Physical activity (PA) is consistently associated with lower risk of long-term conditions. Preliminary evidence suggested the associations could be modified by air pollution. This study aims to examine whether air pollution levels modify the associations of PA with all-cause mortality and incident cancer, major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), type 2 diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

A total of 414,644 UK Biobank participants were included in the analyses. PA was self-reported and objectively measured using accelerometers. PA was self-reported with IPAQ and objectively measured using accelerometers. Annual PM2.5, PM10, and NO air pollutant concentrations in 2010 were measured using a European land use regression model. Cox proportional hazard models were used to examine the associations of PA and air pollution with health outcomes. Multiplicative and additive interactions were estimated.

During the study period from 2006 to 2022, 31,765 (7.7%) died, 70,299 (17.0%) had incident cancer, 25,130 (8.5%) had type 2 diabetes, 33,284 (8.0%) had MACE, and 18,844 (4.5%) had COPD. Lower PA was associated with higher risk of all health outcomes. Higher concentration of PM2.5was associated with all outcomes except for cancer. The associations of self-reported PA with mortality and cancer were stronger in areas with higher air pollution with significant additive and multiplicative interactions. There was no evidence of moderation for objectively measured PA.

In the UK, air pollution should not be a factor inhibiting the promotion of PA.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12916-025-04338-x.

Physical activity (PA) is modifiable lifestyle factor associated with all-cause mortality and a wide range of long-term conditions [1–4], and causality has been largely confirmed through randomised controlled trials [5,6] and Mendelian randomisation studies [7,8]. However, there has been preliminary evidence suggesting that air pollution may be a modifying factor in the association between PA and health outcomes [9]. Studies have shown heterogenous results with PA being associated with higher respiratory disease risk [10] but lower lung function [11], in areas with higher air pollution. In a South Korean study, increasing PA level over time in areas with higher air pollution was found to be associated with higher cardiovascular disease risk. However, several studies in Denmark have shown consistent associations where PA was associated lower risk of health outcomes irrespective of air pollution [12–14].

It is possible that the conflicting results reflect different levels of exposure to air pollution, but there has been no clear evidence from area with lower base air pollution apart from Denmark. In addition, important limitations exist in the current evidence base. It is known that people living in more deprived areas were disproportionally exposed to air pollutants [15] and were more likely to develop long-term conditions [16], suggesting possible confounding by social deprivation. Moreover, all existing evidence is based on self-reported PA data, which is subject to reporting bias [17], and was found to be less sensitive in predicting health outcomes due to regression dilution bias [18]. There have also been little data on air pollutants other than fine particulate matter (PM2.5) [9].

In order to address these limitations, we conducted a prospective cohort study using both self-reported and accelerometer-measured PA to examine whether the association of PA with all-cause mortality and the incidence of four relevant long-term conditions was modified by the concentrations of multiple air pollutants. Based on the Danish studies, we hypothesised that air pollution does not modify the association between PA and health outcomes.

A prospective cohort study was conducted using UK Biobank data. A total of 502,366 participants were recruited between 2006 and 2010. The ages of the participants ranged from 37 to 73 years old. Participants attended one of 22 assessment centres across England, Scotland, and Wales. At the assessment centre, all participants underwent face-to-face interviews, completed a self-administered touchscreen questionnaire, and underwent a physical examination (including height, weight, and blood pressure) conducted by trained staff. Participants’ ethnicity, smoking status, and alcohol intake were all self-reported. Comorbidities and medical history were obtained from self-report of physician diagnoses and verified by staff during face-to-face interviews. This study was conducted under project 71,392.

The outcomes of the study were all-cause mortality and incident long-term conditions: major adverse cardiovascular disease (MACE), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Death certificates were obtained from the National Health Service Information Centre (England and Wales) and the Scottish National Health Service Central Register (Scotland). Hospital admission records were obtained from the Health Episode Statistics (England and Wales) and Scottish Morbidity Records (Scotland). All linkages were undertaken by the UK Biobank and detailed procedures can be found athttp://content.digital.nhs.uk/services. Mortality data were available up to November 2022 at the time of analysis and hospital admission data were available up to October 2022 in England, August 2022 in Scotland, and May 2022 in Wales. Therefore, analysis of all-cause mortality and disease-specific outcomes were censored respectively at these dates or date of death if this occurred earlier. International Classification of Diseases Tenth Revision (ICD-10) codes were used to ascertain incidence of long-term conditions (hospitalisations or deaths) in this study. MACE was defined as incident myocardial infarction, heart failure, or stroke (ICD-10 codes: I11.0, I21, I42.0, I42.6–42.7, I42.9, I50, I60–64); COPD using ICD-10 codes J41–44 and J47; T2D using ICD-10 code E11; and cancer using ICD-10 codes C00–C97. Cancer registry was not used for this study because the data was outdated when the analysis was conducted.

Self-reported physical activity (PA) data were collected by UK Biobank via a touchscreen questionnaire, using the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) Short Form [19] to provide information on the frequency, intensity and duration of walking, moderate and vigorous activity. Data processing followed the guidelines published by IPAQ [19]. The volume of PA was calculated by applying weights to the time spent on activities of different intensities to produce total physical activity in MET (metabolic equivalent of task)-hour/week.

Accelerometer-measured PA was obtained using Axivity AX3 wrist-worn triaxial accelerometers worn by 103,686 UK Biobank participants between 2013 and 2015. Participants who provided an email address to UK Biobank were invited at random [20]. The dominant wrist of each individual was used over a period of 7 days at 100 Hz, as has been described elsewhere [20]. The 7161 participants with insufficient wear time (< 72 h), missing data, or poor device calibration were excluded. A two-step approach based on random forest and raw acceleration was used to categorise time spent in light, moderate, and vigorous PA based on a method described previously [21,22]. In this study, the time spent in intensity-specific PA were combined to produce total MET-hour/week as 1.5 * LPA + 4 * MPA + 8 * VPA, where LPA, MPA, and VPA were weekly hour spent in light, moderate, and vigorous intensity PA.

Based on the European Study of Cohorts for Air Pollution Effects (ESCAPE) protocol, annual outdoor air pollutant concentrations at home addresses of cohort participants in 2010 were estimated using a European land use regression model, including PM ≤ 10 µm (PM10), PM ≤ 2.5 µm (PM2.5), PM 2.5–10 µm (PMcoarse), PM2.5filter absorbance, nitrogen oxides (NOx), and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) [23,24]. PM2.5filter absorbance was calculated using the measured filter reflectance using the ISO (International Standardization Organization) 9835 (1993) formula. Absorbance has previously been found to be highly correlated with elemental carbon [25]. Land use regression models are a statistical method that uses multiple linear regression to analyse the association between pollutant concentrations measured at multiple monitoring points and predictors such as traffic, land use, and topography [24]. Separate models had previously been conducted for PM and NOx. The PM model included measurements taken between 2008 and 2011 from 20 places in Europe with 20–40 monitoring sites each [26]. These included two areas (39 sites) in the UK: Manchester and London/Oxford. Nitrogen oxides (NO2and NOx) were measured, between 2008 and 2011, in 20 European study regions, and NOxwas measured in 36 regions, including three areas (119 sites) in the UK: Manchester, London/Oxford, and Bradford [24]. The measurements were validated with acceptable leave-one-out-cross-validation root mean squared error, e.g. < 1.4 μg/m3for PM2.5[23] and < 6.6 μg/m3for NO2[24]. The overallR2of the models were very good, e.g. 75%–87% for NO2[24]. We excluded 33,935 UK Biobank residents living in addresses for which pollution exposure could not be modelled.

Prior knowledge and existing literature [27–31] were used to select potential confounders to include as covariates: age, sex, ethnicity, Townsend area deprivation index, smoking status, alcohol consumption, and diet quality. Age, sex, ethnicity, smoking status, alcohol consumption [32], and diet quality [33] were all based on self-report. Prevalent diseases are not included as covariates as it appears more likely that these were potential mediators (being caused by lack of/lower level of physical activity), where adjustment could lead to overadjustment bias.

Descriptive statistics were used to compare demographic characteristics between the high and low physical activity groups (binary variable) for an easier interpretation. Higher PA level (> median) was used as the reference in the binary analyses to ensure correct estimation of additive interaction [34].

Cox proportional hazard regression models were used to examine the associations of PA and air pollution with health outcomes. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were used to estimate the effect sizes. Follow-up started at the UK Biobank baseline assessment visit for self-reported PA and at the final date of accelerometer wear for objectively measured PA. Proportional hazard assumptions were checked via tests of the Schoenfeld residuals. None of the tests showed a significant violation of the assumptions.

Both multiplicative and additive interactions (relative excess risk due to additive interaction [RERI]) were calculated for the binary PA and air pollution variables. The above analyses also were replicated treating PA and air pollution variables as numeric variables (scaled to their sample interquartile range [IQR]) since even though dichotomised variables could be easier to interpret they could lead to imprecise and underpowered estimation.

The inferential analyses described above were conducted in the 10 imputed datasets using full conditional specification multiple imputation using chained equations to address missing data in covariates [35]. Rubin’s rule was used to pool the findings from the 10 imputed data. Ten imputations were selected based on the 16% total missingness in the data [36]. PA and air pollution variables were dichotomised as above or below the sample median. Complete case analysis including all people with non-missing data was conducted as a sensitivity analysis. Analysis of self-reported PA was replicated among people with accelerometer data only. Statistical analyses were performed using R statistical software 4.3.0 with the packagesmice,survival, andinteractionR.

Of the 502,536 UK Biobank participants, 414,644 were eligible for this study (Additional file 1: Fig. S1). People included in this study were, on average, 2 years younger, less deprived, and had slightly more (1 MET-h/week self-report and 2 MET-h/week accelerometer-measured) PA (Additional file 1: Table S1). Of these, 86,838 had valid accelerometer-measured PA. During the study period, 31,765 (7.7%) died, 70,299 (17.0%) had incident cancer, 25,130 (8.5%) developed type 2 diabetes, 33,284 (8.0%) had MACE, and 18,844 (4.5%) developed COPD. In the total sample, the median self-reported PA physical activity was 26.0 MET-hours/week, and the median accelerometer-measured PA physical activity was 61.1 MET-hours/week. Participants who had higher PA were on average less deprived, had lower exposure to air pollution, consumed more alcohol, had better diets, and were less likely to smoke (Table1).

Higher levels of PM2.5, but not PM10or PMcoarse, were associated with all outcomes except for cancer (Fig.1; Additional file 1: Table S2). The strongest association was with COPD (HRbinary1.07, 95% CI 1.04–1.10; HRIQR1.05; 95% CI 1.03–1.07). NOx, but not NO2, was associated with higher risk for all outcomes, except for cancer, and the strongest association was with T2D (HRbinary1.07, 95% CI 1.05–1.10; HRIQR1.02; 95% CI 1.01–1.04). PM2.5absorbance was associated with lower risk of all outcomes except for all-cause mortality and cancer.

Higher air pollution was consistently associated with lower PA level, except for PMcoarseand accelerometer-measured PA (Additional file 1: Table S3). Strongest association was observed in NO2and accelerometer-measured PA. Each IQR increase in NO2was associated with 1.64 MET-hours/week lower in PA.

Regardless of type of measurement or parameterisation, lower PA was associated with higher risk of health outcomes (Fig.2; Additional file 1: Table S4). Generally, device-measured PA had a stronger association than self-reported PA; e.g. all-cause mortality HRACC1.41 versus HRSR1.10 per IQR increase in PA. Of all health outcomes, the strongest association with accelerometer-measured PA was T2D (HRACC1.55; 95% CI 1.52–1.58 per IQR increase in PA).

The moderation role of air pollution on the association between self-reported PA and health outcomes is shown in Fig.3and Additional file 1: Table S5. Lower physical activity was associated with higher risk of health outcomes regardless of air pollution level. There was evidence of a positive, but weak, interaction between NOxand self-reported PA in relation to all-cause mortality (RERI 0.09, 95% CI 0.04, 0.14), COPD (RERI 0.08, 95% CI 0.02, 0.15), and cancer (RERI 0.05, 95% CI 0.02, 0.08), indicating that the associations between PA and these outcomes were stronger in areas with higher NOxlevels. In contrast, there was evidence of a negative, but weak, interaction between NO2and PA in relation to T2D (RERI − 0.06, 95% CI − 0.12, − 0.004), suggesting the association between PA and T2D was slightly weaker in areas with higher NO2levels. However, none of these interactions was replicated when PA was measured using accelerometers (Fig.4and Additional file 1: Table S6). Complete case analyses (Additional file 1: Tables S7 and S8), analysis using continuous variables (Additional file 1: Tables S9 and S10), and analysis of self-reported PA variables among people with accelerometer data (Additional file 1: Table S11) showed similar results.

This study systematically explored whether air pollution modified the associations between PA and four relevant long-term conditions, as well as all-cause mortality. Overall, the associations between PA and health were much stronger than those between air pollution and health, suggesting the benefits from PA could outweigh the harms from air pollution. Furthermore, we found no strong evidence to suggest that, within the UK, the potential health benefits of PA were lower in areas with higher air pollution, even though there were consistent associations between air pollution and PA level.

The strongest association for PM2.5was with COPD which is consistent with existing research [37]. Exposure to PM2.5can directly induce inflammation in the pulmonary system, which is a primary mechanism of COPD [38–40]. The association of PM2.5with all-cause mortality and MACE has been reported in a large number of studies [41–43]. PM2.5may contribute to cardiovascular events by activating oxidative stress and inflammatory pathways [44,45]. Our study finding on NOXand type 2 diabetes was also consistent with the literature [46].

This study found that higher levels of PA, whether self-reported or measured objectively, were associated with lower risk of health outcomes. The health benefits of PA have been replicated consistently [47–49]. We demonstrated stronger associations for objectively measured PA which verified the presence of regression dilution bias when self-reported PA is used. This difference between self-reported and accelerometer-based measures of PA may be explained by the fact that accelerometers can measure body activity more accurately and avoid recall or reporting bias [50]. Of all the long-term conditions included in the study, PA had the strongest association with type 2 diabetes. This is consistent with the findings of Coogan et al. [51].

We found little evidence to support any meaningful negative interaction between PA level and air pollution in relation to health outcomes. This finding is consistent with previous epidemiological studies conducted in Denmark where air pollution is generally lower [12–14]. However, it contrasts with a South Korean study which found that increasing PA over time was associated with higher CVD risk in area with high air pollution [52]. It should, however, be noted that the South Korean study defined higher air pollution as annual PM2.5> 26.4 µg/m3, exceeding the maximum exposure of 21.3 µg/m3estimated in our study. Interestingly, a randomised controlled trial showed that a 2-h walking exercise resulted in immediate improvement in lung function but only if the exercise was done in a lower air pollution area [53]. The moderation role of air pollution may also be different in younger people. There have been studies that showed interactions between PA and air pollution in relation to asthma [10] and cardiorespiratory fitness [11] in children. There was some evidence for positive interaction between air pollution and self-reported PA, where people in higher air pollution areas could be particularly susceptible to the health risk due to low PA. However, since these findings were not replicable in objectively measured PA, it could simply be measurement biases associated with socioeconomic background (since socioeconomic background is also associated with air pollution), or spurious findings due to multiple testing.

A strength of this study was the use of both self-reported and accelerometer-measured physical activity, a series of validated air pollution measures and multiple outcome measures. The large sample size provided sufficient statistical power to detect any meaningful interactions (± 7% for multiplicative and ± 8% additive interaction). However, this study also has some limitations. Firstly, since UK Biobank only provides participants’ residential address at baseline, the estimation of exposure to air pollution was based on exposure at home at baseline and did not take account of subsequent relocation or exposures at other places, such as work, and indoor air pollution for individuals who take part in indoor physical activity. However, it would not have been feasible to have personalised air pollution monitor for a population cohort of this size, which is essential for statistical power for rarer health outcomes. There are now air pollution indices from newer models, e.g. those from DEFRA, which in theory could provide time-varying estimates, but it is currently not available routinely in UK Biobank. Furthermore, air pollution and physical activity were not measured at the same time. Both of these measurement issues would likely to result in non-differential misclassification which could underestimate the associations. Secondly, despite the sample size, the numbers of site-specific cancers in UK Biobank, especially for those with accelerometer data, are small, limiting us from examining the associations for those outcomes. Thirdly, as with all observational studies, associations cannot be assumed to be causal and, in spite of adjusting for a range of confounders, residual confounding cannot be ruled out. This is particularly the case as we decided not to adjust for prevalent diseases to avoid overadjustment bias, even though prevalent diseases could lead to less physical activity. Future studies with repeated measures of physical activity could potentially explore such relationship. Fourthly, the study included air pollutants agnostically and therefore conducted a larger number of tests. Inflation of family-wise type 1 error is possible and could explain some of the statistically significant findings. Fifthly, UK Biobank has a healthy volunteer bias and some findings might not be generalisable to the UK population. Sixthly, due to computational difficulties we were not able to conduct more imputations, which could affect the power to detect associations and interactions. Lastly, all data in this study were based on the UK. The findings of this study may not be applicable to other regions with different climates and different levels or distribution of air pollution.

This study showed that, in the UK, PA levels were consistently associated with lower risk of long-term conditions and mortality, even in areas with higher air pollution levels. Whilst air pollution is harmful to health and should be reduced, PA should be promoted regardless of air pollution levels.

Additional file 1: Figure S1; Tables S1–S11. Fig. S1 Participant flowchart. Table S1 Comparison of UK Biobank participant characteristics by inclusion. Table S2 Association between air pollution and physical activity level. Table S3 Association of air pollution level with health outcomes. Table S4 Association of physical activity level and health outcomes. Table S5 Association between lower self-reported physical activity level and health outcomes by air pollution level. Table S6 Association between lower accelerometer-measured physical activity level and health outcomes by air pollution level. Table S7 Association between self-reported lower physical activity level and health outcomes by air pollution level in complete case analysis. Table S8 Association between accelerometer-measured lower physical activity level. Table S9 Association between per IQR decrease in self-reported physical activity level and health outcomes by air pollution level. Table S10 Association between per IQR decrease in accelerometer-measured physical activity level and health outcomes by air pollution level. Table S11 Association between lower self-reported physical activity level and health outcomes by air pollution level among people with valid accelerometer data.

MH analysed the data and drafted the manuscript. FKH conceptualised the idea, designed the study, and supervised the analysis. JO designed the study, interpreted the data and critically revised the manuscript. ST, CCM, JPP, and FKH interpreted the data and critically revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

JO was employed by the MRC/CSO Social and Public Health Sciences Unit, University of Glasgow, and supported by the Medical Research Council (grant number MC_UU_00022/4) and Chief Scientist Office (grant number SPHSU19).