Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) are each individually associated with mild hepatic injury and, rarely, with hyperbilirubinemia. Coinfection is not well documented, and within available reports, mild hepatic injury has been demonstrated.

A 25-year-old man with no significant past medical history acquired coinfection and developed transaminitis, moderate hyperbilirubinemia, and hepatosplenomegaly. The degree of transaminitis was severe and out of proportion for either SARS-CoV-2 or EBV infection. The patient was admitted to the hospital for further laboratory and imaging studies to rule out other etiologies. He was managed symptomatically and without antiviral medications. The patient’s transaminase levels demonstrated a pattern of recovery on day 10 with complete normalization documented at 10 months. There were no long-term sequelae.

While SARS-CoV-2 and EBV are each independently associated with mild hepatic injury, this case highlights a rare presentation of severe liver injury, possibly due to synergistic viral effects.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection is referred to as coronavirus disease of 2019 (COVID-19). SARS-CoV-2 is associated with a broad range of systemic complications, including hepatic dysfunction. Liver injury associated with COVID-19, otherwise known as COVID-19-associated liver injury (COVALI), is attributed to direct viral toxicity, systemic inflammation, and drug-induced liver injury. COVALI occurs more often in patients with pre-existing hepatic conditions [1]. Abnormal liver function tests are reported in 14– 53% of hospitalized patients with COVID-19, with a pooled incidence of 23.1% [2,3]. Mild transaminase elevations on admission are common, with a peak aspartate aminotransferase (AST) range of 69–364 U/L and a peak alanine aminotransferase (ALT) range of 52–220 U/L [4,5]. COVALI usually presents with AST predominance, whereas viral hepatitis generally presents with an ALT-predominant pattern [4–6]. Hyperbilirubinemia is rare in mild cases but is documented in severe disease. When present, hyperbilirubinemia is associated with worse outcomes [3,4,6,7].

In contrast, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection is frequently accompanied by mild transaminitis, typically two to three times the upper limit of normal, in up to 90% of cases [8–10]. True EBV hepatitis, with transaminase levels five to ten times the upper limit, is uncommon. Transaminase elevations greater than ten times the upper limit are unlikely to be due to EBV alone [8,11]. Hyperbilirubinemia and jaundice are rare. When present, they have been attributed to autoimmune hemolytic anemia, biliary duct obstruction due to abdominal lymphadenopathy, or cholestatic hepatitis [10,12–17]. Multiple case reports indicate that the incidence of cholestatic hepatitis is 5% [18–21].

Coinfection with SARS-CoV-2 and EBV is rare, and cases involving severe hepatitis in this context are even more limited. In a recent systematic review of 1,211 patients with SARS-CoV-2 and viral reactivation or coinfection, only 38 (3.14%) had EBV coinfection. Jaundice was never reported, and transaminitis was documented in only one case [22]. While EBV reactivation has been related to liver injury caused by SARS-CoV-2, the impact of coinfection with EBV on liver dysfunction is poorly understood [22–24].

We present a rare case of SARS-CoV-2 and EBV coinfection characterized by severe transaminitis, moderate hyperbilirubinemia, jaundice, and hepatosplenomegaly. This presentation exceeds the expected degree of hepatic injury from either virus alone and is more severe than prior reports of coinfection cases, raising the question of a synergistic effect on hepatic dysfunction.

Written consent was given by the patient, and Sanford Health’s Institutional Review Board waived approval.

A 25-year-old male with no significant past medical history presented to his primary care physician with one day of severe headache, sore throat, fatigue, and myalgias. Physical examination was notable for pharyngeal erythema and left posterior cervical lymphadenopathy. Point-of-care testing was negative for Group A Streptococcus, influenza A/B, and respiratory syncytial virus. SARS-CoV-2 was detected via nucleic acid testing of a nasopharyngeal swab, and the patient was managed conservatively at home.

Over the next five days, the patient developed progressive symptoms including worsening cough, congestion, persistent fever, chills, night sweats, and right upper quadrant abdominal pain. Dark urine and scleral icterus followed, prompting re-evaluation. Laboratory studies revealed markedly elevated transaminases (ALT 1,414 U/L; AST 891 U/L), hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 9.7 mg/dL), a mild leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and a slight elevation in alkaline phosphatase. The complete comprehensive metabolic panel is shown in Table1. The initial urinalysis was bright orange in color and uninterpretable microscopically due to pigment interference.

He was referred to the Emergency Department for further evaluation. He denied alcohol use, recent travel, gastrointestinal symptoms, or relevant family history. His vital signs were within normal limits. Physical examination revealed jaundice, pharyngeal erythema, mild tonsillar enlargement, and palpable left posterior cervical lymphadenopathy.

Laboratory investigations revealed normal creatine kinase, lipase, and coagulation studies (protime and international normalized ratio). Acetaminophen and ethanol levels were undetectable. Viral hepatitis panel was nonreactive for hepatitis A, B, and C. An EBV anti-viral capsid antigen immunoglobulin M (anti-VCA IgM) and anti-viral capsid antigen immunoglobulin G (anti-VCA IgG) were drawn. Repeat urinalysis showed elevated specific gravity, 3 + bilirubin, and trace protein. Direct bilirubin was 7.6 mg/dL. Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated hepatomegaly and a contracted gallbladder without visible cholelithiasis; however, small stones could not be excluded “due to recent oral intake,” per the ultrasound read. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis revealed nonspecific gallbladder wall edema, hepatosplenomegaly, and trace ascites. The liver measured up to 22.9 cm craniocaudally, and the spleen measured up to 18.2 cm. Magnetic resonance imaging with and without contrast confirmed hepatomegaly without steatosis, mild periportal edema, a contracted gallbladder with wall thickening, and splenomegaly. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography was non-diagnostic due to motion artifacts. A chest radiograph was unremarkable.

The constellation of findings, including significant transaminitis, hepatosplenomegaly, and systemic symptoms, was deemed atypical for COVID-19. The degree of transaminitis was out of proportion for isolated COVALI. The patient was admitted for further workup and Hepatology consultation. Supportive care, including IV fluids, tramadol for pain, and benzocaine-menthol lozenges for pharyngitis, was initiated. The patient experienced progressive symptomatic improvement. Liver function tests, including bilirubin levels, improved during admission.

The patient was discharged in stable condition with a presumptive diagnosis of acute viral hepatitis due to COVID-19. EBV serologies, HIV screening, blood cultures, and autoimmune hepatitis panels were pending at the time of hospital discharge. The final viral and autoimmune hepatitis panel results are shown in Table2. Later, anti-VCA IgM returned strongly positive at > 160.00 U/mL, with negative anti-VCA IgG. The patient was advised to avoid contact sports and strenuous activity for 3–4 weeks. At one-week follow-up, liver function tests and bilirubin levels had further decreased to 289 U/L ALT, 126 U/L AST, and 3.3 mg/dL total bilirubin. At ten months, the patient had fully recovered with complete normalization of laboratory values and no evidence of long-term sequelae (Fig.1).

It is important to distinguish the potential relationships between SARS-CoV-2 and EBV infections. When an EBV carrier is inoculated with SARS-CoV-2 and develops COVID-19 there is potential for reactivation of latent EBV infection. This phenomenon has been documented and is attributed to severe immune modulation by SARS-CoV-2 infection [22]. Coinfection refers to simultaneous acute infection by SARS-CoV-2 and EBV. The phenomenon of reactivation is distinguishable from that of EBV and SARS-CoV-2 coinfection through serology [25]. An EBV carrier’s serology testing would reveal the presence of anti-VCA IgG and the absence of anti-VCA IgM. Upon infection with SARS-CoV-2, EBV reactivation would be characterized by anti-VCA IgM conversion to positive [25]. In contrast, when both infections are acute, and thus the patient is experiencing co-infection, baseline serology would indicate the absence of both anti-VCA IgG and anti-VCA IgM [25]. The possible baseline EBV serologies and coinfection versus reactivation serologies are summarized in Table3. As in the present case, coinfection leads to anti-VCA IgM positivity, maintenance of anti-VCA IgG negativity, and positive SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid testing. The EBV serologies for this patient were performed via multiplex flow immunoassay on the BioPlex instrument. This EBV anti-VCA IgM methodology has a specificity of 96.7% and a sensitivity of 94.1%. The specificity and sensitivity of the anti-VCA IgG are 95.7% and 88.4%, respectively [26].

A limitation of this case is the reliance on the EBV serologies for the diagnostic certainty of coinfection. Confirmatory testing, such as polymerase chain reaction for EBV deoxyribonucleic acid or liver biopsy, were not pursued, as the initial serology results were not available until after the patient was discharged from the hospital. The patient’s condition continually improved after discharge and further diagnostic workup was not pursued.

SARS-CoV-2 and EBV coinfection is infrequently reported and remains poorly characterized [22–24]. Both viruses are independently associated with mild transaminitis, typically no more than two to five times the upper limit of normal [4,5,8,11]. However, the severe transaminitis seen in this case, which reached thirty times the upper limit of normal, was not characteristic of either infection alone or previously reported coinfection. Based on the authors’ review of the literature, coinfection with this severe level of transaminitis has not previously been reported [23]. Furthermore, other causes of acute liver injury, including other viral hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, and drug-induced liver injury, were excluded through a comprehensive workup.

This case raises questions about a synergistic pathophysiological interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and EBV on liver function. It is plausible that the immune pathology of COVALI, characterized by direct action of the virus, hypoxic and endothelial injury, and the cytokine storm, was potentiated by concurrent EBV infection [27]. One report of severe EBV-hepatitis proposed that EBV infected T cells were responsible for the hepatocyte injury, yet the hepatocytes themselves were not infected with EBV on histologic examination [28]. This mechanism is in contrast to most viral hepatitis cases where virus-infected hepatocytes are destroyed by cytotoxic T lymphocytes through the Fas/Fas ligand or perforin/granzyme B pathways [29]. The synergistic effect could result from EBV infected T cells amplifying both the cytokine storm and the destruction of SARS-CoV-2 infected hepatocytes, regardless of whether EBV had infiltrated hepatocytes themselves.

This report underscores the potential for SARS-CoV-2 and EBV coinfection to lead to severe hepatocellular injury even in immunocompetent patients. The transaminitis observed in this patient demonstrates hepatocellular injury beyond the extent expected for either infection in isolation, suggesting the possibility of a synergistic effect of coinfection not yet elucidated. There is an opportunity for further research into the mechanism of hepatic dysfunction in viral coinfections that could guide treatment courses in similar cases.