Family caregivers are often faced with unpredictable stressors and strange behaviors of patient they care for. External stresses such as negative attitude of society or stigma, sense of discrimination or isolation, and lack of support are also among challenges they face. This study was conducted with the aim of determining the relationship between mental health literacy, care burden and emotional styles in family caregivers of people with mental disorders.

This descriptive correlational study was conducted in 2023 on 215 caregivers of patients with mental disorders who had been selected from 4 psychiatric hospitals in Tehran, Iran by quota sampling method. Data collection took place from January to February 2023. Mental Health Literacy Scale, Care Burden Inventory and Affective Style Questionnaire were used to collect data. Descriptive tests, Pearson correlation coefficient, and polynomial logistic regression were used for data analysis through SPSS-22 software.

The mean score of mental health literacy was 64.62 ± 19.06 among the participants, which was at moderate level. The mean score of care burden was 93.38 ± 14.15 and the dominant emotional style of family caregivers was concealing (42.8%). Mental health literacy had a significant and negative relationship with care burden (r=-0.816). The mean score of burnout among the caregivers who had concealing emotional style was 3.837 points higher than those with adjusting emotional style (p< 0.001). In terms of gender distribution, results showed that female caregivers were experiencing higher level of care burden (p< 0.001).

Results showed that mental health literacy had an inverse relationship with care burden. Also, there was no significant relationship between the level of mental health literacy and emotional styles. As the findings showed, caregivers who had a concealing emotional style were experiencing higher level of care burden than caregivers with an adjusting emotional style. Therefore, it seems that in order to reduce care burden in the caregivers of mentally ill patients, programs should be implemented to increase their mental health literacy.

According to the latest definition of American Psychiatric Association (APA), mental disorder is a syndrome with characteristics such as clear imbalance in cognition, emotional regulation or behavior, which are caused by biological, psychological, or developmental processes that underlie mental functioning [1]. Psychiatric disorders, which include significant disruptions in thought, emotional regulation, and behavior, encompass various conditions such as anxiety, depression, bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), schizophrenia, eating disorders, destructive behaviors, social disorders, and neurodevelopmental disorders [2]. Mental disorders are often associated with significant discomfort or weakness in social, occupational or other important activities of daily life [3,4].

The report of Institute of Health Criteria and Evaluation (IHCE) in 2017 estimated the number of people suffering from mental disorders in the world to be 792 million (13.4% of global population). In other words, on a global scale, about one out of every 10 people has a mental disorder. Meanwhile, Iran ranks second in the world in terms of the burden of mental disorders [5]. The national epidemiological survey that was carried out in 2019 revealed that 22.31% of participants were diagnosed with at least one psychiatric disorder. Meanwhile, anxiety disorders (14.13%) and behavioral disorders (8.3%) had the highest prevalence among the participants [6]. The prevalence of mental disorders among Iranians over 15 years of age was found by Noorbala et al. (2022) to be 29.7% [7]. A new study also found that the prevalence of mental disorders among middle-aged population of primary healthcare centers in Northeastern Iran was 8.59%, and also depression (53.72%) and anxiety (42.02%) were the most common psychiatric disorders in both males and females [8].

The increase in the prevalence of mental disorders in the world and in Iran is an undeniable fact, but only a few people go to medical centers for treatment. Also, most of the burden of care for psychiatric patients is on their families’ shoulder, which creates many challenges for them [9,10]. Studies have shown that more than 60% of people with mental disorders who are discharged in the hospital return home. In Asian countries such as Iran, 70% of people with schizophrenia receive their main care from their family members [11].

Family caregivers are often faced with unpredictable stressors and strange behaviors of patients. They are also faced with external stresses such as negative attitude of society or stigma, feeling of discrimination or isolation, and lack of support. In addition, transfer of patient care to family members and their new responsibility as a care giver have imposed additional stress on their body and mind [12], disrupting all aspects of life in them [13]. Care burden refers to the mental, physical and social pressures that are imposed on caregivers as a result of taking care of chronic patients, causing them many problems such as fear, anxiety, burnout and depression [14]. Being a family caregiver is a source of burnout for people with mental disorders. Caring for people with mental disorders can affect caregivers’ mental health and social connections [15]. Having multiple caregiving tasks and responsibilities can lead to anxiety, depression, panic and sense of loneliness, which can affect physical, mental, emotional, social, and economic status of caregivers [16]. In such difficult situations, one’s ability to express and regulate his emotions is very important. Emotion regulation refers to the processes through which a person determines when, how and what emotion to experience. Emotion regulation is categorized into three styles of concealing, adjusting and tolerating, which can be briefly called emotional styles [17]. Emotion regulation strategies help family caregivers of chronic psychiatric patients to manage caring behaviors [18]. Caregivers experience both positive and negative emotions. Studies have identified many negative emotions such as feelings of duty, victimization, sadness, obligation, pressure, exhaustion (when involved in decision-making about their loved one), distress due to loved one’s hospitalization, fear, distrust, and sense of insecurity [15]. A study in China also revealed that 42.1% of the caregivers of individuals with schizophrenia had high levels of emotion expression, which was associated with increased care burden [19].

Family caregivers’ inadequate knowledge on how to use emotions in a positive way is considered a debilitating stress, which causes a decrease in quality of care and disease recurrence [20]. The extent of burnout and its impact on family caregivers depends on their adaptation and acquisition of information on how to care for patients. The knowledge to use this information is related to mental health literacy. People with high mental health literacy have better mental health and are more involved in the process of self-care. They also seek better resources from family, society, local community and health system [16]. Mental health literacy is a subset of health literacy that was first introduced by the Australian researcher Yoram et al. (1997) and refers to the knowledge and beliefs related to mental disorders which can help in diagnosis, management and prevention [21,22]. Mental health literacy has six components, including " recognition of disorders”, “knowledge of risk factors and causes”, “self-treatment knowledge”, “knowledge of professional help available”, “knowledge of how to seek mental health information”, and “attitudes that promote recognition and appropriate help-seeking behavior” [5].

Paying attention to family caregivers as the main source of support for patients with mental disorders is one of the principles of treatment and care in these patients [23]. On the other hand, nurses are often in the best position to help family caregivers, because they are familiar with the principles of caring for individuals with mental illness and are at the forefront of communication with the patient’s family from the beginning of hospital admission to the time of discharge. In addition to considering the aspects of care burden and emotional health of families, nurses can increase the mental health literacy of family caregivers through appropriate trainings [12,24]. In this regard, studies have also shown that family caregivers of individuals with mental illness have limited mental health literacy [25,26].

Many studies and interventions have been conducted on the care burden of family caregivers of patients, especially people with mental disorders [14,27,28]. Also, emotional styles have been studied by researchers in the past in different populations [29–31]. However, the emotional styles have rarely been studied among the caregivers of psychiatric patients. On the other hand, these studies are few and far between [25]– [26], and in Iran, only one study has been conducted on the health literacy of caregivers of individuals with multiple sclerosis [32]. Considering the importance and necessity of using non-pharmacological interventions in the field of psychology and psychiatric nursing, and also the lack of available studies on the family caregivers of psychiatric patients, we decided to study the mental health literacy of family caregivers of patients with mental disorders so that appropriate measures would be taken to support and empower these families.

This descriptive, correlational and cross-sectional study was conducted between Jan and Feb 2023 on the family caregivers of people with mental disorders referred to hospitals affiliated with the medical science universities of Tehran, Iran.

Using Cochran’s formula and the results of a similar article, with 95% confidence and 80% test power, the number of necessary samples was calculated to be 215 people [33]. The participants were selected by quota method from four teaching hospital in Tehran, Iran. The quota for Imam Hossein, Razi, Rozbeh, and Iran Hospitals was 9%, 51%, 22% and 18%, respectively.

Inclusion criteria for the participants were; having no history of psychiatric disorders based on self-report, having at least primary education and the ability to speak Persian, being between 18 and 60 years old, having direct responsibility for caring for the affected person for at least six months [27], having a family relationship with the patient, not receiving payment for the care, and not taking care of other patients. Exclusion criteria also included partial completion of the questionnaire and disclosure of distorted/incorrect information.

This scale was designed and evaluated in 2015 by O’Connor and Casey [34]. It has 35 questions, which were reduced to 29 questions after translation and psychometric evaluation done by Jafari and colleagues. It also has 6 subscales, including “recognition of disorders” with 8 items based on a 4-point Likert response scale (very unlikely, unlikely, likely, very likely with a score range of 8 to 32), “attitudes that promote recognition and appropriate help-seeking” with 10 items based on a 5-point Likert response scale (strongly disagree, disagree, neither agree nor disagree, agree, strongly agree, with a score range of 10 to 50), “self-treatment knowledge” with 2 items based on a 4-point Likert response scale (very useless, useless, useful, very useful with a score range of 2 to 8), “knowledge of professional help available” with 3 items based on a 4-point Likert response scale (very unlikely, unlikely, likely, very likely with a score range of 3 to 12), “knowledge of how to seek mental health information” with 4 items based on a 5-point Likert response scale (completely disagree, disagree, neither agree nor disagree, agree, completely agree with a score range of 4 to 20), and “knowledge of risk factors and causes” with 2 items based on a 5-point Likert scale (very unlikely, unlikely, likely, very likely with a score range of 2 to 8). The total score in this scale is obtained by summing up the scores of all subscales, with the lowest score being 35 and the highest being 160. Higher scores in this scale indicate higher literacy level [34,35]. In Iran, Jafari et al. (2021) reported Cronbach’s alpha and content validity ratio of 0.72 and 0.90 for this scale respectively, indicating acceptable reliability [35].

This tool was invented in 1989 by Novak and Guest [36], and includes 24 items and 5 subscales of " time-dependence burden” (questions 1–5), " developmental burden” (questions 6–10), “physical burden” (questions 11 to 14), “social burden” (questions 15 to 19), and “emotional burden” (questions 20 to 24). Questions in this tool are answered based on a 5-option Likert scale; never (score 0), rarely (score 1), sometimes (score 2), often (score 3), and almost always (score 4). The scores of this tool range from 24 to 120, so that the scores of 24 to 39 indicate mild burden of care, 40 to 71 indicate moderate burden of care, and 72 to 120 indicate very high burden of care. Haghbin and Sheikholeslami (2019) found an appropriate content validity of this tool. They also found the reliability of each of the subscales to be 0.70 for concealment, 0.75 for compatibility, and 0.50 for tolerance. They reported the total reliability of 0.81 for this tool, which is satisfactory [37].

This questionnaire was designed by Hoffman and Kashdan in 2010 [38] and includes 20 items and three subscales, including “adjusting style” (items 2, 4, 7, 8, 12, 16, 19), “concealing style” (items 1, 4, 5, 9, 10, 13, 15) and “tolerating style” (items 5, 6, 11, 17). The responses to items are based on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from “extremely true of me” to “not true about me at all”. Some items are common in the two subscales. Higher scores in this tool reflect a preference for an affective style. Total score in each subscale is obtained by summing up of the scores of items in that subscale. To obtain the overall score for the questionnaire, the total scores of all subscales in the entire questionnaire are added together. A higher score for each subscale indicates a respondent’s tendency toward that style, and vice versa.

Cronbach’s alpha was calculated by Karsheki (2013) for the subscales of concealment, compromise, and tolerance as 0.70, 0.75, and 0.50, respectively, indicating high reliability of the tool [39]. In a study by Badri et al. (2016), Cronbach’s alpha was calculated as 0.86 for the entire tool, 0.73 for the subscale of compromise, 0.72 for concealment, and 0.65 for tolerance [40].

In the present study, the reliability of the three tools was checked through internal consistency with Cronbach’s alpha method. The results showed that all three tools have high reliability. Cronbach’s alpha for mental health literacy questionnaire was calculated at 0.79, for emotional styles at 0.85, and for care burden at 0.71.

The first author visited the hospitals from morning to afternoon, and according to previous arrangements, communicated face-to-face with the caregivers who were willing to participate in the study (obtaining informed consent) in a quiet room, and asked them to complete the questionnaires. Each questionnaire took about 60 to 80 min to complete.

Statistical tests such as frequency percentage, mean and standard deviation were used in this study. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was also used to check the normality of variables. For data analysis, Pearson correlation coefficients were used to determine the relationship between quantitative variables based on whether or not the normality assumption was met. Also, linear regression and multinomial logistic regression models were used to control confounding variables and determine the effect of variables. The linear regression model was used for the quantitative variable, and the regression model was used for the qualitative variable. data were analyzed by SPSS software version 22 at the significance level of less than 0.05.

A total of 215 individuals participated in the study. The demographic information of patients and their caregivers are demonstrated in Table1. The mean score of mental health literacy among the caregivers was 64.62(± 19.06), which is at moderate level (the lowest score was 35 and the highest was 160). The mean caregiver burden score was also 93.38 (± 14.15), indicating that very high caregiver burden was felt by the caregivers (The score range of 24 to 120). Findings also showed that most of the family caregivers (42.8%) had the concealing emotional style (Table2).

The Pearson correlation coefficient between the total scores of mental health literacy and caregivers’ burden was equal to -0.816 (p< 0.001). This indicates a very strong relationship between these two variables. In addition, considering the negative sign of the correlation, it can be concluded that the two variables are inversely related to each other. In other words, an increase in the value ​​of one variable leads to a decrease in the value ​​of another variable and vice versa (Table3). In this study, linear regression analysis was conducted to examine the relationship between demographic variables and the key research variables. According to the findings, for every one unit increase in the total score of care burden, the mental health literacy score decreased by 1.051 units. Also, the mental health literacy score of caregivers who medically related field of study was 11.678 points higher than that of caregivers who had an unmedically field of study. Caregivers of patients with mania had a mental health literacy score of 4.635 points lower than that of patients with schizophrenia. In this model, no significant difference was observed between the mental health literacy of all caregivers (Table4).

Also, results showed that for every one unit increase in the total mental health literacy score, the score of caregiver burden decreased by 0.570 units. Also, total care burden score of caregivers who had a concealing emotional style was 3.838 units higher than caregivers who had an adjusting emotional style. The mean score of emotional tolerating style was not significantly different from others. Also, the care burden score in caregivers of patients suffering from mania and anxiety was 3.320 and 3.727 units lower than the caregivers of schizophrenia patients, respectively. In this regard, no significant difference was observed between them and other patients. In addition, caregivers who were housekeeper had a care burden score of 2.691 points higher than that of unemployed caregivers (Table5).

In the third model, logistic regression, for every one unit increase in caregiver burden score, the chance of having concealment and tolerance emotional styles was 0.097% and 0.068%, respectively. This showed that the chance of having concealment and tolerance emotional styles was higher than the adjusting emotional style. According to the negative coefficients for different categories of caregiver’s education, we saw the decreasing effect of caregiver’s education on the chance of having a concealing and tolerating style compared to the adjusting style. In other words, the chance of adjusting emotional style in caregivers increased significantly with increasing education level. Also, the chance of concealing emotional style for men was almost 80% lower than the chance of adjusting emotional style of (Table6). There was also a significant relationship between the level of mental health literacy and affective emotional styles (Fig.1).

According to the findings, most of the family caregivers of patients with mental disorders were young and in the age group of 18 to 35 years. Regarding the gender of the caregivers, after taking into account the caregiver’s relationship with the patient, we observed that the majority of female patients were being cared for by the same sex family member, while this issue was less common in male patients. Also, parents and children were mostly taken care of by their same-sex parent and child. Sister caring for brother was seen more than brother caring for sister. Dutta et al. (2021) showed in their study that men on average are more involved as caregivers, which is inconsistent with the findings of present study [41]. Traditionally, in Iran, most caregivers of people with mental disorders are women, perhaps due to the greater presence of women at home and their ability to provide greater care. A systematic review was conducted by Amiresmaili et al. (2023) it was determined Iranian caregivers suffer more than 50% from care burden. These caregivers are mostly female; parents work as housewives similar to previous studies which showed three out of five caregivers were women (61%) and parents constituted the majority of caregivers. Given that being female, increases caregiving burden by 0.41 times and the fact that most caregivers are women, paying attention to the needs of female caregivers is importance in establishing supportive systems [42].

Regarding the low level of education in patients, it can be argued that due to the nature of mental disorders, which starts at a younger age, people with mental disorders are not able to continue their education and remain led educated. Also, the higher level of education in a caregiver increases his/her chance of using adjusting emotional style. This may be due to the caregiver’s greater opportunity to acquire knowledge and receive positive feedback from adjusting emotional style. In the present study, about 40% of the caregivers were responsible for their patient’s expenses in addition to their caregiving responsibility. When this issue was investigated in spouses with the gender factor, we observed that when the gender of caregiver is changed from a woman to a man, responsibility for expenses increases by 50%. The reason for this is the stronger role of men in financing the family. Also, the economic level of caregivers did not affect the care burden score. The results of Noori and Ebrahim’s study (2020) confirm the results of present study [43]. In this study, we found that caregivers who were housewives had 2.691 units higher score of care burden. It is assumed that greater involvement in the home environment and continuous caring for the patient causes burnout in caregivers and increases their care burden. This study also showed that caregiver burden was lower in caregivers of patients with mania and anxiety disorders. This is probably because the greater complexity of patient’s disorder is positively associated with the level of care burden experienced by the caregiver. Since anxiety and mania disorders are less complex among the common disorders listed in the demographic questionnaire, the burden of care attributed to them was also less than that of caring for patients with schizophrenia in this study.

Based on the results, caregivers whose education was related to their caring role had significantly more mental health literacy compared to other caregivers. Since medical fields such as psychology, nursing assistant, nursing, social work, medicine, counseling, emergency medicine, occupational therapy, and midwifery increase the level of students’ knowledge on mental disorders, it is natural that caregivers with the mentioned educational fields gain a higher level of mental health literacy. The chance of having a concealment emotional style for men was almost 80% lower than the chance of having an adjusting emotional style, which could be due to gender differences in the dominant emotional style of individuals. This justification is in line with the study of Mack et al. (2009) regarding the differences in the emotional regulation style in different sexes. However, the study of Gardener et al. (2013) did not conclude this difference and considered it as research bias [44,45].

According to the findings of present study, among the components of mental health literacy, the highest mean score was related to attitudes that promote recognition and appropriate help-seeking, followed by recognition of disorders and knowledge of how to seek mental health information. Maybe the reason for that is the close personal relationship of family caregivers with the affected person. The findings of Mehrotra et al. (2018) in this regard are in line with the present study [26]. According to the findings, the lowest mean score of mental health literacy was related to self-treatment and knowledge of risk factors and causes, which is in line with the findings of Dutta et al. (2021) [41] and Poreddi et al. (2015) [46] studies. Meilsmeidth et al. (2024) in a quasi-experimental study conducted on 504 young students, found a significant difference between the stigma and knowledge scores of the participants after the implementation of an educational program. This study showed the importance of education on improving mental health literacy [47]. Considering the strong influence of culture on literacy, there is a possibility that caregivers would blame themselves and self-medicate. Altweck et al. (2015) found that “an overwhelming cultural difference (namely, lay help-seeking beliefs) played a central role in the Indian sample, and an eligible role in the European American sample. Further, collectivism was positively associated with causal beliefs of mental illness in the European American sample, and with lay help-seeking beliefs in the Indian sample [48]. Awareness of the dimensions of caregiver’s mental health literacy can help reduce negative factors in caregiver’s mental health and find solutions to meet his/her needs.

Among the components of care burden, the highest score was related to emotional burden and the lowest was related to physical burden. A high level of emotional burden of care was also reported by caregivers in the studies of Noori and Ebrahim (2020) [43], Peng et al. (2019) [49], Inogbo et al. (2017) [50] and Haghgoo et al. (2017) [27], confirming the findings of present study. Ramezani et al. (2018) argued that 68% of caregivers in their study had mild to severe burden of care [51]. In explaining this issue, it can be said that most of the specialized care is focused on the patient and the family caregivers who are in close interaction with the patient are ignored and their needs are not taken into account, and also, they are not given an opportunity to express their concern at all so they are also be at risk of serious problems. In this regard, Hsiao et al. (2020) stated that family caregivers have less time to do personal activities in their free time, so the risk of reduced life expectancy increases in them [52]. Patients and their families are constantly affected by changes caused by the disease and its treatment. These changes gradually reduce the level of functioning and ability of family members, destroy the emotional system and communication structures of the family, lead to inefficient relationships between family members, cause financial and economic problems, reduce social interactions of the family, change roles and ultimately increase the care burden.

As the results showed, concealment was the most common emotional style among the family caregivers. This finding can be due to a communication stigma caused by the presence of a person with mental disorder in the family that may receive negative attitudes of the society. In this situation, caregivers often try to hide their emotions. In line with the findings of present study, Chen et al. (2019) also mentioned concealment as the dominant emotional style in caregivers of psychiatric patients [53]. Behrouian et al. (2020) confirmed that caregiving stress increases vulnerability to emotional distress, and physical/ psychological problems such as anger, sadness, despair, shame, guilt, and depression [54].

According to the findings of present study, mental health literacy had an inverse relationship with caregiver burden (r=-0.816). Based on this, it can be said that improving the level of mental health literacy, including the components of knowledge, self-treatment, risk factors, searching for information, and specialized help and attitude, leads to a reduction in the level of caregiver burden. It can also reduce the severity of other components (time-dependence, developmental, physical, social and emotional burden). In this regard, Cianfrocca et al. (2018) showed that searching for health information in order to increase health literacy leads to a significant reduction in care burden and also improves the quality of life of patients and caregivers [55]. Contrary to these results, Barutcu (2019) showed that increasing health literacy can increase the burden of care in family caregivers of patients [56]. Çaka et al.(2024) found that as the mother’s health literacy increases, her burden of care also decreases [57].This difference may be due to the increased sensitivity and awareness of caregivers towards the needs, problems and feelings of patient suffering from mental disorders, more efforts required to meet these needs, increased duties and responsibilities, spending more time and energy to identify the best solutions, and communication strategies in face of a person suffering from mental disorder.

Based on our findings, there was no significant relationship between the level of mental health literacy and emotional styles. Since emotion can be categorized into different emotional styles, it can be concluded that if we ignore the influence of other variables, caregivers with the emotional styles of concealment and tolerance are more frequent that those with adjusting emotional style. This is maybe due to having more power of reasoning and control of emotions, which is directly related to the level of knowledge and logic of a person. There is a need to conduct more research to investigate the relationship between these two variables. Andrade et al. (2022) found that knowledge of coping strategies that affect caregivers’ conditions depends on their level of mental health literacy [16]. A systematic review and meta-analysis by Suwanwong et al. (2024) identified significant correlations between mental health literacy and modifiable predictors, including stigma toward professional help, self-efficacy, attitudes toward help-seeking, social support, positive psychological states, mental health education, and psychological distress [58].

As the findings showed, caregivers who had a concealment emotional style had more caregiver burden than caregivers with an adjusting emotional style. There was also no significant difference between the caregivers with tolerance emotional style and others. In addition, for every one unit increase in caregiver burden, the probability of having concealment and tolerance emotional styles was 10.2% and 7% higher than the probability of adjusting emotional style, respectively. This relationship can be justified in this explanation; when a person hides and suppresses his feelings, naturally, negative emotions accumulate in him and he will experience a greater burden of care. But when he rationally and intelligently uses the adjusting emotional style to manage his emotions, he experiences less burden of care. In their study, Clari et al. (2022) showed that the poor functioning of family and caregivers of people with schizophrenia is associated with a high care burden, this is while higher level of hope in the caregiver is associated with lower care burden [59]. The study of Liu et al. (2022) also confirms the findings of present study [60].

This study confirms the relationship between care burden and emotional styles. The experience of negative emotions in the family caring for a family member with a psychiatric disorder is considered a debilitating stress and may even lead to disease reoccurrence in the patient by reducing the quality of care. There is a need for further studies on the relationship between caregiver burden and emotional styles, because if the dominant caregiver style can be changed with appropriate training, caregiver burden and, as a result, caregiver burnout will be reduced, and ultimately a higher quality of care is provided to patients with mental disorders.

The present study had some limitations, including limited sampling to a few care centers and the lack of a comparison group. Also, the large number of questions asked may have caused fatigue in the participants. In addition, since the research is a survey, there is a possibility of errors in data collection and ultimately bias. Therefore, the study findings may not be generalized to all contexts. Future research should focus on larger sample size, and also comparative studies with qualitative methods (focus group discussions) may be useful for a deeper understanding of this issue.

In this study, the relationship between mental health literacy, care burden and emotional styles of the family caregivers of people with mental disorders was examined. The findings showed that the mean mental health literacy score was an average level. The mean care burden score indicating a very high level of care burden in family caregivers of people with mental disorders. The findings also showed that the highest score of emotional styles was related to the concealment emotional style. Pearson correlation coefficient showed a very strong and inverse relationship between mental health literacy and care burden. The findings also showed that care burden had a significant relationship with emotional styles in family caregivers of people with mental disorders. Since families play an important role in the care and follow-up of patients with psychiatric disorders, it seems that there is a need for programs to increase their mental health literacy.

The findings of this study are of great importance for policymakers in the field of health and mental health care in order to implement necessary interventions to improve the mental health literacy of caregivers of patients with mental disorders. As an economical and effective public health measure, improving mental health literacy has been widely used in many countries to prevent and reduce a variety of mental disorders. According to the results of this study, evidence-based decisions can also be made to improve the mental health literacy level of caregivers of patients with mental disorders and reduce the economic burden of mental illnesses.

There is need for more studies to examine the relationship between care burden and emotional styles. Because if it is possible to change the caregiver’s dominant emotional style with appropriate training, the burden of care and as a result the caregivers’ burnout will be reduced, and ultimately, a higher quality of care is provided to patients with mental disorders.

This study is the result of the master’s thesis in the field of psychiatric nursing, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Islamic Azad University of Medical Sciences, Tehran. We hereby express our thanks and appreciation to the cooperation of the research vice-chancellor of the university and the officials of the university hospitals in Tehran, as well as to all the family caregivers studied for their participation in the research.