Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a highly prevalent, irreversible, and progressive disease associated with a high cardiovascular risk. We aimed to clinically investigate the extra-therapeutic effect of adding therapeutic doses of pentoxifylline (PTX) and/or folic acid (FA) for CKD patients to the standard care on their health-related quality.

A randomized, prospective, parallel, and controlled clinical trial of CONSORT 80 patients diagnosed with CKD stages 3–5 were stratified by simple randomization into four groups (20 patient/group) and followed up for 6 months. Control group: received standard usual care therapy only; PTX group: received therapeutic dose of PTX added to standard usual care therapy; FA group: received FA added to standard usual care therapy; and PTX and FA group: received both PTX and FA added to their standard usual care therapy. The primary objective was to compare the renal function biochemical parameters for the intervention groups compared to the control group. Meanwhile, the secondary objective was to compare the incidence of readmission to hospitalization with cardiovascular events, incidence of peripheral vascular diseases and Fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS) for the intervention groups compared to the control group.

This study’s research was granted authorization by the Research Ethics Committee (REC), Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, No. (FMASU MS UNIV 15/2022) dated to 15/12/2022, and the Ethical Committee in the Faculty of Pharmacy (Girls), Al-Azhar University, No. (313) dated to 22/12/2022. This study was authorized byhttps://clinicaltrials.gov/(NCT05284656) and the first date of registration was 16/02/2022. All patients were assigned to write an informed consent.

There was a significant improvement in renal function biochemical parameters and a significant reduction in the FAS for the intervention groups compared to the control group.

Our results demonstrated that administration of therapeutic doses of PTX and/or FA in CKD patients delayed the progression of advanced chronic kidney disease and has been used successfully improved their health-related quality of life.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12882-025-04399-3.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a progressive disease affecting more than 10% of the worldwide population [1]. Besides, it is accounted for 13.4% of the global deaths in 2023 especially in low-income countries [2,3]. The main risk factors for CKD include the age, hypertension and diabetes [4]. Moreover, people with CKD do not exhibit any symptoms; until the later stages of the disease. Treatment options include replacement therapy or conservative care. Slowing down the course of renal dysfunction, treating certain consequences including anemia, mineral and bone disorders, cardiovascular diseases (CVD), etc., are goals of conservative treatment for CKD [5]. The most common complications of CKD include cardiovascular diseases (CVD) which leads to rehospitalization and death [6].

Fatigue is an excessive subjective overwhelming sense of physical and mental exhaustion which is commonly experienced in CKD patients. It impairs daily functional activities, patient’s quality of life and it is associated with poor therapeutic outcomes through raising the mortality rate and suppressing the recovery rate [4,5]. Numerous factors related to fatigue such as anemia, hemoglobin (Hb), serum albumin, impaired oxygen delivery, altered cardiovascular response to exertion, metabolic acidosis, and inflammatory cytokines; such as c-reactive protein, and IL-6 [5]. The nutrient loss, due to diet restriction and chronic inflammation, is very common in CKD patients. This in turn may stimulate progression into anemia and general fatigue [7].

Pentoxifylline (PTX) is a methylxanthine derivative that functions as a phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitor [8]. It is commonly used to treat peripheral arterial diseases. PTX improves circulation through altering the erythrocyte deformability and enhances capillary microcirculation [9]. Owing to this hemorheological property and the hypotensive effect on the intraglomerular pressure, PTX has gained a great interest as a therapeutic agent in patients with kidney disease especially in diabetic patients [10]. In addition, on chronic administration, PTX is an effective anti-inflammation, anti-oxidative stress and ameliorating agent against the histological damage and it has a protective effect on the endothelial function [11]. It has been in the clinical use since 1972 and has gain approval by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1984 for managing peripheral blood circulation and improving symptoms of blood flow complications [12].

Folic acid (FA) is essential for the synthesis, repair and methylation of the DNA [13]. FA also participates in single-carbon transfer processes and provides single-carbon units in various oxidative states. Mood disorders, megaloblastic anemia, and hyperhomocysteinemia are among the consequences of folate shortage [13,14]. Common unwanted health issues due to folate deficiency include macrocytic anemia, weakness, confusion, memory deficits, shortness of breath, peripheral neuropathy, pregnancy complications and depression [15]. Hyperhomocysteinemia (Hhcy) occurs in about 85% of CKD patients because of impaired renal metabolism and reduced renal excretion [16]. FA, the synthetic form of vitamin B9, is critical in the conversion of homocysteine (Hcy) to methionine. Shortage of FA leads to raising of the Hcy levels [17]. Hyperhomocysteinemia (Hhcy) is regarded as an independent predictor of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in end-stage renal disease [18]. Hhcy indicates enhanced risks for inflammation, endothelial injury and vascular damage which lead to CVD, stroke, and CKD [19]. FA has also been shown to improve endothelial function without lowering Hcy, suggesting an alternative explanation for the effect of FA on endothelial function [20].

We intended to explore the hypothesis that adding therapeutic doses of PTX (tablets, 400 mg twice daily) and/or FA (tablets, 500 mcg once daily) to the standard usual care has a therapeutic adding effect and has an enhancement effect on the health-related quality of life for CKD stages 3–5 patients.

It was a randomized, single-center, prospective, open-label, parallel, and controlled clinical trial conducted at El Demirdash Hospital in Cairo, Egypt, in the nephrology clinics and departments. Randomization were implemented and controlled through central computer. The outcome assessors and the data analysts assigned to the intervention were blinded in order to assure the elimination of any bias.

This study’s research was approved by the relevant Institutional Review Boards. Besides, the study was authorized byhttps://clinicaltrials.gov/(NCT05284656) and the first date of registration was 16/02/2022. An informed consent was obtained from the included patients.

Patients between 18 and 60 years old were included if they were diagnosed with stage 3–5 CKD and had a stable condition. Stable patients were defined as: no hospitalizations or cardiac problems in the 90 days preceding screening; consistent function of the kidneys (starting serum creatinine must have not been elevated by 50% in the ninety days preceding screening), no modifications in concurrent drugs during the duration of the investigation, and patients who fully concur to take part in the study.

Pregnant and nursing women, patients with severe comorbid conditions expected to have less life expectancy less than 6 months, current administering PTX as well as FA, restrictions for using of PTX drug: previous history of PTX or theophylline allergy, past history of serious retinal hemorrhage or current cerebral hemorrhage, patients diagnosed with a current infections, inflammatory disorders, or those with HIV infection, patients with chronic liver failure, patients who had been given an immunosuppressive treatment, and patients who did not comply (those who did not take their drugs as prescribed during the research).

An informed consent was obtained from the included patients. The required data does not include identifying images, other personal or clinical details of participants. All procedures and experiments have been performed in accordance with guidelines and regulations of El Demirdash Hospital in Cairo and World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. Assigned participants to the interventions had access to the the random allocation sequence.

Patients were randomly allocated into four groups; 20 patients for each, the control group who received only the standardized usual care therapy throughout the six months, PTX-group who received pentoxifylline (Trental®tablets, 400 mg, twice daily) in addition to the standardized usual care therapy throughout the six months, FA-group who received FA (Folic acid®tablets, 500 mcg once daily in addition to the standardized usual care therapy throughout the six months, PTX and FA group who received both PTX (Trental®tablets, 400 mg, twice daily) and FA (Folic acid®tablets, 500 mcg, once daily) in addition to the standardized usual care therapy (Supplementary materialS1) throughout the six months. Throughout the six months of the research, patient adherence (using Direct Observed Therapy; DOT, method) [21] and compliance (using Self-reporting method) [22]. The measured primary and secondary parameters at the beginning of treatment were assigned as baseline measurements. Meanwhile, the measured primary and secondary parameters after six months were assigned as six-months measurements.

The primary outcome of this study was to compare the renal function biochemical parameters (serum creatinine, serum ferritin, estimated glomerular filtration rate, hemoglobin, international normalized ratio (INR), red blood cell (RBCs), and serum phosphorus and urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio) for the intervention groups compared to the control group. Meanwhile, the secondary objective of our study was to compare the incidence of readmission to hospitalization with cardiovascular events, incidence of peripheral vascular diseases and health-related QoL using Fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS) for the intervention groups compared to the control group.

The primary composite endpoint of the research was worsening the kidney function of any patient, indicated by sustained reduction of the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) by more than 50% during treatment or death due to either cardiovascular or kidney diseases. Besides, the secondary endpoint was worsening the eGFR by more than 50% without cardiovascular problems, hospitalization for cardiovascular or kidney diseases, and all causes of mortality such as sepsis.

https://www.ildcare.nl/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/679743_FAS_ARAB.pdf.

The FAS has been found to be the most promising measure of fatigue with good reliability and validity [23].

Although the questionnaire is very clear, professionally trained healthcare providers were assigned to help the patient to answer the questionnaire and to evaluate each mentioned problem in the questionnaire.

Each item is rated from 1 (never) to 5 (always), thus resulting in a total scaled score ranging from 10 to 50 points, with 10–21 points indicating no fatigue, 22–34 points indicating fatigue and ≥ 35 points indicating extreme fatigue.

All metric scaled scores and age were tested with the determined fatigue scaled score with Pearson`s correlation coefficient at the base line and after 6 months. Values above 0.5 indicated a strong effect.

Patients eligible for participation were asked to provide a written consent form and to complete FAS. Additionally, the basic demographic characters: age, gender, health conditions, current medications and laboratory analysis were recorded. Before the study, patients current standardized usual care medications were evaluated to check if there any risk of drug-drug interactions with study medication.

All patients were assessed at baseline and after six months from the start of the therapy, and they were subjected to the following: demographics and history-taking, adverse effect follow-up, patient compliance follow-up, radiological evaluation, laboratory investigation (biochemical markers) including; serum creatinine, estimated glomerular filtration rate, protein /creatinine ratio, serum ferritin, serum calcium, serum phosphorous, international normalization ratio (INR), urine analysis, complete blood count, c-reactive protein and FAS.

The sample size was calculated, using G power program for sample size calculation, setting power at 80%, alpha error at 5%, reviewing results from the number of patients admitted to the hemodialysis unit, a sample size of eighty patients was needed.

GraphPad Prism®5 software was used for the analysis of the data. Qualitative data were presented as frequencies (N) and percentages (%). Quantitative data were presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Both the students’ t-test and the ANOVA test were performed to analyze the statistical significance of the studied groups. In all statistical tests, a level of significance of 0.05 was used, below which the results were considered to be statistically significant.

As shown in Fig.1, in the frame time between December 2021 to January 2023, 138 patients were assessed for their eligibility using both inclusion and exclusion guidelines; 25 patients were excluded (where fifteen patients having chronic liver disorders, seven patients taking immunosuppressive treatment, and three women being pregnant). A total of 113 individuals were eligible to participate in the study. After obtaining their consents, they were allocated at random to a selection of four groups. After eliminating dead cases and non-compliance patients (all adverse effects and causes of non-compliances; as reported in supplementary materialS2, eighty of the 113 patients, 20 in each arm, completed the study research and were included in the final analyses.

There was no significant difference in predisposing factors (hypertension, diabetes mellitus and chronic use of analgesics) and the comorbid conditions (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, heart failure, hyperlipidemia and anemia) in all the allocated groups (As shown in Table1). The reported procedure adheres to the CONSORT guidelines (http://www.consort-statement.org/) for reporting clinical trials and BMC Series editorial policies (http://www.biomedcentral.com/submissions/editorial-policies#standards+of+reporting.

Comparison between the control group and the three intervention groups at baseline and after six months showed an improvement of renal function and hematological parameters in the three intervention groups compared to the control group, with a synergistic improvement in all the measured parameters in the PTX + FA group (as shown in Table3; Fig.2). Combined PTX and FA treatment showed the maximum therapeutic activity for the renal function and hematological parameters (Serum creatinine, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio, serum ferritin, hemoglobin and platelets count number).

Cohort following up of patients during the six months of the experiment showed that significant reduction of the incidence of readmission to hospitalization with cardiovascular events and the incidence of peripheral vascular diseases in three intervention groups compared to the control group, with a synergistic improvement in all the measured parameters in the PTX + FA group (as shown in Table4).

The fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS) for all patients at baseline using FAS showed that all CKD patients were suffering from severe fatigue states (mean fatigue scaled scores of 38.70, 38.50, 38.65, and 38.75 for control, PTX, FA, and PTX + FA groups respectively). There was no significant difference between the four groups (p-value > 0.05), (as shown in Table5; Fig.3).

After six months, FAS was repeated for all patients. In the control group, there was a highly significant difference in mean fatigue scaled score (p value < 0.0001) at baseline and after six months from the start of the treatment, as the mean fatigue scaled score increased by 2.4. In the PTX + FA group, there was a highly significant difference in mean fatigue scaled score (p value < 0.0001) at baseline and after six months; decreased by 3.2, followed by the FA group, decreased by 2.1, and followed by PTX group, decreased by 1.1.

Up till now, there is no specific treatment for most of the acquired chronic kidney diseases (CKDs). Renal transplantation is limited by organ shortage that is not likely to be resolved in the immediate or near future. Therefore, the best current therapeutic option is to concentrate on preventing the progression of renal diseases [17,24].

We aimed to investigate and compare the effects of the administration of therapeutic doses of pentoxifylline (PTX) and/or folic acid on patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) in order to provide nephroprotection options that could delay the progression of advanced chronic kidney disease. Therapeutic doses of pentoxifylline and/or folic acid showed statistically significant decreasing in serum creatinine, serum phosphorus and urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio. Meanwhile, there were statistically significant increases in estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), serum calcium, hemoglobin, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) after six months compared to the baseline values. Besides, we found that there were statistically significant decreases for the urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio in the PTX group after six months compared to the baseline, while there were no statistically significant differences in the control group after six months compared to the baseline. This result was in agreement with Chen et al. [25]. Yet, that study used 800 mg of PTX once daily. Moreover, our results were also in accordance with the findings of Renke et al. [26]. In that study, a placebo-controlled cross-over study was used. They found that PTX at a dose of 1200 mg daily reduced proteinuria [26]. We got the same results with lower doses of PTX and less patient non-compliance. Besides, our results shed the light that the nephroprotective effect of pentoxifylline affects by the daily dose. Previous researches [25,26], used one daily doses of pentoxifylline [800 and 1200 mg respectively once daily] which may have high patient non-compliance. So, we can divide the dose of pentoxifylline in order to get the same nephroprotective effect with decreased the patient non-compliance. Moreover, we designed our clinical trial in order to include diabetic, hypertensive or both diseased patients. All of those previous studies and our studies, concentrate on the treatment of the therapeutic outcomes for using the therapeutic doses of pentoxifylline and folic acid as a therapeutic option for improving the kidney function parameters and resultant reduction of the quality of life; represented by the fatigue. The etiology of the CKD such as nephropathy, hypertensive nephrosclerosis, glomerulonephritis, or other causes, which greatly affects the prognosis of the CKD and the development of fatigue should be investigated in future studies in order to generalize our findings. Focus groups for each comorbid factor should be designed in order to judge the generalizability of those findings.

On the other hand, Perkins et al., in a pilot randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial, found that proteinuria level was significantly different between the PTX and placebo groups after one year compared to the baseline suggesting that it is not before one year till the therapeutic dose of PTX to enhance the eGFR [27]. The sample size in that study and the following up procedure might lack the accuracy. In our study, we directly followed up the patients for six months and the sample size was higher than that study. The reduction of the glomerular filtration rate in that research was slower between the six months to the twelve months compared to our study. This may be due to administration of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and/or angiotensin receptor blockers which is affected by the electrolyte imbalance and sodium in taking prior to the start of treatment [28].

In our present study, there was a statistically significant increase (P< 0.05) in the PTX group after six months compared to the baseline regarding the eGFR, with no statistically significant difference in the control group. So, the therapeutic dose of PTX significantly enhanced the kidney function.

On the other hand, Perkins et al., showed that the mean eGFR decreased in the assigned PTX group and the controlled placebo group. But the mean eGFR decrease was significantly less in the PTX group than the placebo group [27]. This may be due to the difference in the experimental design between the two studies.

Our results go along with those of the Goicoechea et al. study [29]. There was a change in eGFR after twelve months in PTX group patients, whereas in the control group there was a worsening by the end of the study. That study used inflammatory biomarkers for their results. In our study we focused on both the biomarkers and the fatigue; as an output of the health condition, well as. So, our study took into account the fatigue condition of the CKD patients. Moreover, our results were also similar to that reported by Johnson et al. [30]. PTX-group showed significantly increased hemoglobin concentration [30]. Treatment with under-therapeutic dose of PTX dose had no effect on the hyporesponsiveness of ESAs with enhanced patients’ quality of life. So, our data for the reduction of the fatigue scaled score go along with this study. Additionally, our findings go along with Chen et al., [25]. Treatment with therapeutic dose of PTX for six months resulted in significant reduction of the protein excretion level. Besides, our result is similar to those of Nanayakkara et al., a randomized, double-blind trial [31]. Participants treated with different anti-oxidants or placebo showed improved eGFR in CKD patients. The similarity of their results and ours is due to the power of PTX to relief the oxidative stress produced during CKD which produces inflammation [32,33]. So, it has the same antioxidant effect.

In contrast, House et al.‘s multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, showed that eGFR decreased in the B-vitamin group after 36 months of continuous treatment. So high doses of B vitamins and longtime treatment resulted in a greater decrease in GFR and an increase in vascular events [34]. In that study, authors excluded CKD patients with stage 4 and 5. So, this may explain the difference between our results and that results and the need for high doses of vitamin B for long time of treatment.

Yang et al. evaluated and compared the efficacy of folic acid and pentoxifylline on renal protection in predialysis patients with advanced CKD [33]. Even though, that previous study had just investigated and compared the effects of folic acid and pentoxifylline on delaying dialysis initiation in predialysis patients with advanced CKD and devoid many laboratory data (such as creatinine and eGFR), To the best of our knowledge, we are the first study to compare the efficacy of folic acid and/or pentoxifylline on renal protection based on laboratory data such as serum creatinine, urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio, estimated glomerular filtration rate, serum calcium, hemoglobin, and serum ferritin. Moreover, Yang et al.‘s study was a retrospective population-based observational study. Our study is a well-designed prospective study with measured all biochemical parameters with the fatigue scaled score for patients.

It has been reported that PTX has anti-inflammatory, anti-proinflammatory cytokines and anti-hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha (HIF-2alpha) leads to improvement of the glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and significantly having anti-proteinuric effect. These explanations have been previously explained the improvement of the renal function parameters in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients (Stages 3–5) over at least 6 months of clinical trials [36–38]. Meanwhile, our results showed an unexpected high improvement of the observed renal function (27% improvement). The explanation of this unexpected nature of observed renal improvement includes that most of the hired patients for these clinical trials (80%) are diabetic patients. Pentoxifylline has been proved to show significant antiproteinuric effects in diabetic kidney disease patients [37], significantly increased serum markers for diabetic kidney health such as Klotho [39], significantly reduced harmful serum tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in diabetic patients [40] and a delay in the loss of estimated glomerular filtration rate [41,42] in diabetic patients. So, our results for the PTX are more promising for diabetic patients. Meanwhile, further investigations should be done before the addition of PTX to the usual care therapy protocol through investigating the effect of PTX on CKD patients with low inflammatory markers. Besides, no evidence for the primary kidney protective effect of PTX. The biological plausibility of these findings is that PTX inhibits phosphodiesterase isoenzyme (PDE) increases the accumulation of cAMP inside nephrocytes increased the (HIF-2alpha) stimulating the hemoglobin and inhibiting renal fibrosis [36]. Besides, PTX decreases the blood viscosity and improves the tissue oxygenation of the kidney. So, it leads to improvement of the kidney condition. These subcellular and hemodynamic explanations have been added to the discussion section and highlighted with yellow. Moreover, we firstly reported that variability in laboratory measurements in the platelets counts and International normalized ratio (INR) are not significantly affected by either PTX or Folic acid (FA) suggesting that alternative mechanisms may be responsible for the agent’s ability to augment haemoglobin levels in CKD patients with ESA-hyporesponsive anemia [37]. The source of novelty in our research is the assessment of the Fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS) as an output for the anemia and the clinical trial for the effect of Foilc acid or combined therapy.

Fatigue can be defined as an overwhelming sense of tiredness, lack of energy, and a feeling of exhaustion [38]. Fatigue assessment tools include unidimensional fatigue scales such as: Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy – Fatigue (FACIT-F), Brief Fatigue Inventory, Fatigue Severity Scale, Fatigue Assessment Scale, Numerical Rating Scale – Fatigue, and Visual Analog Scale – Fatigue. The multidimensional fatigue scales found were the Checklist Individual Strength, Chalder Fatigue Scale, Multidimensional Assessment of Fatigue, Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory Scale, and Piper Fatigue Scale [40,46]. It has been reported that our used assessment tool; Fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS) tool is the tool of choice for assessing fatigue in CKD [43]. In our results, FAS scaled scores for CKD patients exceeds 22 indicating that CKD patients have moderate-to-sever fatigue correlating to the worsening of the quality of health-related life (QoL) and poor clinical outcomes. It is simple validated tool for assessment of the fatigue severity in CKD patients [39].

Previous studies solely focused on biomarkers (such as hemoglobin (Hb) and C-reactive protein (CRP) and neglected investigating the effect of standard medicines on the clinical outcomes or patient quality of life. Johnson et al. showed that treatment with oral dose of 400 mg daily of pentoxifylline for 3 months significantly increased Hb and significantly declined inflammatory cytokines and CRP [44]. Besides, Cooper et al. investigated end-stage renal disease patients administered 400 mg of pentoxifylline orally per day for 4 months and found a substantial increase in Hb and a significant decrease in TNF-α and IFN-ϒ [45]. These results go a long with our results.

In our study, we focused on the therapeutic effect of pentoxifylline and folic acid on clinical outcomes by assessing the fatigue scaled score along with all biochemical parameters.

To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate the therapeutic effect of pentoxifylline and folic acid in CKD patients (stages 3–5) on clinical outcomes by assessing the fatigue scaled score using the Fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS).

In this study, there was a significant decrease in the fatigue scaled score in all the intervention groups before and after the intervention, which was due to the effect of pentoxifylline and folic acid for six months compared to the control group.

Contrary to our study, in Fukuda et al. study, authors studied fatigue and quality of life in end-stage renal disease. In this study, patients undergone double blind study of receiving nutrients (mixture of vitamin B1, vitamin B2, niacin, vitamin B6, vitamin B12, folic acid, vitamin C, carnitine, coenzyme Q10, nave galacto-oligosaccharide, and zinc) or placebo after each dialysis session for 12 weeks. They found no significant difference between nutrient-treated patients and placebo-treated patients [46]. This can be explained that it measured the biochemical biomarkers and questionnaire for acute and chronic fatigue within twelve weeks of the study. The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of both pentoxifylline and folic acid needs about four months till generation of the whole human blood and the feeling of fatigue can be reduced [35]. So, our experimental design is more logic to measure the Fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS) after six months of treatment.

In our study, we used randomized controlled clinical trial, we used two interventions with doses chosen on the basis of prior studies and we evaluated both biomarkers and health-related outcomes for evaluating the therapeutic beneficiaries. This experimental design is appropriate and relevant to the question of our research. Moreover, the inclusion of a patient-reported outcome (FAS) is the first time to be reported as a biomarker for the quality of life for patients with CKD. Besides, the study explores low-cost, potentially accessible treatments for CKD patients in resource-limited Meanwhile, it has been calculated by the center settings.

In the current study, there was no significant difference between the control group and intervention groups regarding age, gender, or biochemical parameters at baseline. This indicates good randomization of the cases with the exclusion of any selection bias that could affect the outcome results.

The present work was limited by the small number of patients due to the difficulty of recruiting patients who met the study criteria. Although. the sample size met the least amount of the sample size calculated by the G-power program, meanwhile, the sample size is relatively small to generalize these findings. Besides, the duration of treatment (six months) should be increased for following up, in order to explore the effect of chronic administration of these medications on the biomarkers and the quality of life of these patients. In addition to, the CKD is significantly influenced by the etiology which is significantly influence the progression and the response to treatment such as diabetic nephropathy, hypertensive nephrosclerosis, glomerulonephritis, etc. This represents a significant limitation for our study. On the same way, it was a single-center trial.

In spite of the study limitations including the relatively short study duration (6 months), we can generally conclude that co-administration of therapeutic daily doses of pentoxifylline acid (PTX) and/or folic acid (FA) to chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients with different etiologies has the therapeutic advantage of the ability to delay the progression of CKD by enhancing renal function, improving the biochemical parameters and relieving fatigue which is reflecting positively on their quality of life.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.