Metal nanocrystals (NCs) show utility in a variety of
applications
due to their unique structure-dependent properties. Isolating these
structure–property relationships is crucial for NC design,
but heterogeneities present in NC ensembles as well as limitations
in NC characterization strategies complicate this goal. Herein, we
describe the various types of intraparticle and interparticle heterogeneities
common to NC ensembles and then provide a detailed description and
comparison of single-particle techniques that can be used to characterize
these different heterogeneities. Case studies then showcase the use
of multimodal characterization approaches, where multiple, primarily
single-NC techniques are used in tandem to provide new insights into
metal NC structure–property relationships. We conclude with
a critique of single-NC techniques that motivates the development
of new high-throughput and high-resolution single-NC characterization
approaches as well as computational tools, with a proposed workflow
outlined to accelerate NC design and discovery.

Metal nanocrystals (NCs) are
of interest in research areas as far ranging as biosensing to space
exploration.−The interest in and usefulness of metal NCs arise from their unique
nanoscale features, such as large surface area-to-volume ratios, the
close proximity of energetically distinct surface sites, and the rise
of localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs).−Further, the
properties of NCs can be tuned through their size, shape, and composition.−However, colloidally synthesized NCs are not identical within the
ensemble, displaying both intraparticle and interparticle heterogeneity,
defined as structural and compositional inconsistencies within a single
particle or among a grouping of particles, respectively. This heterogeneity
arises from small energetic differences between certain features during
NC formation (e.g., twinned versus single-crystalline
seeds, which can vary in their total energy as a function of size). Significantly, this heterogeneity may dilute
the properties of the predominant NC structure within an ensemble,
falsely enhance the ensemble’s properties in ensemble-averaged
measurements, and mask NCs with exceptional properties. For example,
Nie and Emory proposed that the enhanced Raman signal observed when
using Ag nanoparticles originated from less than 1% of the nanoparticles
within the ensemble. This groundbreaking
identification led to decades of research, largely leveraging theory
and single-NC approaches, to accurately elucidate structure–property
relationships, where now surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)
is a robust analytical tool.

This example highlights the importance
of deconvoluting the structure–property
relationships of NCs to efficiently design NC candidates for various
applications and understanding the tolerances of various heterogeneities
in an NC ensemble toward an application. However, this example also
highlights a major challenge for the field of nanoscience. Most efforts
directed at structure–property correlation rely on routine
bulk measurements (e.g., absorption spectroscopy,
cyclic voltammetry,etc.), which can lead to misidentification
of these relationships on account of interparticle and intraparticle
heterogeneity. To obtain reliable structure–property correlation,
property measurements of individual NCs are required, which directly
correlate with their composition, size, shape, and defects. Single-NC
measurements are state-of-the-art in terms of structure–property
correlation.−However, these methods often suffer from experimental
complexity, low throughput, and insufficient correlated data. There
is a need for accessible, high-throughput single-NC methods that are
also information-rich. For example, conceptual breakthroughs such
as those that made SERS robust could be accelerated by obtaining correlated
structure–property measurements from thousands of individual
NCs in seconds, but a major bottleneck is reliance on electron microscopy
to obtain structural and compositional information at the level of
single NCs. Additionally, some property measurements are not available
at the level of single NCs currently (e.g., selectivity
and active surface area of single-NC electrocatalysts, particle density,
ligand placement,etc.).

Herein, NC heterogeneity
across length scales is described by outlining
common intraparticle defects, ranging in scale from atomic level (point)
to linear (one-dimensional) to planar (two-dimensional) defects, before
concluding with a description of ensemble-level (interparticle) heterogeneity.
Then, analytical techniques for single-particle structural characterization
of metal NCs are described, comparing and contrasting their advantages
and disadvantages relative to those of other techniques. Case studies
in both the intraparticle and interparticle size regimes are included,
showcasing the current state of structure–property characterization
and correlation across these length scales. We conclude thisPerspectivewith a proposed characterization workflow for
accelerating NC design through both high-throughput and high-resolution
single-particle techniques, outlining the frontiers of single-NC studies
where big data and computational and machine learning (ML) approaches
are expected to play an increasingly important role.

Figuresummarizes
the different types of intraparticle and interparticle heterogeneities
common to metal NCs and their relationship to one another as a function
of length scale. The smallest-scale sources of intraparticle heterogeneity
possible within NCs are point defects. These atomic-scale defects
include the replacement of an atom with one of a different element
(substitutions) or the absence of an atom (vacancies) within a crystal
lattice. Interstitial defects can also occur where an atom occupies
a site outside of the points formed by the crystal lattice.

Scheme depicting
different types of intraparticle and interparticle
NC heterogeneities across length scales, where blue atoms contribute
to intraparticle examples, brown atoms contribute to interparticle
examples, and black atoms represent a secondary composition in multielemental
particles or a substituted atom.

Although intraparticle
heterogeneity is inherent to colloidal NCs,
interparticle heterogeneity is more commonly characterized, as these
differences are often larger and more easily visualized. Interparticle
heterogeneities include differences in NC size and shape within the
ensemble and particle-to-particle variations in composition and truncation.
Ligands on the surface of NCs, introduced from the NC synthesis or
by post-synthesis NC functionalization, can be an additional source
of both intra and interparticle heterogeneity due to differences in
ligand density across a single NC or from particle-to-particle. We note that in some cases, intraparticle heterogeneities
introduce interparticle heterogeneities; that is, when intraparticle
defects are present in NCs used as seeds (i.e., sites
for heterogeneous nucleation) for growth to larger NCs, propagation
of such defects to a larger scale is possible. The propagated defects
can lead to increased polydispersity, especially in relation to the
NC shape in the resulting NC ensemble. For example, when synthesizing
Ag nanocubes, often a subset of the ensemble consists of shape impurities
such as Ag right bipyramids, Ag decahedra, and even Ag nanowires with
pentagonal cross-sections; these shape impurities arise because the
initial seeds formed during the synthesis contain twin planes while
the seeds producing Ag nanocubes are single-crystalline. However, intraparticle defects in seeds can
also be intentionally engineered to access monodisperse populations
of specific shapes and symmetry-reduced structures.,Further, intraparticle defects in catalytic materials can be intentionally
formed to alter the material’s electronic properties and surface
structure toward more selective and active catalysis.

This section describes and contrasts different analytical techniques
that are capable of characterizing the structural features of single
metal NCs at different length scales, whether they are already well-established
tools for single-NC analysis (e.g., electron microscopy)
or less common but promising tools for single metal NC characterization.
Though techniques such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence,
and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) are common methods used
in materials characterization and may indicate the presence of some
interparticle heterogeneities (e.g., size polydispersity,
sample compositional and phase purity,etc.),−they are limited to bulk-scale, not single NC, analysis and thus
will not be discussed herein. Further, techniques that are primarily
used to measure single-NC properties (as opposed to techniques that
characterize structure only or can measure both structure and properties)
were excluded from this section, with two single-NC property techniques,
scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM) and electrochemical
collision methods, being highlighted in the following case study sections.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) have long been foundational techniques in single-NC studies,
being the gold standard of verifying that a single NC is being analyzed,
although familiarity with signal intensities (e.g., electrical current, light scattering) in other single-NC techniques
can provide an internal reference. In SEM, a focused electron beam
is scanned across the sample, generating backscattered and secondary
electrons that are detected on the same side of the sample as the
electron source to build an image with three-dimensional (3-D) topographical
information. Alternatively, TEM uses an electron beam that penetrates
and is transmitted through the sample, generating elastically and
inelastically scattered electrons that are collected on the opposite
side of the sample as the electron source to construct a two-dimensional
projection of the sample. Due to the
reliance on the transmission of electrons through the sample, TEM
is limited to a sample thickness of a few hundred nanometers, although
focused ion beam milling can thin specific regions of a material for
TEM analysis and be used to reveal the internal structure of nanomaterials. SEM is limited only by the maximum distance
the instrument allows between the sample stage and the electron beam/detector,
which is on the scale of centimeters. Further, SEM requires conductive
samples to limit the charging of the sample by the electron beam,
but TEM can image both conductive and non-conductive specimens. Overall, SEM offers easier sample preparation
and analysis, faster experiments, and less sample damage at the cost
of reduced spatial resolution compared to TEM, which is on the order
of nanometers in SEM studies as opposed to angstroms in TEM studies. SEM is also limited in the number of compatible
auxiliary techniques when compared to TEM, although an energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector can be inserted into both types
of instruments to obtain compositional information from element-specific
X-rays generated as the electron beam interacts with the sample.

High-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HRTEM) and scanning
transmission electron microscopy (STEM) are two popular modes of TEM
capable of reaching subangstrom resolution. In HRTEM, a phase contrast
image is formed by the interference of the direct electron beam with
a diffracted electron beam, whereas in STEM, a single highly focused
electron beam is raster scanned across the sample, increasing the
time required to collect an image but also increasing the resulting
spatial resolution.,The detector used in STEM imaging
can also be varied to further optimize the resulting signal. For example,
annular bright field (ABF)-STEM collects low-angle scattered electrons
and is optimal for imaging light elements, whereas high-angle annular
dark-field (HAADF)-STEM collects electrons scattered at high angles
and is optimal for imaging heavy elements. HAADF-STEM has superiorZ-contrast (Z= atomic number) compared to HRTEM, making atomic features often
easier to visualize and differentiate. Aberration correction in some
HRTEM and STEM instruments can further increase the spatial resolution
of these techniques, as well asZ-contrast in HAADF-STEM,
through real-time correction of electron beam distortions while imaging.

In addition to static imaging, auxiliary
methods make it possible
to capture 3-D morphology, obtain compositional information, and monitor
dynamic processes in state-of-the-art TEM studies. Electron tomography
is one such auxiliary technique, in which the 3-D structure of a single
NC is reconstructed from a series of two-dimensional TEM or STEM images
collected at various tilt angles, providing
snapshots of NC structure in processes such as early-stage nucleation
and atomic-level restructuring.,Electron tomography
can also be used to qualitatively evaluate complex NC structures and
morphology, such as helicity measurements to report on single-NC chirality. Another auxiliary technique is 4D-STEM, where
an electron diffraction pattern is collected at each probe position
as the electron beam is scanned across the sample, forming an information-rich
four-dimensional data set with a high spatial resolution (∼1
nm). 4D-STEM has been used to obtain
high-resolution information about strain, lattice orientation, and
dielectric field across single NCs,−though the large amount
of data collected in this technique makes data processing time-intensive.

Advances inin situTEM and STEM have made
the
visualization and study of various dynamic processes occurring at
the single-NC level possible. Specifically, advances in TEM sample
holders and use of graphene liquid cells provide gas- and solvent-tight
chambers,−while specialized e-chips and holder ports allow imaging and tracking
in a variety of environments, including thermal, electrochemical, pressurized/gas
flow,,and liquid flow. Further, advancements in cameras used in this technology allow dynamic
processes occurring at the millisecond time scale to be captured. EDS, EELS, and 4D-STEM can also be used in tandem
within situ(S)­TEM to study changes in composition
and the crystal lattice as well as changes in electronic properties
of single NCs in real time.,,A significant question that continually plaguesin situelectron microscopy experiments is, to what extent does the electron
beam affect, even at low doses, the dynamic processes being recorded?
To minimize these effects, careful protocols and best practices have
been implemented by the community, with
control experiments and benchmarking withex situdata being important components in validatingin situresults.

In comparison to electron microscopy, optical microscopy
techniques
can be inexpensive, high-throughput alternatives to identify interparticle
heterogeneity, especially in plasmonic NC samples. However, since optical microscopy techniques probe samples
with much lower energy than electron microscopy, optical images of
single NCs are diffraction-limited, meaning that small-scale intraparticle
defects cannot be directly visualized. This limitation can be overcome
using super-resolution imaging, where single NCs are tagged with a
series of probes that can be localized at the NC surface with a spatial
resolution of ∼10 nm, revealing NC structure in optical reconstructions. Such studies can also be used to reveal the
effect of both interparticle and intraparticle heterogeneity on single-NC
catalytic activity,,though these super-resolution
techniques suffer in part from lower throughput and challenging sample
preparation compared to other optical methods as well as possible
alteration of the NC properties resulting from probe functionalization.

Without additional probes, wide-field optical microscopy techniques
can be used to capture interparticle heterogeneity in NC samples,
where many single particles are imaged simultaneously. As the optical
response of a single NC is highly sensitive to its physical features,
NCs of different sizes, shapes, and compositions can be compared and distinguished through differences in their optical
properties. Further, the short integration times andin situcapabilities of optical microscopy make it an ideal candidate to
track dynamic changes in single-NC structures under various conditions
and applications.,Of course, the “structural”
information obtained from diffraction-limited optical data is qualitative
and must be inferred, where correlated electron microscopy is often
used to confirm such interpretations and determine structure–property
relationships.

Compared to scanning electron
microscopy techniques (SEM and STEM),
both STM and AFM have lower temporal resolution (s–1to ms–1scan rate as opposed to μs–1scan rate for SEM/STEM), limiting the event types that can be capturedin situ. However, STM and AFM eliminate the concern of electron
beam effects inin situstudies that afflict electron
microscopy studies. Electron microscopy also benefits from the ability
to obtain compositional information on single NCs through commercially
available coupled techniques, though STM and AFM can measure particle
height with high accuracy and obtain electrical, magnetic, and mechanical
information on single NCs. A significant
benefit to STM and AFM is that they can characterize the size, structure,
height, and surface topography of thin two-dimensional NCs, whereas
(S)­TEM can usually only capture the lateral dimensions and shape of
these materials, and SEM often struggles to visualize these weakly
electron-scattering NCs at all.

Another high-throughput MS technique, charge-detection MS
(CD-MS),
which is often used to analyze large biomolecules, has also been used
to obtain single-particle information on nanoscale particles. In CD-MS,
the charge of an ion (a single, charged particle in the case of NCs)
is measured through the charge (z) induced by the
ion on the walls of a conducting tube, while them/zis simultaneously obtained from the time-of-flight
of the ion through the tube. Because
both thezandm/zare measured for each charged particle, the mass of thousands of
single particles can be calculated and converted into size histograms
using shape-dependent density equations like in SP-ICP-MS data processing. While CD-MS cannot provide precise compositional
data like SP-ICP-MS because the particles are not atomized, CD-MS
has been shown to be sensitive to the particle surface, where particles
with similar masses but different surface properties (e.g., capping ligands,etc.) can be distinguished due
to differences inzafter ionization. However, CD-MS instruments are still much less
common than quadrupole ICP-MS instruments, which are able to analyze
mono- and bimetallic NCs in SP-ICP-MS (whereas the more rare and expensive
time-of-flight ICP-MS is required for compositions >2).,Currently, most nanoparticle CD-MS studies have focused on polymeric
or oxide nanoparticles, and particle masses between 1 MDa and a few
hundred MDa have been found to be sufficient for analysis.,For reference, a 10 nm Au nanoparticle (assumed to be perfectly
spherical with a density equal to bulk Au, 19.3 g/cm3)
is expected to have a mass around 6 MDa, which theoretically falls
within the typical reported analysis range for non-metallic nanoparticles
by CD-MS, though detection limits for metal NC compositions have not
yet been thoroughly investigated for CD-MS as they have for techniques
like SP-ICP-MS. This data will be of
growing interest and necessity for relevant metal compositions as
CD-MS likely continues its expansion into the high-throughput metal
and metal oxide NC characterization space.

Recently, single-particle
mass and volume measurements of large
populations of silica nanoparticles, acquired by CD-MS and resistive-pulse
sensing (RPS), respectively, allowed for the observance of size-dependent
silica particle density changes for particles ranging from 19 to 72
nm in diameter. While not an MS technique,
RPS is a high-throughput microfluidic technique capable of estimating
certain single-particle structural features through signal processing
and geometric modeling, similar to SP-ICP-MS and CD-MS. In RPS, ion
displacement resulting from the movement of a particle through an
electrically biased nanopore results in a current pulse that has an
amplitude proportional to the particle volume (Figurea). Further,
the particle dwell time in the pore (i.e., current
pulse width) may give insight into particle shape and length, and
the pore-to-pore time (i.e., the time between current
pulses) can provide information about particle ζ-potential (Figureb). While being unable to obtain NC composition like in SP-ICP-MS,
the biggest advantage of RPS over both SP-ICP-MS and CD-MS is the
ability to estimate the size of single particles with unknown densities
(i.e., multimetallic NCs) by solving volume equations
directly, although these equations are still shape-dependent. Analysis
of metal NCs by RPS can be complicated compared to other analytes
due to particle conductivity and surface charges affecting ion flux
through the pore and therefore the characteristics of the resulting
current pulse.,The impact of NC conductivity
can be minimized through adjustment of pore size, electrolyte salt
concentration, and applied bias voltage as well as the use of particle
calibration standards to decrease the error in particle volume calculated
from current pulse amplitude. Still,
there are currently few examples of analysis of metal NCs by resistive-pulse
techniques,−though the non-destructive continuous flow analysis afforded by
this technique makes it uniquely capable of direct coupling to flow
synthesis reactors and other single-particle characterization methods
compared to the majority of other techniques discussed herein.

(a) SEM image
of an example detecting region used in resistive-pulse
sensing measurements, where particles in solution enter the channel
through a nanofilter to limit aggregates entering and clogging the
nanopores, and multiple pores in series are used to increase the measurement
precision. (b) Current vs time trace resulting from resistive-pulse
measurements of a single 50 nm silica particle passing through the
three-nanopore series, where the current pulse amplitude (Δi), dwell time (td), and pore-to-pore
time (tpp) are labeled. (c) Schematic
showing one preparation method for APT specimens containing NCs, where
Au@Ag core@shell nanoparticles were dried onto a Si substrate before
being sputter coated with a Cr layer and then covered with a Pt layer
by chemical vapor deposition. A focused ion beam instrument is then
used to carve and lift out a probe tip-shaped portion of the layered
specimen (black dashed line), with the nanoparticles suspended in
the middle of the formed tip. (d) HAADF-STEM image of an APT specimen
fabricated using a similar method as shown in part (c) except using
Pd@Au core@shell nanoparticles (visualized as white spots in the inset
magnified image) embedded in a Ni matrix. (e) Three-dimensional APT
reconstruction (top) showing heterogeneity on the surface of an isolated
Au@Ag nanoparticle from the sample described in part (c) as well as
a 2 nm thick cross-sectional slice through the particle showing the
core@shell morphology when Au and Ag are mapped together (middle)
and showing a small internal cluster when just Ag is mapped (bottom).
Parts (a–b) adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2024 American
Chemical Society. Parts (c, e) adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH
Publishing. Part (d) adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2020 Elsevier
B.V.

For high-resolution MS techniques, there are two
types of resolutions
that should be considered: mass resolution and spatial resolution.
Mass resolution is determined by the mass analyzer and is the smallest
difference inm/zthat can be separated,
whereas spatial resolution refers to the minimum sampling spot size
where an isolated mass spectrum is obtained in MS mapping techniques. One such high-spatial-resolution MS technique
capable of analyzing single NCs is atom probe tomography (APT), which
allows for the 3-D compositional mapping of a sample with a sub-nanometer
spatial resolution and parts per million elemental sensitivity. This
sensitivity is accomplished by applying a high voltage to a sample,
resulting in the ionization and desorption of individual atoms that
are then characterized based on theirm/z. Each data point is then used to build a 3-D reconstruction of the
sample volume containing spatially resolved compositional information,
which also gives information about particle size and shape. An important distinction of APT is that the
sample must be formed into the shape of a probe tip with a tip diameter
of around 100 nm, through processes such as focused ion beam milling
for bulk materials, in order to achieve the electrostatic field magnitudes
(∼10 V nm–1) required to remove the single
atoms from the material surface. Many
methods have been designed for preparing NC samples for APT analysis
such as coating a Si probe tip with NCs by electrophoresis, or encasing one or multiple NCs within a matrix
material through electrodeposition before sharpening to a tip using
a focused ion beam (Figurec,d). APT has been used to
visualize individual NC phenomena such as trace Na and Cl impurities
in 7 nm carbon-supported Pt nanoparticles as well as to visualize
phase-segregated clusters hidden within individual core@shell nanoparticles
(Figuree).−The small phase-segregated clusters found inside of the nanoparticles
by APT would likely not be possible to visualize by traditional STEM-EDS/EELS
due to each point in a 2-D STEM-EDS/EELS map corresponding to the
compositional average of that point along the height of the particle
(i.e.,thez-axis).
APT has also been used to visualize thin shells (down to a single
atomic layer) in core@shell nanoparticles, where the thin shell could
not be visualized by STEM-EDS due to detection limits of the EDS detector
and the core and shell metals not having a large enough Z-contrast
to be visually distinguished. Although
three-dimensional compositional mapping can be performed using EDS
tomography within the STEM instrument, it does not match the compositional spatial resolution of APT, and
issues can arise due to detector shadowing and sample damage from
long electron beam exposure time. Despite
the unmatched intraparticle compositional detail that APT can provide
for individual NCs, it is still not widely adopted in single-NC studies
given the limited number of instruments available across institutions,
its high cost, as well as challenging sample preparation.

Secondary-ion
MS (SIMS) is another high-spatial-resolution MS technique
where an ion beam is focused and scanned across a sample surface (substrate-supported
particles in the case of NC analysis), ejecting secondary ions from
the sample that are then guided to a mass analyzer and characterized
based on theirm/z. Currently, SIMS is limited to a lateral spatial
resolution of nearly 100 nm, but the compositional mapping resolution
can be improved to sub-20 nm through correlative SIMS-microscopy imaging
and data processing or by inserting SIMS instrumentation and an ion
source directly into different types of microscopes, including helium
ion,,SEM, and (S)­TEM instruments. The
compositional data obtained by SIMS is highly surface-sensitive, as
only secondary ions from the first few atomic layers are ejected from
the sample surface and detected. This
sensitivity significantly differs from compositional analysis by (S)­TEM-EDS/EELS,
where a very high compositional mapping resolution is typical (∼1
nm), but the composition at each spot is an average across the entire
sample height and only has surface-sensitivity at the sample edges.
Advantages of SIMS over EDS/EELS include its much lower detection
limit (ppm compared to >0.1 wt %) and its ability to detect both
light
and heavy elements and distinguish between isotopes, though coupled electron microscopy-EDS/EELS instrumentation
is widely commercially available and protocols are well-established.
Although not widely used as such now, SIMS may be used to assess quantitative
differences in surface composition between single NCs in an ensemble,
even for surface elements at very low concentrations. Future technique
improvements may also allow for spatial resolutions favorable for
intraparticle mapping of NCs, giving a unique insight into compositional
variations across NC surfaces.

Tablesummarizes
the opportunities of the various analytical techniques discussed,
comparing their ability to characterize different structural heterogeneities
within and between NCs and theirin situcapabilities
and general limitations. Overall, though many of these structural
and compositional characterization techniques have the spatial resolution
required to visualize interparticle and intraparticle NC characteristics,
logistics such as finding and placing the probe at a single NC remain
a time-consuming challenge. Further, as each of these techniques has
its own limitations, the most robust analysis of NCs often requires
multimodal approaches where structural techniques are coupled with
other such techniques (often analyzing different length scales such
as single particles versus the ensemble) as well as coupled with techniques
that measure properties. The following case studies demonstrate the
ability of some of these analytical techniques to be used together
to correlate NC structure and properties at the nanoscale.

Despite their
sometimes atomic-scale size, intraparticle heterogeneities
can influence the electronic structure, catalytic activity, optical
response, mechanical strength, and more of NCs by creating localized
regions with distinct behavior. For example, compositional and crystallographic
gradients may give rise to distinct catalytic activity and selectivity
within an NC. This strong dependence
of properties on structure makes precise and correlative characterization
of these heterogeneities critical for various applications, with examples
to the fields of catalysis and plasmonics described herein.

In the case of catalysis, the intersite distance (dsite) of single atoms on the surface of NCs (referred
to as single-atom alloys and can be viewed as point defects) has been
shown to alter the activity of NCs. Wang
et al. studied the effect of Audsitein
Au–Ag single-atom alloys on the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)
using a single-particle collision electrochemistry method. Particle collision electrochemistry, also referred
to as stochastic electrochemistry, allows for many single-particle
events to be captured one-by-one at a micro- or nanoelectrode in a
short amount of time by relying on the random collision of nanoparticles
dispersed in the electrolyte with the electrode. In contrast, more traditional NC electrochemical methods
rely on a single ensemble-averaged measurement involving hundreds
of stationary NCs anchored to the electrode surface, which may misrepresent
or oversimplify NC structure–property relationships. The high-throughput
single-particle measurements afforded by collision electrochemistry
methods sacrifice the ability to perform correlated experiments with
structural techniques such as electron microscopy, as the NCs measured
are not anchored to the electrode. Structure–property correlation
using this technique is thus often reliant on statistical analysis
and inference, though collision methods can be more relevant to a
wider range of materials (e.g., non-catalytic materials
through blocking methods) than traditional methods. In the collision method employed by Wang et al., single
Ag nanoparticles that collide with the surface of an ultramicroelectrode
first trigger deposition of single Au atoms on the Ag nanoparticle
surface from the reduction of NaAuCl4in the surrounding
electrolyte. This collision process is also coupled with an instantaneous
measurement of the ORR activity of the newly formed single-atom alloy
particle. Thedsitein the formed single-atom
alloys was controlled by varying the concentration of NaAuCl4in the electrolyte solution, and its value was estimated theoretically
by calculating the number of Au atoms deposited during the collision
event and assuming that the Au atoms were evenly distributed across
the Ag particle surface. Single-atom alloy nanoparticles formed by
collision with the ultramicroelectrode were collected for imaging
by aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM by injecting Ag nanoparticles one-by-one
toward the surface of the ultramicroelectrode using an injection nanopipette
in close proximity to the electrode. This specialized preparation
method greatly decreases the throughput of the collision method but
limits the number of pure Ag nanoparticles in the resulting STEM sample.
HAADF-STEM imaging of the Au single atoms on the Ag host particle
for the largest NaAuCl4concentration studied (Figurea,b) revealed an
Audsitevalue (1.2 nm) in good agreement
with the value predicted theoretically (1.3 nm).

(a) Aberration-corrected
HAADF-STEM image of Au single atoms on
an individual Ag NC and (b) corresponding distance energy spectrum
between two neighboring Au atoms (dsite). (c) TOF per Au atom for the ORR as a function ofdsite, with the error bars representing the standard deviation
between 3 independent experiments. (d) HRTEM images of the tip of
a defect-free (“normal”) Au nanostar and the tip of
a defective Au nanostar with twin boundaries and superlattice defects.
(e) Finite-element method-based electromagnetic field distribution
simulations of a defect-free Au nanosphere (left), defect-free Au
nanostar (middle), and defective Au nanostar (right) under various
excitation wavelengths. (f) SERS spectra of 4-nitrobenzenethiol (4-NTP)
collected on an Au nanosphere film substrate (red) and a defective
Au nanostar film substrate (black) under an excitation wavelength
of 785 nm. Parts (a–c) adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2024 American
Chemical Society. Parts (d–f) adapted with permission from
ref . Copyright
2022 American Chemical Society.

To assess the effect ofdsite, the
turnover frequency (TOF) per Au atom for the ORR was calculated and
mapped for each Au–Ag single-atom alloy studied (Figurec). When Audsitedecreased from 4.0 to 1.9 nm, the TOF increased by
1.8 times; however, the TOF declined whendsitewas further reduced to 1.3 nm. Notably, Au–Ag single-atom
alloys with adsiteof 1.9 nm exhibited
the highest TOF, making them the most efficient ORR electrocatalyst.
The optimized Audsiteis believed to
enhance O2adsorption and weaken the binding strength of
ORR intermediates, thereby improving activity. These findings demonstrate that even the smallest-scale
intraparticle defect, specifically low concentrations of surface substitutions,
may have a significant impact on the resulting properties, such as
on the catalytic activity, of a particle. Further, the use of a collision
electrochemical method for these intraparticle catalytic studies allowed
for the high-throughput synthesis and near-instantaneous characterization
of single particles, which would be a much lower throughput and tedious
task if other methods were employed.

Intraparticle defects also
have the potential to influence the
plasmonic properties of the metal NCs. For example, while it has been
well-established that large-scale features such as particle size,
shape, and composition affect the optical properties of an NC,,Guo et al. recently showed that twin boundaries in the tips of Au
nanostars can significantly impact the electromagnetic field enhancement
and corresponding SERS intensity in what are usually highly active
samples. Observed using HRTEM, the twin
boundaries and superlattice defects are believed to shorten the mean
free path of electron scattering, increasing electron oscillation
damping and in turn weakening the electromagnetic field enhancement
and SERS activity of the nanoparticle (Figured). In finite-element method-based electromagnetic
field distribution simulations, the effect of such defects can be
modeled using a bulk damping term (Γb).Figuree shows that the
simulated electromagnetic field enhancement for a defective Au nanostar
(25Γb, right) is significantly lower than the electromagnetic
field enhancement of a normal Au nanostar (1Γb, center)
and even a tip-less Au nanosphere (1Γb, left). The
simulated trends agree with the experimental observation that Au nanospheres
have a greater enhancement factor than defective Au nanostars, with
a nearly 40 times greater enhancement factor being observed experimentally
at an excitation wavelength of 633 nm. This enhancement leads to the
SERS intensity of 4-nitrobenzenethiol (4-NTP) collected on a film
of Au nanospheres being greater than the intensity of 4-NTP collected
on defective Au nanostars, contradicting the notion that sharp NC
features will result in greater electromagnetic field enhancement
and therefore greater SERS intensity compared to rounded edges (Figuref). Such a result
demonstrates not only the need for analytical techniques capable of
capturing atomic-level features but also the need for greater examination
of the role that small intraparticle defects play in resulting NC
properties compared to more “obvious” features such
as NC size, shape, and composition. This study also demonstrates the
coupling of single-particle (HRTEM) and ensemble (SERS) techniques,
bridged by computational insight, to build a complete understanding
of this specific structure–property relationship. Further,
using single-particle insights to better understand how defects propagate
effects to the ensemble-level is especially important as some NC applications,
such as biosensing and batteries, require NC ensembles.

Interparticle
heterogeneity can lead to broad distributions in
the physical and chemical properties across an NC ensemble. This heterogeneity
can impact collective behaviors like optical absorption (e.g., LSPR bandwidth), catalytic activity, and even electronic conductivity
by introducing different local environments and reaction sites.−This heterogeneity can lead to an inaccurate understanding of structure–property
relationships while also limiting the reproducibility of ensemble
NC responses. Thus, characterizing interparticle heterogeneities and
correlating them to properties is essential, as highlighted with examples
from the fields of catalysis and plasmonics herein.

For plasmonic
NCs, the correlation of single-particle optical properties
such as the LSPR spectrum to the size, shape, and/or composition of
an NC is critical, as changes to NC structure can impact performance
in applications such as refractive index sensing. Traditionally, this correlation requires linked optical
and electron microscopy measurements, which makes the evaluation of
the structure–function relationship of many single particles
extremely inefficient. Recently, O’Dell et al. demonstrated
the ability to obtain Au nanorod structure and its corresponding optical
properties in the same image using CLocK microscopy. In CLocK microscopy, a rotating birefringent calcite crystal
is placed in the emission path of an optical microscope, producing
a polarization-resolved extraordinary ray (e⊥) ring
around a traditional polarization-averaged diffraction-limited spot
(Figurea). The polarization-resolved nature of the e⊥ring allows for NC structure, orientation, and information
about its polarization-resolved scattering spectrum to be captured
in a single image in less than 1 s. As can be seen inFigureb, the orientation of the red/orange
lobes of the e⊥ring in the CLocK image indicates
the orientation of the long axis of an Au nanorod on a substrate,
as confirmed by the correlated SEM image. The relative intensities
of the red, green, and blue (RGB) color channels at various e⊥ring orientations in the CLocK image report on the
positions and magnitudes of the longitudinal and transverse plasmon
modes traditionally measured by using polarization-resolved single-particle
dark-field scattering spectroscopy. The RGB polar plot obtained from
the polarization-resolved spectrum agrees well with the RGB polar
plot obtained by fitting the CLocK image, supporting the idea that
color CLocK images accurately capture single-particle scattering spectral
information. Thus, with shorter integration times and wide-field capabilities,
CLocK microscopy can be used to more efficiently infer information
about Au nanorod length and width, allowing for Au nanorods of various
dimensions and orientations to be identified and differentiated all-optically
without further post-processing or structural characterization by
electron microscopy (Figurec). Using ML approaches, specifically a convolutional neural
network, Au nanorod length, width, and aspect ratio were predicted
directly from CLocK images within ∼10% of the true value measured
using electron microscopy. This wide-field,
all-optical approach of obtaining structure–property relationships
is extremely valuable in quickly identifying interparticle heterogeneity
in NC samples and can potentially be used to identify over- or underperforming
NCs in various applications when coupled within situtechniques and other property measurements.

(a) Schematic of the
CLocK microscope. (b) Correlated SEM image,
CLocK image, and polarization-resolved dark-field scattering spectra
for a single Au nanorod. The RGB polar plots are provided to compare
the optical properties obtained from CLocK (top) with the optical
properties measured by using a spectrometer (bottom). SEM scale bar
= 100 nm. CLocK scale bar = 1 μm. (c) Wide-field color CLocK
image with the corresponding numerically labeled and color-correlated
SEM images. SEM scale bars = 100 nm. CLocK scale bar = 5 μm.
Parts (a–c) adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2024 American
Chemical Society.

Single-particle property measurements have also
made it possible
to better understand the implications of interparticle heterogeneity
for common NC applications such as catalysis. For example, SECCM,
whereby an electrolyte-filled micro- or nanopipette forms a droplet
at its tip that acts as an electrochemical cell (Figurea), has allowed for electrochemical
properties of single NCs dispersed onto an electrode to be individually
measured. Besides the use of SECCM to
form a small electrochemical cell that completely envelopes a single
NC for study, SECCM has also been used to map the electrochemical
activity and topography across the surface of particles to assess
intraparticle differences,,as well as to map
the heterogeneity in various electrode materials, such as indium tin
oxide (ITO). Though they are both single-particle
electrochemical techniques, SECCM differs from collision electrochemical
methods as the NCs of interest are anchored onto the electrode surface,
and the electrochemical cell formed by the nanopipette droplet is
the dynamic component as opposed to the NCs comprising the dynamic
component in collision methods. The stationary state of the NCs in
SECCM allows for correlated techniques, such as electron microscopy,
to be performed after electrochemical measurement, as well as the
length of the experiment to be controlled, though the throughput of
the measurements is greatly reduced compared to collision methods.
A significant challenge in SECCM is the placement of the pipette onto
the electrode since scanning the cell in a grid pattern across the
electrode surface is time-intensive, with the risk of only partially
enveloping an NC of interest. Because electron microscopy can damage
the NCs of interest and deposit contaminants such as carbon onto the
NCs while imaging, optical techniques have been employed before SECCM
measurement to better target NC locations on the electrode.

(a) Schematic depicting
the SECCM setup. (b) SECCM map and correlated
SEM images for the CO2RR (−1.3 V vs RHE). (c) SECCM-derived
and (d) macroscale electrochemically active surface area (ECSA)-derived
TOFCOvs potential plots comparing the CO2RR
activity of {111}-terminated octahedra (OD), {110}-terminated rhombic
dodecahedra (RD), and {310}-terminated truncated ditetragonal prisms
(TDP). (e) SEM images of a single Au nanocube (left) and Au octahedron
(right) and (f) the averaged electrochemical response with error bars
for HER at individual Au nanocubes (Au NCs) and Au octahedra (Au ODs)
obtained by SECCM. Parts (a–d) adapted with permission from
ref . Copyright
2022 American Chemical Society. Parts (e–f) adapted with permission
from ref . Copyright
2020 American Chemical Society.

Recently, SECCM has been used to isolate the catalytic
activity
of different NC shapes and facet types toward the CO2reduction
reaction (CO2RR) and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).−Specifically, in one study, single-crystalline Au NCs predominantly
exhibiting specific crystallographic planes, including {111}-terminated
octahedra, {110}-terminated rhombic dodecahedra, {310}-terminated
truncated ditetragonal prisms, and {100}-terminated cubes, were synthesized
for SECCM studies. For CO2RR, the SECCM pipette was scanned across a glassy carbon substrate
containing dispersed particles, creating a map of electrochemical
activity that was correlated with SEM images (Figureb). The turnover frequency of CO (TOFCO), a key metric reflecting the intrinsic activity, was calculated
to compare the performance of different Au facets. SECCM-derived TOFCOshowed that the CO2RR activity follows the order
of {110}-terminated rhombic dodecahedra > {310}-terminated truncated
ditetragonal prisms > {111}-terminated octahedra across almost
the
entire potential range studied (Figurec). This same activity trend was observed from macroscale
(ensemble) data at low overpotentials (potentials more positive than
−0.7 V vs RHE). However, at higher overpotentials (potentials
more negative than −0.7 V vs RHE), mass transfer limitations
in macroscale measurements altered the trend to rhombic dodecahedra
≈ truncated ditetragonal prisms > octahedra (Figured), obscuring the actual differences
in activity. By combining SECCM and macroscale results, {110}-terminated
Au rhombic dodecahedra were found to offer a superior activity for
converting CO2to CO compared to both {111}-terminated
octahedra and high-index {310}-terminated truncated ditetragonal prisms. For HER, single-particle SECCM measurements
revealed that Au nanocubes exhibit higher HER electrocatalytic activity
than Au octahedra (Figuree,f). These findings are significant
to the understanding of the implications and tolerances of various
applications toward interparticle heterogeneity, as all NC ensembles
contain interparticle heterogeneities such as shape differences, which
may yield different catalytic activities and selectivities depending
on the shapes present. These case studies are also significant, as
they demonstrate a rigorous protocol for correlating SECCM and NC
structural characterization, which can be used to investigate other
types of NC heterogeneity, such as composition or ligand density.

These case studies represent
the state-of-the-art in single-particle
characterization, linking directly NC features to critical property
measurements. However, certain property measurements are still not
possible at the level of single NCs. For example, SECCM provides electrochemical
readouts of single-NC catalysts, but to obtain product quantification
from reactions generating multiple products, additional tools would
need to be coupled with SECCM. Moreover, many single-NC techniques
have low throughput, especially when moving between multiple analytical
techniques to acquire correlative data. These limitations, coupled
with the notion that single-NC techniques are experimentally complicated,
have limited their adoption. However, we are inspired by the ability
of single-NC studies to reveal fundamental NC features that give rise
to functional properties and envision a future in which single-NC
studies are high-throughput, information-rich, and experimentally
accessible to a diverse community of researchers.

Conceptually,
the screening challenge presented by NC heterogeneity
may be viewed similarly to that of drug discovery and design, where
there is a large, multidimensional experimental space from which a
lead target is to be identified. Notably,
the process of drug discovery has been transformed over the past few
decades by the creation of high-throughput assays to identify lead
compounds that then undergo high-resolution characterization and computer-aided
design until clinical candidates are identified. We propose that a similar workflow be adopted to accelerate
single-NC screening and design, as outlined inFigure.

Schematic of proposed workflow to accelerate
single-NC screening
of structure and properties.

Next, the model NC collections would be analyzed by high-throughput
primary assays that provide rapid evaluation of ensemble heterogeneity
and, ideally, of an NC feature or property of interest at the level
of single NCs. Here, automation and artificial intelligence may offer
opportunities to improve the efficiency of traditionally low-throughput
techniques such as electron microscopy. At the same time, intrinsically high-throughput methods are being
advanced to provide more correlative sample information. For example,
optical methods offer high-throughput screening of ensemble heterogeneity,
and the NC features that account for this heterogeneity are now starting
to be obtained through all-optical methods such as CLocK microscopy.,These advances provide a tremendous opportunity to accelerate the
identification of interesting NCs through the creation of hybrid tools
(e.g., tools that combine optical with probe-based
techniques) and by coupling other optical readouts as proxies for
a property of interest (e.g., use of fluorescent
probes in catalysis).,Additionally, SP-ICP-MS provides
high-throughput screening of ensemble structural and compositional
heterogeneity. Statistical analysis may link this heterogeneity to
other property measurements as well. With this insight, single NCs
identified as potentially interesting through these primary assays
can then enter a high-resolution characterization loop.

As discussed,
excellent tools for high-resolution characterization
of NCs exist (e.g., analytical TEM), where now the
most promising single NCs would be the focus after being identified
through a high-throughput workflow rather than the whole NC ensemble.
Central to the success of this workflow is the ability to analyze
the same single NCs in both the high-throughput primary assays and
high-resolution techniques providing property measurement and structural
characterization. This logistical challenge is non-trivial, given
the sample requirements of different analytical techniques; however,
research is addressing this challenge. For example, optically transparent
carbon electrodes have recently been reported and enable correlative
single-NC measurements by optical microscopy techniques, electrochemistry,
and TEM.,Notably, by first screening
NC ensembles with high-throughput single-NC methods, scientists now
could strategically select single NCs with different properties for
high-resolution characterization rather than randomly characterizing
as many single NCs as possible with the hope that the different particle
types are captured in the measurements. In this manner, single-NC
studies are accelerated while preserving the ability to obtain accurate
structure–property relationships.

At the same time, we
need to continue to push the frontiers of
what types of high-resolution single-NC property measurements are
possible, where, again, the creation of new hybrid tools for analytical
nanoscience represents a key opportunity. With these advances, computational
methods play a crucial role, assisting experimentalists in validating
techniques and providing a better understanding of structure–property
relationships down to the atomic scale. Traditionally, first-principles
calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) and molecular
dynamics (MD) have been used to investigate the electronic and structural
properties of NCs.,These calculated properties
can aid in predicting the thermodynamic and kinetic behavior of species
interacting with NC surfaces, defects, and interfaces, including surface
reactivity. For instance, DFT can predict the hydrogen binding energy
at different facets, which is an important descriptor for reactivity
in the HER. This capability, when coupled
with single-NC measurements of HER by SECCM and SEM imaging, provides
the atomic-level detail essential for active site identification,
which is a challenge for NC ensembles with high levels of heterogeneity.

At this point, NC optimization and design become possible with
reliable structural and compositional inputs. Modern supercomputers
have facilitated high-throughput screening and the data-driven expedition
of novel nanomaterials. Structure generation methodologies such as
Monte Carlo sampling, Cluster Expansion
(CE), and Genetic Algorithm (GA) facilitate computational sampling for material
screening. The rise of artificial intelligence has sparked significant
interest in its application to NC design by introducing machine-learned
potentials (MLPs), which define the potential energy surface (PES)
of materials. These MLPs provide a promising
alternative to traditional methods for modeling complex NC systems
with a far-reduced computational expense as compared with DFT, nearing
comparable accuracy. Many open-source and pretrained models such as
CHGNET and MACE have been developed to accelerate simulations of NCs.,Furthermore, generated computational and experimental data can be
used to train and refine MLPs for better accuracy and efficiency in
future modeling efforts.

With such design principles computationally
identified, the workflow
can leverage automated synthetic methods for NC collection generation
to target and optimize an ensemble in a high-throughput manner. In
this NC optimization step, a key consideration is the synthetic feasibility.
That is, once an NC feature is identified as functionally important
through the workflow outlined inFigure, this feature will ideally be amplified
in the NC ensemble. For some features, synthetic tools likely already
exist (e.g., expression of low index surface facets).
However, other features may be difficult to replicate at scale, given
the current synthetic toolkit. In this regard, the workflow may identify
the frontiers of nanomaterial synthesis. Yet, at the same time, this
possibility also highlights that there may be benefits to keeping
NC heterogeneity within a manageable level at the initial stage of
model NC collection generation. Imposing such limits may conceptually
be considered akin to diversity-oriented synthesis in the field of
drug discovery and design, where small-molecule collections are created
by starting from a common, promising compound and modifying the compound
through limited synthetic steps.

The proposed workflow outlined inFigureand the high-throughput and high-resolution
techniques required for its implementation are anticipated to greatly
accelerate NC design by accurately revealing fundamental structure–property
relationships. Yet, we also note two additional sources of heterogeneity
that are not tied to the lattice of the NCs but are critical to evaluate
to ensure accurate structure–property measurements. First,
the ligand shells that passivate the surfaces of colloidally derived
NCs can be a source of heterogeneity. For structural measurements
at the single-NC level, capping ligands on the NC surface may impact
the perceived particle volume and particle surface charge, resulting
in inaccuracies in the calculated particle sizes. Further, capping
ligands can also impact NC properties, including the LSPR of plasmonic
NCs, through changes in the local dielectric environment and the activity
and selectivity of NC catalysts through blocking of specific surface
sites.−Consequently, protocols are commonly adopted
to remove the capping ligands before property measurement, but as
Baker et al. showed, some methods do not fully remove these ligands
and can introduce spatial variation. These protocols also likely depend on the composition and faceting
of the NCs, but rarely are these protocols validated across material
systems. Second, many of the property measurements of NCs are performed
with the NCs supported on a substrate. For example, for optical studies
of NCs, ITO is a widely used transparent support electrode because
of its favorable conductivity and transparency in the UV–visible
region. However, ITO has recently been shown to have nanoscale heterogeneities
in its electrochemical properties,,which could
lead to misinterpretation of results. As such, consideration of this
heterogeneity is critical, along with the development of alternative
substrate materials.

Given the
strong correlation between the NC structure and its properties,
a trend in nanomaterial synthesis has been to minimize heterogeneity
in NC ensembles and move toward atomically precise nanostructures.
However, NC heterogeneity can also be viewed as an asset, as an opportunity
for NC discovery, and for screening diverse NC populations. By the
development of new high-throughput and high-resolution tools to evaluate
single NCs in an integrated workflow, the inherent heterogeneity of
NCs can be leveraged to drive new science and innovation. In accurately
identifying NC structure–property relationships, conceptual
breakthroughs for NC design can be achieved. This design should lead
to NCs with property enhancements but also a better understanding
of what level and types of heterogeneity are allowable, and even beneficial,
in an ensemble for a given application. Ultimately, this understanding
is anticipated to address reproducibility concerns and may lead to
more sustainable nanochemistry.

The authors acknowledge financial support from the
US National
Science Foundation Center for Single-Entity Nanochemistry and Nanocrystal
Design (CSENND) under Grant No. CHE 2221062. The authors would like
to thank all members of CSENND for their valuable insights and discussions.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.