Generation of broadband terahertz (THz) pulses with variable
polarization
and carrier-envelope phase can enable the tailoring of THz beam wavefronts
for advanced applications in THz imaging and spectroscopy and for
strong THz field optics. While metasurfaces composed of deeply subwavelength
THz emitters have recently been demonstrated to define the polarization
and spatial profile of the generated THz fields, precise phase control
or synthesis of THz pulse waveforms remains a challenging problem.
Here, we propose and demonstrate metasurfaces composed of indium arsenide
(InAs) nanoscale ribbon arrays capable of generating THz pulses with
variable carrier-envelope phase. We show that different THz generation
mechanisms, each contributing distinct phases, can be activated in
the ribbons, enabling carrier-envelope phase control spanning a range
of π over a wide band of frequencies (∼1–3 THz).
This is achieved solely through the ribbon array geometry using linearly
polarized optical excitation of the ribbons. The arrays enable precise
control of the THz phase and amplitude, opening the door to advanced
structured THz wavefront synthesis using ultrathin dielectric metasurfaces.

To enable THz emitters for the
generation of THz pulses with a
variable phase using InAs, which supports both the transient photocurrents
and resonant nonlinear processes, we selectively activate and control
THz generation mechanisms through the geometry of nanoscale InAs ribbons.
First, shift currents (arising from an above-bandgap pulsed optical
excitation) are maximized in InAs ribbons designed to support optical
dipolar resonances and enhance absorption.,Second, to enable THz pulse generation with a π/2 phase shift,
lateral photocurrents are activated by exploiting the effect of charge
carrier density gradient (lateral photo-Dember effect) formed as the
excitation pulse sweeps across the surface at oblique angles.,The latter mechanism is controlled by the orientation of the ribbons
(Figurea). Furthermore,
we exploit the ribbon’s width to control surface-normal transient
photocurrents by altering the resonant field distribution within the
ribbons, leading to enhanced THz emission. The combination of these
three mechanisms, in principle, provides a means to achieving arbitrary
carrier-envelope phase in generated THz pulses.

InAs ribbon arrays for
THz pulse generation with different carrier-envelope
phase Δϕ. (a) Illustration of the THz pulse generation
configuration: the InAs ribbon arrays are tilted by angle α
= 45° with respect to the optical axis. SEM images show the in-plane
(θ = 0°) and out-of-plane (θ = 90°) ribbon arrays
and the corresponding generated THz pulses, which exhibit a phase
shift Δϕ (blue and red waveforms, respectively). (b) Normalized
time-domain waveforms ofp-polarized THz emission
from in-plane (blue) and out-of-plane (red) ribbons when illuminated
withs-polarized optical excitation. The gray shaded
waveform shows the reference pulse generated from a uniform InAs layer
(withp-polarized incident excitation). The orange-shaded
waveform shows the temporal derivative of the pulse generated from
the in-plane ribbons. Ribbons have a 400 nm period and 210 nm width.
Insets: polar diagrams illustrating the phase of the emitted waves
at 1 THz (relative to a uniform InAs layer). (c) Spectral amplitude
of the generated pulses for in-plane (blue) and out-of-plane (red)
ribbons arrays shown in (b), and (d) phase relative to uniform InAs
layer.

We fabricated ribbon arrays from a 130 nm thick
layer of (100)
InAs and transferred them onto a sapphire substrate (seeSupporting Information, Section 1). The arrays
were photoexcited with 100 fs, 800 nm,s-polarized
optical pulses from a Ti:sapphire laser (Figurea). The emitted forward-propagating THz pulses
were detected using a THz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) system
equipped with a photoconductive antenna (PCA) detector with a small(10 × 10 μm2) input aperture
positioned ∼6 mm from the ribbon array (seeSupporting Information, Section 2).

We observe distinctly
different THz pulses for InAs ribbons oriented
in the plane of incidence (in-plane) and out of the plane of incidence
(o/plane) (Figureb–d). The THz pulse waveform generated from the out-of-plane
ribbons inFigureb matches the temporal derivative of the pulse generated from the
in-plane ribbons (red line and orange shaded region inFigureb). The corresponding phase
difference of ∼π/2 is evident in the polar plot of the
Fourier spectra (Figured) and spans over a larger portion of the generated pulse spectra, ∼1–3 THz.

To verify the correlation
between the phase shift and ribbon orientation,
we incrementally rotate the ribbons around the surface normal (from
θ = 0° to θ = 90°; seeFigurea) and record the resulting THz waveforms
(Figurea). At θ
= 0°, we observe strong THz emission. As the angle increases,
the carrier-envelope phase gradually shifts, reaching a value of π/2
at θ = 90°. At the same time, the amplitude of THz emission
decreases, reaching a minimum at θ = 45° and then partially
recovering at θ = 90°. The amplitude of THz emission from
out-of-plane ribbons is ∼3 times weaker than that from in-plane
ribbons (Figuresc
and a). Since only in-plane ribbons can support
lateral photocurrents along thex-axis, this suggests
that the larger amplitude emission at θ = 0° originates
from lateral photocurrents, while the emission at θ = 90°
is likely dominated by shift currents, exhibiting a distinct phase
shift relative to the emission due to lateral photocurrents. This
is consistent with the models for the shift currents and transient
photocurrents, and it highlights the role of ribbon orientation in
controlling the phase of THz emission.

(a) Map of the THz pulse
field (time-domain) emitted from an InAs
ribbon array (periodP= 400 nm, ribbon widthW= 210 nm) showing the variation of THz pulse waveforms
as the ribbons are rotated from θ = 0° to θ = 90°.
(b) Polarization of the emitted THz pulses: top panel:p-polarized (blue) ands-polarized (green) components
for the in-plane ribbons; bottom panel:p-polarized
(red) ands-polarized (green) components for the
out-of-plane ribbons. Insets: polar diagrams illustrating the phase
of the emitted waves at 1 THz (relative to a uniform InAs layer).

Before we discuss the details of the emission mechanisms,
we first
characterize the properties of generated THz pulses for both ribbon
orientations. The emitted THz pulses arep-polarized,
as can be seen in waveforms for both thep-polarized
ands-polarized components of the THz electric field
inFigureb. To characterize
the angular distribution of the emitted waves, we mapped their far-field
emission patterns at a distance of ∼6 mm : both samples exhibit
relatively symmetric directional emission (Figure).

Far-field maps of THz fields and corresponding
spectral amplitude
maps for THz pulses generated from the in-plane (a) and out-of-plane
ribbons (b). (c) Far-field emission patterns (intensity,ITHz) for the in-plane (blue) and out-of-plane (red) ribbons.
Insets: polar diagrams illustrating the phase of emitted waves at
1 THz.

For the in-plane ribbons (Figurea), the THz emission exhibits a higher amplitude
and
peaks at lower frequencies than that of out-of-plane ribbons (Figureb). The difference
in the spectral content is consistent with the anticipated dominant
emission mechanisms: the out-of-plane ribbons and the corresponding
shift current mechanism are expected to produce THz emission of higher
frequencies compared to the transient photocurrents for in-plane ribbons.
This difference also translates into a slight variation in the THz
emission pattern: the broader spectrum with higher frequency components
results in a smaller beam divergence. In contrast, the emission from
in-plane ribbons, dominated by lateral photocurrents, peaks at lower
frequencies and exhibits a larger divergence (Figurec), as expected for sources of spatial extent
comparable to the wavelength (seeSupporting Information, Section 2).

Interestingly, there is a subtle asymmetry in
the emission pattern
for in-plane ribbons, showing more pronounced oscillations for the
emission angle of β = −20° compared to β =
20° (Figurea).
This asymmetry can arise from the interferences of two sources of
lateral photocurrent: one induced by the excitation pulse sweeping
along the ribbons and the other from opposite gradients of the photoexcited
charge carrier density for positive and negative angles β (Figurea). Their interference results in a slightly asymmetric far-field
emission pattern. By comparison, for out-of-plane ribbons, where neither
transient currents contribute to the THz emission, the far-field pattern
remains symmetric (Figureb).

These results demonstrate that InAs ribbon arrays
can enable phase
control of emitted THz radiation (Figure) without the need to adjust the polarization
of the excitation beam. The emission
from these ribbons is linearly polarized (Figure) with a symmetric emission pattern defined
by the spatial extent of the illuminated array (Figure), making them appropriate for use as subwavelength-size
point sources of THz emission. By combining the in-plane and out-of-plane
ribbon arrays with appropriate weighting to account for the difference
in emission amplitude, continuous phase adjustment between 0 and π/2
can be achieved in a single metasurface through geometry alone, enabling
structured THz wavefront generation (seeSupporting Information, Section 3).

The experimental results suggest
the amplitude variation between
the in-plane and out-of-plane ribbons and the difference in THz field
phase are a result of two different generation mechanisms. In-plane
ribbons of various sizes consistently generate THz pulses of larger
amplitudes and practically identical phase (Figurea; seeSupporting Information, Section 4), while out-of-plane ribbons emit a weaker THz field
and exhibit either a π/2 or −π/2 phase shift (seeSupporting Information, Section 4). This large
amplitude and phase shift indicate that the dominant mechanism in
the in-plane ribbons is supported only by the ribbons with that orientation.
Notably, when we vary the ribbons’ size and period (seeSupporting Information, Sections 1 and 4), we
observe a clear peak in THz emission amplitude for in-plane ribbons
with a period of ∼450 nm (Figurea). Below, we will use this size dependence
and numerical modeling to identify the relevant mechanisms.

(a) Peak amplitude
of THz pulses from in-plane (blue) and out-of-plane
(red) ribbon arrays of periods,P= 300–550
nm. Inset: polar diagrams showing the phase of emitted waves at 1
THz. (b) Simulated optical absorption at λ = 800 nm (left);
simulated THz nonlinear polarization due to shift currents,ishift(middle); and simulated charge density
gradient photocurrents,ix,iz(right). (c) Peak
THz pulse amplitude from ribbons of periods,P=
300–550 nm, compared to the fitted superposition of modeled
emission due to the lateral photocurrents and charge density gradient
currentizfor the in-plane
ribbon arrays.

However, the reduced emission
at smaller in-plane ribbon sizes
suggests the lateral current can still be suppressed or canceled out.
While the narrower cross-section in smaller ribbons is more likely
to suppress the lateral current due to scattering on surface defects,
we also considered whether the currents normal to the surface,iz, could affect the emission
(Figureb, right).izcan be excited if the optical
intensity distribution in the ribbons varies with depth due to the
mode profile. Indeed, our modeling of the optical intensity distribution
shows that for ribbon sizes of ∼450 nm, the intensity is higher
at the bottom surface of the ribbons, and the correspondingizcurrents (Figureb, right) exhibit a peak, adding
constructively to the emission from lateral photocurrents. For smaller
ribbon sizes,izchanges
sign and destructively interferes with the lateral photocurrent.iztherefore offers a potential
explanation for both the observed peak in emission atP= ∼450 nm and the reduced emission at smaller ribbon sizes
(Figurec).Figureillustrates how
the emission due toizfor in-plane ribbons can interfere destructively (Figurea) or constructively (Figureb) with the emission
due to the lateral photocurrents, whileFigurec shows how the direction ofizchanges with ribbon size, resulting
in the peak in THz emission atP =∼450 nm.

Destructive
(a) and constructive (b) interference of the THz field
emitted due to the lateral photocurrent (yellow arrows) and charge
density gradient current,iz(blue and red arrows), for the in-plane ribbons (P= 295 nm andP= 480 nm). (c) Electric field distribution
in theyz-plane for in-plane ribbons of increasing
size (labeled by periodPin nm). Arrows indicate
the magnitude and direction of the total charge density gradient current,iz, and the dotted lines mark
the cross sections shown in (a,b), respectively.

For the out-of-plane ribbons, the lateral photocurrent
mechanism
no longer exists. Furthermore, theizcurrent and the in-plane current within the ribbon
width,ix, largely cancel
out for most ribbon sizes considered here (Figureb, right; seeSupporting Information, Section 6). The destructive interference of emission
due toixandizcurrents with the strong
nonlinear contribution (Figureb, middle) therefore allows the shift currents to become the
dominant mechanism for out-of-plane ribbons, producing the phase-shifted
THz pulses. Interestingly, for very small ribbon sizes, the two current
contributions are predicted to add constructively. Although we did
not explore the emission from very small ribbons experimentally here,
we note that smaller nanostructures may suppress these currents as
a uniform distribution of carriers develops more quickly in a smaller
volume, diminishing their contribution to the THz emission.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated carrier-envelope
phase control
of THz emission from InAs metasurfaces by engineering the geometry
and orientation of nanoscale ribbon arrays. The phase shift, Δϕ,
spanning ±π/2, arises from the selective activation and
interference of distinct THz generation mechanisms: lateral photocurrents,
shift currents, and photocurrents normal to the surface (iz). This was achieved with a uniform
linear polarization of the excitation beam (s-polarized).
Numerical modeling reveals the interplay of these mechanisms and how
ribbon size and orientation modulate their relative contributions,
enabling constructive or destructive interference that governs both
emission amplitude and phasewith in-plane ribbons dominated
by lateral photocurrents and out-of-plane ribbons by shift currents.
These results highlight how InAs metasurfaces, patterned into nanoscale
ribbon arrays, can provide a versatile platform for THz wavefront
synthesis. Integration of these ribbon arrays with demonstrated binary
phase metasurfaces opens a pathway to
THz pulse generation with arbitrary carrier-envelope phase, enabling
structured THz wavefronts with tailored phase landscapes. This capability
can lead to advancements in lightwave-driven scanning probe microscopy,,subpicosecond control of electron dynamics and other nonlinear optics, imaging, and spectroscopy applications.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsphotonics.5c00941.

S.N. and S.P.
were supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(EPSRC) Centre for Doctoral Training in Connected Electronic and Photonic
Systems (EP/S022139/1). J.S. was supported by the EPSRC TERACOM program
(EP/W028921/1). H.J., S.A., I.B., and O.M. were supported by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of
Materials Sciences and Engineering, under Field Work Proposal Number
24–017574. Part of this work was performed at the Center for
Integrated Nanotechnologies; an Office of Science User Facility operated
for the U.S. DOE Office of Science. Sandia National Laboratories is
a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology
and Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary
of Honeywell International, Inc., for the U.S. DOE’s National
Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525. This
paper describes objective technical results and analysis. Any subjective
views or opinions that might be expressed in the paper do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. DOE or the United States Government.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.