Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Tadayoshi Hashimoto, MD, PhD; e-mail:tadhashi@east.ncc.go.jp.

Received 2025 Jan 12; Revised 2025 Jul 12; Accepted 2025 Jul 21; Collection date 2025.

The clinical relevance of ecDNA in AGC is substantial. ecDNA-based amplification in AGC occurs in approximately 37.9% of patients and correlates with poorer prognosis than focal amplification.8Furthermore, a whole-genome sequencing of 170 gastric cancer genomes suggest thatFGFR2amplification is associated with ecDNA.9However, to our knowledge, there have been no clinical reports to date investigating the therapeutic effects and resistance of FGFR-targeted therapy in patients withFGFR2amplification on ecDNA.

The clinical information presented in this report was collected throughout the patient's course of care. The patient provided informed consent for the use and publication of their health information and medical imaging.

A 48-year-old man was diagnosed with AGC after staging laparoscopy that revealed positive peritoneal cytology. The patient received systemic chemotherapy with S-1 plus oxaliplatin and intraperitoneal chemotherapy with paclitaxel for 5 months at the previous hospital, followed by total gastrectomy. The patient developed para-aortic lymph node (PALN) metastases 2 months after surgery and was treated with systemic chemotherapy using S-1 plus paclitaxel. After transferring to our institution, computed tomography (CT) was performed, revealing obvious disease progression with further enlargement and increase of the PALN, multiple bone metastases, and lung lymphangitis. The patient received a combination of capecitabine, oxaliplatin, plus nivolumab while undergoing next-generation sequencing (NGS) using Caris MI Profile (Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ) for tumor tissue resected at surgery and Caris ASSURE (Caris Life Sciences) for plasma samples. Before the NGS results were available, his condition deteriorated with worsening of the lymphangitis, prompting the initiation of irinotecan. However, 2 days later, the patient was hospitalized because of respiratory distress and the onset of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). NGS revealedFGFR2amplification (CN, 264.9) along with pathogenic short variants inCDH1,SMAD4,andTP53in the tumor tissue. Liquid genotyping identifiedFGFR2amplification (plasma CN [pCN], 16.6) along with the pathogenic short variants ofCDH1andFGFR2. Histologic evaluation with immunohistochemical staining (IHC) for FGFR2 demonstrated cytoplasmic staining with 10% IHC 3+ and 5% IHC 2+ without membrane positivity (Figs1A and1B). On the basis of the NGS findings, off-label treatment with pemigatinib, a selective FGFR1-3 inhibitor, was initiated. Although the patient required platelet and fresh-frozen plasma transfusions for 3 days, the DIC resolved, and the respiratory condition improved. Resistance to irinotecan could not be fully assessed because of its short duration of use; therefore, pemigatinib was combined with irinotecan (initiated 2 days pre-pemigatinib) after approval from the institutional review board. The patient's condition gradually improved, and he was discharged 3 weeks after admission. Liquid NGS revealed a decrease in the detectedFGFR2pCN (Table1). Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) 7 weeks later from the initiation of pemigatinib showed a marked reduction of [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in multiple bone metastases, accompanied by decreased tumor marker levels (Fig1C).

Clinical and pathologic findings of the case. (A) Hematoxylin-and-eosin–stained biopsy specimen of the primary tumor. (B) IHC analysis ofFGFR2showing 10% IHC 3+ and 5% IHC 2+ in the cytoplasm without membrane positivity. (C) Clinical course depicting changes in tumor markers (CEA and CA 19-9) and PET-CT scans before and after pemigatinib initiation at our hospital. The arrows indicate the timing of liquid biopsy sampling at −6, 2, 8, and 13 weeks, with reference to the pemigatinib initiation. CA 19-9, carbohydrate antigen 19-9; CAPOX, capecitabine plus oxaliplatin; CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen; FGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor; IHC, immunohistochemistry; IRI, irinotecan; NGS, next-generation sequencing; nivo, nivolumab; PET-CT, positron emission tomography-computed tomography.

Abbreviations: CN, copy number; FGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor; ND, not detected; PD, progressive disease; pCN, plasma CN; PR, partial response; VAF, variant allele frequency.

However, disease progression occurred 2 months after pemigatinib initiation, with worsening lower back pain attributed to progressive bone metastases, confirmed by PET-CT at 9 weeks after pemigatinib initiation (Fig1C). Plasma NGS using Guardant360 (Guardant Health, Redwood City, CA) revealed a marked increase inFGFR2pCN (110) and the emergence ofMYCamplification (pCN 45.4),KRASamplification (pCN 3.0), variousFGFR2mutations (L617V, N549H, E565A, V564L, N549K, and V564F), and anFGFR2-PRNCR1fusion. Progressive DIC necessitated continuous platelet and plasma transfusions. Subsequent off-label use of other FGFR inhibitor therapy with erdafitinib followed by futibatinib was ineffective, resulting in disease progression and the patient's death. The final liquid NGS analysis showed an expanded array of gene alterations, including increasedFGFR2mutations (Figs2A and2B; Table1).

Genomic dynamics in liquid NGS analysis. (A) The pCN variations ofFGFR2, MYC,andKRASmonitored by liquid NGS using Caris Assure (first two time points) and Guardant360 (subsequent time points) were correlated with the treatment response. (B) Fish plot visualization of clonal evolution depicting the emergence of multiple acquiredFGFR2mutations during disease progression. The time points are indicated relative to pemigatinib initiation. FGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor; IRI, irinotecan; NGS, next-generation sequencing; pCN, plasma copy number; VAF, variant allele frequency.

FISH in AGC patients withFGFR2amplification enrolled in the MONSTAR-SCREEN-2 study. The yellow arrowheads indicate scattered extrachromosomalFGFR2signals suggesting ecDNA in patients 1-4. The white arrows in patient 5 indicate HSRs. AGC, advanced gastric cancer; ecDNA, extrachromosomal DNA; FGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; HSR, homogeneously staining region.

We present a patient with an extraordinarily high CN ofFGFR2amplifications driven by ecDNA, treated with FGFR-targeted therapies. The patient received concurrent pemigatinib and irinotecan, on the basis of the limited exposure to previous irinotecan and the preclinical evidence that combining cytotoxic chemotherapy with FGFR-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors enhances antitumor effects.11However, the duration of response was short, and disease progression was marked by the emergence of numerous genetic alterations.

A high CN is a reported characteristic of ecDNA, with amplified oncogenes on ecDNA showing significantly higher CNs (mean CN ≥50) compared with those on intrachromosomal DNA.12Previous studies demonstrated tumor responses to FGFR-targeted therapy in patients withFGFR2amplification, especially in those with a high CN, although the duration of response was generally short.2,13These findings may suggest ecDNA involvement. However, in our analysis of the MONSTAR-SCREEN2 cohort, ecDNA was also detected in patients with low CN, indicating that high CN is neither necessary nor sufficient for the definitive diagnosis of ecDNA. Another characteristic of ecDNA is early therapeutic resistance through unique mechanisms such as increased genetic heterogeneity, rapid genome changes driven by super-enhancers, and amplification of resistance genes, leading to a poor prognosis.7,14,15The rapid emergence and diversity of acquiredFGFR2mutations and a fusion observed in our patient would be highly unusual if confined to chromosomal DNA, given conventional mutation rates and selective pressures.16,17These alterations are thought to occur on ecDNA, accumulating unrepaired genetic alterations during its rapid amplification and replication processes. We previously reported an AGC patient with markedly highEGFRamplification in ctDNA who acquired multipleEGFRmutations andMETamplification after treatment with cetuximab.18The clinical course of this patient closely resembled that of our present patient. Therefore, FISH analysis was performed in this AGC patient withEGFRamplification, revealing the presence of ecDNA (Appendix Fig A1).

Important caveats of our study include the absence of standardized ecDNA diagnostic criteria and the inability to reliably identify ecDNA using IHC. Although we explored IHC as a more accessible diagnostic approach, FGFR2 often exhibits nonspecific cytoplasmic staining as an artifact, even in cases withoutFGFR2amplification, which complicates interpretation. Our analysis suggests that IHC alone cannot definitively identify ecDNA-based amplification. These findings emphasize that the development of more specific diagnostic approaches for ecDNA detection remains a critical area for future research.

In conclusion, this case report provides valuable insights intoFGFR2-amplified AGC driven by ecDNA. The distinct patterns of response and resistance highlight the need for novel therapeutic strategies. Targeting the primary oncogenic driver and the underlying mechanisms of ecDNA-mediated heterogeneity is critical for achieving more durable treatment outcomes.

The authors thank all patients and families for participating in the study. The authors would like to thank Enago (www.enago.jp) for the English language review.

FISH analysis of an AGC patient withEGFRamplification. This patient exhibited a markedly highEGFRplasma copy number in ctDNA, as previously reported by our institution. After treatment with cetuximab, multipleEGFRmutations and MET amplification were acquired (Nakamura et al18). FISH analysis revealed a scatteredEGFRstaining pattern, indicating the presence of ecDNA. AGC, advanced gastric cancer; ecDNA, extrachromosomal DNA; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Supported by SCRUM-Japan Funds (http://www.scrum-japan.ncc.go.jp/index.html) and research funding from Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East.