Optical selection rules endorsed by symmetry are crucial for understanding the optical properties of quantum materials and the associated ultrafast spectral phenomena. Here, we introduce momentum-resolved Floquet optical selection rules using group theory to elucidate the pump-probe photoemission spectral distributions of monolayer black phosphorus (BP), which are governed by the symmetries of both the material and the lasers. Using time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT), we further investigate the dynamical evolution of Floquet(-Volkov) states in the photoemission spectra of monolayer BP, revealing their spectral weights at specific momenta for each sideband. These observations are comprehensively explained by the proposed Floquet optical selection rules. Our framework not only clarifies experimental photoemission spectra but also uncovers unexplored characteristics under different pump-probe configurations. Our results are expected to deepen the understanding of light-induced ultrafast spectra in BP and can be extended to other Floquet systems.

Symmetry-based Floquet optical selection rules determine the visibility of light-induced sidebands in TrARPES intensity plots.

Ultrafast lasers have emerged as indispensable tools for detecting and manipulating optical and electronic properties of quantum materials, enabling the exploration of light-matter interaction through symmetry-based paradigms (1,2). A representative example lies in selection rules for detecting related optical properties in equilibrium, which dictate allowable electric dipole transitions under different linearly (3,4) or circularly (5,6) polarized lasers governed by the point group symmetry of the target material. Beyond probing equilibrium characterization, the light field can also drive the system into a nonequilibrium regime, leading to distinctive physical phenomena (7,8). For instance, via virtual absorption or emission of multiple photons, the Bloch states can be dressed into Floquet states inside the crystal and Volkov states in the vacuum by the strong time-periodic field (9–12), and their interference can further give rise to the Floquet-Volkov states (13–16). Moreover, accompanied by the formation of light-induced sidebands in the energy domain, the light field can transiently modify electronic (17–32) and optical properties (33–36) of target materials, known as the Floquet engineering (8,37).

Recently, time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (TrARPES) experiments have provided the first observation of the Floquet band renormalization in the semiconductor black phosphorus (BP) thin film driven by the linearly polarized pumping laser (38–40). This Floquet engineering occurs for the pumping laser polarized along the armchair (AC) direction but not the zigzag (ZZ) direction, exhibiting a strong pump polarization dependence. This phenomenon underscores the point group symmetry-enforced pseudospin selectivity in the Floquet band engineering for BP. In this context, the pseudospin is a generalized concept of spin in a two-sublattice system with distinct behaviors from spin under spatial symmetry operations (41,42), and it governs optical selection rules in equilibrium, which refer to symmetry-imposed constraints on the electric dipole transitions induced by an external light field, as confirmed by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments (43), and notably influences the Floquet band structures (38–40).

Despite prior advances in Floquet engineering on band structures, recent experimental findings on BP (39,44) reveal symmetry-sensitive TrARPES signatures under certain pump-probe configurations that cannot be fully explained by existing theoretical models. For example, when both pumping and probe lasers are polarized along the AC direction, the TrARPES intensity plot shows missing spectral weights around theΓpoint for then=1Floquet sideband, differing from then=0Floquet sideband features (39). Moreover, when the probe laser polarization switches to the ZZ direction while maintaining the AC pumping configuration, only a spot-like spectral signature appears around theΓpoint for then=1Floquet sideband (44). These phenomena demonstrate the strong dependence of the light-induced sideband visibility on the light polarization but without a comprehensive understanding from a general theoretical framework.

On the other hand, while some dynamical selection rules have been proposed for the Floquet systems, they primarily focus on the high harmonic generation to integrate all contributions from eachkpoint (45–47) or are limited to molecular and model systems without fully accounting for the point group symmetries (48,49). Hence, existing frameworks do not capture the momentum-resolved selection rules necessary to interpret experimental TrARPES features in materials like BP and generally leave the detectability of light-induced sidebands unexplained and unpredictable. Consequently, there is a critical need to propose general symmetry-based Floquet optical selection rules, which could depict the photoemission process between the photon-dressed sideband states and vacuum states under various pump-probe configurations. These rules are essential for interpreting and predicting the spectral features of sidebands in real materials and are crucial tools for the future of Floquet engineering.

Motivated by these open questions, in this work, we choose monolayer BP, which shares the same point group symmetry with the BP thin film, as a showcase system to investigate Floquet optical selection rules under various pump-probe configurations. These rules jointly depend on the intrinsic lattice symmetry and the polarization geometries of the pumping and probe lasers. We also use a state-of-the-art ab initio calculation approach to simulating the photoemission spectra, which is the time-dependent surface flux method in the semiperiodic system (t-SURFFP) (50,51) based on real-time time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT; see Methods for more details). In this approach, the ionization process is simulated by allowing electrons to escape the sample under the action of the probe field and be collected by a “numerical” detector placed at a fixed distance from the surface. This enables the computation of high-quality (Tr)ARPES intensity plots that outperform simpler approximations, especially in capturing surface-specific effects and time-resolved dynamics (52,53). Besides capturing the build-up, evolution, and collapse of light-induced sidebands to confirm the Floquet engineering, our spectral simulations also track the real-time evolution of electron occupations in these Floquet(-Volkov) sidebands, thereby reflecting their controllable features under various pump-probe conditions. In addition to reproducing previously reported spectral features (39,44), our TDDFT simulations uncover spectral weight distributions that have not been reported in earlier works. These findings provide predictive insights into the symmetry-governed visibility or suppression of sidebands, which are fully accounted for by our proposed Floquet optical selection rules. Together, our work offers a general theoretical framework for understanding and predicting symmetry-governed features in TrARPES, which can be further extended to other light-driven quantum materials beyond BP.

Here, considering the wealth of TrARPES experimental results on the BP thin film (38–40,44), we choose the monolayer BP as a prototype material, which is a direct gap semiconductor at theΓpoint, featuring anisotropic electronic structures along the AC and ZZ directions (54–56). Under the glide-mirror operation with the green plane inFig. 1A, which serves as the scattering plane in the pump-probe photoemission measurements (38–40,43,44), the BP remains invariant. At theΓpoint, the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) wave functions arise from the superposition of wave functions∣A〉and∣B〉at A and B sublattices inFig. 1A, namely,∣A〉−∣B〉and∣A〉+∣B〉. These two wave functions transform as the irreducible representationsΓ2+andΓ4−ofD2hgroup, with characters of −1 and 1 respect to the mirror operationMyz(57). In analogy to graphene, this sublattice-based structure gives rise to a well-defined pseudospin degree of freedom (43), with opposite pseudospin polarizations in the VB and CB. The pseudospin governs the polarization dependence of optical transitions and photoemission spectral features, and its role is consistent with previous findings in BP thin films (38), as further detailed in note S1.

(A) Schematic for ARPES on monolayer BP with different probe polarizations. (B) The ARPES intensity plot along the AC direction for then-doped monolayer BP under the AC (s-pol.) probe laser. The ARPES signature on the CB in (B) is magnified by a factor of 10 for clearer presentation. (C) Similar results to (B) but under the ZZ (p-pol.) probe laser. The band structures for both panels are in blue dot lines. The probe photon energyħω is 6.2 eV, and the peak intensityIpris 0.03 × 109W/cm2with a pulse durationTprof 80 fs.

To reveal optical selection rules in equilibrium as a benchmark, we conduct TDDFT simulations of ARPES intensity plots along the AC direction forn-doped monolayer BP. As illustrated inFig. 1A, once we set the glide-mirror plane as the scattering plane in pump-probe photoemission measurements (38–40,43,44), unders-polarization (s-pol.) probe laser with the electric field oscillating along the AC direction [noted as AC (s-pol.) probe laser], a distinct ARPES intensity signature emerges around theΓpoint for the VB inFig. 1B. In contrast, almost no ARPES intensity signature is observed for the CB around theΓpoint (seeFig. 1B). Conversely, when the probe laser is altered top-polarization (p-pol.) with the electric field oscillating in the scattering plane [noted as ZZ (p-pol.) probe laser; seeFig. 1A], the ARPES intensity signature around theΓpoint exhibits the opposite behavior: The VB vanishes entirely, while the CB becomes distinctly visible, as shown inFig. 1C. Our simulated spectra align qualitatively with previous ARPES experiments on BP thin film with electron doping (38,43), demonstrating that electrons in the VB and CB can be selectively excited by tuning the polarization direction of the laser. This behavior reflects the underlying optical selection rules in BP.

We further use TDDFT to explore the formation of the Floquet(-Volkov) states in the undoped monolayer BP under laser pumping. The absence of electron doping offers a clean platform for the unambiguous resolution of the spectral weights of each sideband for the VB across different pump-probe conditions. Initially, we concentrate on the AC (s-pol.) pumping laser without an out-of-plane (zdirection) electric field component. This ensures no coupling between the light field and the photoemission final states around theΓpoint, forming the Floquet states. Moreover, the below-gap pumping with photon energy smaller than the bandgap guarantees no single-photon absorption to excite electrons from the VB to CB. Consequently, we only focus on the VB edge and its light-induced replica bands with the Floquet indexnF(seeFig. 2A). Using the Floquet TDDFT approach (see Methods), we simulate the Floquet band structures, labeled asn=nFand illustrated by black dashed lines inFig. 2 (B and C). Compared with the equilibrium band structures in blue dot lines, we find a momentum-dependent energy shift around theΓpoint for then=0Floquet sideband for the VB (Floquet VB). This result is consistent with experimental observation under the same setup and light pumping (39), underscoring that the Floquet TDDFT approach can effectively capture all features of the Floquet engineering on band structures.

(A) Schematic of Floquet states. (B) The TrARPES intensity plot along the AC direction upon below-gap pumping. The polarization configuration shown in the top inset is denoted as “pump@probe”, with the pumping laser in red and the probe laser in purple. For example, “AC (s-pol.)@AC (s-pol.)” indicates that both lasers are polarized along the AC (s-pol.) directions. For the pumping laser, the photon energyħΩ is 0.41 eV, which is half of the equilibrium band gap of 0.82 eV, and the peak intensityIpuis 4 × 109W/cm2with a pulse durationTpuof 100 fs. The parameters of the probe laser remain consistent with the ARPES calculations but with a longer pulse durationTprof 100 fs. The pump-probe delay timeΔtis set to 0 fs. The blue arrow denotes the single-photon absorption, and the bottom inset shows the VB in blue dot lines for improved clarity. (C) Similar results with the same parameters as (B), but the polarization of the probe laser is along the ZZ (p-pol.) direction. (D) Schematic of Floquet-Volkov coherence. (EandF) Corresponding results with the same parameters as (B) and (C) but upon ZZ (p-pol.) pumping laser. The blue dot lines are equilibrium band structures, and the black dashed lines are light-induced band structures with the Floquet indexnas {−2,–1,0,1,2} for these photoemission spectra. The arrows in [(A) and (D)] denote the possible electronic transitions induced by the probe laser.

We also calculate TrARPES intensity with the probe laser along different polarization directions to further reveal spectral features. TrARPES intensity plots shown inFig. 2 (B and C)exhibit similar features to those for equilibrium VB inFig. 1 (B and C). Then=0Floquet VB around theΓpoint is visible under the AC (s-pol.) probe laser but not under the ZZ (p-pol.) probe laser. These results indicate that then=0Floquet VB inherits the symmetry of the equilibrium VB. Then=1Floquet VB around theΓpoint exhibits distinct symmetry behavior. As shown inFig. 2B, it is undetectable under the AC probe laser (39), while under the ZZ probe laser (seeFig. 2C), a spot-like spectral signature appears (44). These observations underscore that TrARPES spectral weights strongly depend on the symmetry of equilibrium VB and the polarization geometry of the probe laser.

In addition to the Floquet states in monolayer BP, the ZZ (p-pol.) pumping laser has a nonzero out-of-plane component of the electric field, which can dress the photoemission final states in the vacuum as the Volkov states with the Volkov indexnV(seeFig. 2D). Because of the Floquet-Volkov interference (14), thenth sideband in TrARPES intensity plots stems from transitions wheren=nV+nF, as shown inFig. 2D. The simulated results under the ZZ (p-pol.) pumping laser are presented inFig. 2 (E and F)with different probe lasers, showcasing no band renormalization for then=0VB. This finding is consistent with previous experimental and theoretical studies on BP thin film (39). For the experimental setup depicted in the inset ofFig. 2E, we calculate the dynamical evolution for the Floquet-Volkov states and the transfer of spectral weights among different light-induced sidebands by varying the pump-probe delay timeΔt(see note S3.1). Our TDDFT simulations successfully visualize the formation and collapse of the Floquet-Volkov states in the time domain. Furthermore, the spectral weight distributions in each light-induced sideband atΔt=0under AC (s-pol.) and ZZ (p-pol.) probe lasers also differ from those of Floquet states shown inFig. 2 (B and C). Then=0,1sidebands for the VB around theΓpoint are visible under the AC (s-pol.) probe laser (seeFig. 2E) but disappear entirely under the ZZ (p-pol.) probe laser (seeFig. 2F), which has not been reported in previous works. Thus, on the basis of these systemic simulations, we conclude that spectral weights for the Floquet(-Volkov) sidebands in monolayer BP depend on the Floquet indexnand symmetries of targeted bands in equilibrium, pumping lasers, and probe lasers. Although previous experimental studies have partially revealed polarization-dependent sideband intensities under specific pump-probe configurations (44), a unified and symmetry-based theoretical framework has remained elusive.

Here,∣ψi〉and∣ψf〉are the wave functions of the initial and final states in (Tr)ARPES measurements. The light-matter interaction HamiltonianH′^≃Apr⋅p^involves the vector potential of the probe laserAprand the electron momentum operatorp^. Given the scattering geometry shown inFig. 1A, the final state∣ψf〉should have even symmetry under the glide-mirror operation (58). To yield a nonzero photoemission intensity,Mmust be an even function under the mirror operationMyz, implying thatH′^∣ψi〉inEq. 1is also even. IfH′^∣ψi〉is an odd function,Mis zero, and the target state is invisible in the photoemission spectrum (see note S2.1).

As a reference, we analyze the ARPES intensity plots for monolayer BP without laser pumping, as shown inFig. 1 (B and C). The initial state in the matrix elementMis the VB maximum (CB minimum), described by the wave function∣ψv〉(∣ψc〉). At theΓpoint, the wave vector group isD2h, under which the VB (CB) wave function∣ψv〉(∣ψc〉) is odd (even) with respect to theMyzoperation (43). Moreover, the AC (s-pol.) and ZZ (p-pol.) probe lasers, polarized perpendicular and parallel to the scattering plane, are odd and even with respect toMyz, respectively. As a result,H′^∣ψv〉(H′^∣ψc〉) is even under theMyzoperation, indicating that the matrix elementMis nonzero and the AC (ZZ) probe laser can selectively detect the signature of the VB (CB) edge at theΓpoint (see details in note S2.2). These symmetry-based selection rules explain the opposite ARPES intensities inFig. 1 (B and C).

SinceΓ3−andΓ2+share the same character −1 under the mirror operationMyzin theD2hgroup, the overall character ofEq. 3is(−1)∣n∣. This implies that whennis even (odd),H′^∣ψi〉is also even (odd), resulting in a nonzero (zero) matrix elementM(see case 1 in note S2.3). Thus, then=0Floquet VB can be observed, while the spectral weights around theΓpoint for then=1sideband disappear (seeFig. 2B).

The polarization direction of the probe laser is changed from that inEq. 3, meaning thatH′^∣ψi〉transforms as an odd (even) function whennis even (odd). This leads to the vanishing of then=0Floquet VB and the emergence of then=1sideband as a distinct dot-like feature around theΓpoint (seeFig. 2C).Equations 3and4, derived purely from symmetry considerations, provide a general and analytical framework to comprehend the spectral features of Floquet sidebands. In particular, they reveal how the symmetry character ofH′^∣ψi〉alternates with the Floquet indexn, enabling a direct, symmetry-based interpretation of TrARPES intensity plots.

Moreover, under the ZZ (p-pol.) pumping laser shown inFig. 2 (E and F),H′^∣ψi〉is even (odd) under the AC (ZZ) probe laser, regardless ofnbeing odd or even (see cases 3 and 4 in note S2.3). This behavior stands in contrast to the AC (s-pol.) pumping case, where the symmetry character ofH′^∣ψi〉is sensitive to the Floquet indexn. The key difference arises from the symmetry of the light-induced sideband wave function∣ψnv〉under the mirror operationMyz. For the ZZ (p-pol.) pumping, the vector potentialApulies in the scattering plane, rendering the term[v(k∥)⋅Apu]inEq. 2even underMyz. As a result,∣ψnv〉inherits the mirror symmetry of the original VB wave function∣ψv〉, regardless of the Floquet indexn. In contrast, under the AC (s-pol.) pumping laser, whereApuis perpendicular to the scattering plane, the termv(k∥)⋅Apubecomes odd underMyz, leading to the character of∣ψnv〉alternating with(−1)∣n∣. This distinctive symmetry behavior accounts for the consistent appearance of sidebands around theΓpoint inFig. 2Eand their absence inFig. 2F.

To systematically compare and highlight the symmetry properties of Floquet(-Volkov) sidebands under representative pump-probe configurations, we summarize the results of our group-theoretical analysis inTable 1. This table presents a unified classification of the Floquet optical selection rules in monolayer BP, based on the interplay between the Floquet indexnand the symmetries of the equilibrium parent band, pumping and probe laser pulses. The classification not only recovers the known cases observed in specific experiments (e.g.,Fig. 2C) but also provides predictive power for unexplored setups (e.g.,Fig. 2F), serving as a guiding principle for future pump-probe spectroscopies.

The group representations ofH′^∣ψnv〉and resulting symmetry (even or odd) are listed for typical geometries.

where∣ψ0v〉(∣ψ−1c〉) denotes the wave function of then=0(n=−1) Floquet VB (CB) at theΓpoint without hybridization,a0andb−1are linear combination coefficients. Since both∣ψ0v〉and∣ψ−1c〉are odd upon the AC pumping (seeEq. 2), the hybrid wave function∣Ψ0v〉remains odd. This fact leads toH′^∣ψi〉inEq. 1being even (odd) under the AC (ZZ) probe laser. Consequently, then=0Floquet VB around theΓpoint retains a visible signature under the AC probe laser (seeFig. 3A), while its spectral weight is absent under the ZZ probe laser (seeFig. 3B). Similar features are also observed upon below-gap pumping: Then=0Floquet VB around theΓpoint remains visible under the AC probe laser inFig. 2Bbut is suppressed under the ZZ probe laser inFig. 2C, consistent with the near-resonance pumping case under the same pump-probe configuration. Moreover, the red arrows inFig. 3 (A and B)highlight that the spectral features of then=−1Floquet CB resemble those of then=0Floquet VB around theΓpoint, as the hybrid wave function∣ψ−1c〉of then=−1Floquet CB is also odd under the mirror operationMyzdue to a similar linear combination of∣ψ0v〉and∣ψ−1c〉.

(A) The TrARPES intensity plot along the AC direction upon near-resonance pumping. The pumping and probe laser polarizations are along the AC (s-pol.) directions. The pump photon energyħΩ is 0.88 eV, and the peak intensityIpuis 4 × 1010W/cm2, while all other parameters are consistent with the below-gap pumping case. (B) Similar results to (A), but the polarization of the probe laser is along the ZZ (p-pol. ) direction. The blue dot lines are equilibrium band structures, and the black dashed lines are the Floquet band structures with the Floquet indexnas {−1,0,1} for both panels. The red and brown arrows point to the regions of then=−1andn=1Floquet CB and VB around theΓpoint, respectively.

Because of the establishment of a direct optical transition channel between the VB and CB, near-resonance pumping results in a slightly pumped-electron occupation around the CB edge. Similarly, the hybrid wave function∣Ψ1v〉of then=1Floquet VB at theΓpoint is also a linear combination of∣ψ1v〉and∣ψ0c〉, exhibiting opposite symmetry and spectral properties to∣Ψ0v〉inEq. 5. As indicated by brown arrows inFig. 3 (A and B), while no signature is detected under the AC probe laser, the ZZ probe laser reveals these occupations. These facts indicate that even with the direct optical absorption between the VB and CB, as well as the hybridization between Floquet sidebands, the spectral weights observed in TrARPES still obey symmetry-governed Floquet optical selection rules, indicating their fundamental importance for the understanding of the Floquet phenomena.

From below-gap to near-resonance pumping, the Floquet optical selection rules consistently explain monolayer BP photoemission spectra, which share similar spectral characteristics with that of BP thin films. Moreover, we perform extensive TDDFT calculations by tuning the pump-probe delay time (figs. S3 to S5), the peak intensity of the pumping laser (fig. S6), and the pulse duration of pumping and probe lasers (fig. S7) to capture the birth and death of Floquet(-Volkov) states, and we find that the Floquet optical selection rules persist under different configurations. Although these selection rules are obtained from a group theory perspective without considering any scattering mechanism for these light-induced states, this framework can be effectively applied to interpret the monolayer BP photoemission spectra from our TDDFT simulations and experimental observations for the BP thin film. Furthermore, our paradigm developed in this work is not limited to BP. Still, it can be adaptable to momentum-resolved Floquet states for other materials, such as graphene, topological insulators, transition metal dichalcogenides, and hexagonal boron nitride under laser pumping (see note S4). These results underline the pivotal role of symmetry for the coherent Floquet(-Volkov) states across a broader range of quantum materials.

At the same time, these findings also shed light on why the Floquet bands deserve focused attention within photoemission spectroscopy. Unlike equilibrium band structures, these Floquet states encode photon-dressed quantum coherence and dynamical symmetry properties that are intrinsically time dependent and inaccessible through conventional ARPES. In contrast, TrARPES extends the capability of ARPES into the time domain, enabling direct observation of such nonequilibrium states with momentum and temporal resolution. When combined with symmetry-based Floquet optical selection rules, TrARPES offers a more refined level of control over light-matter interactions. By tuning the pump-probe geometry, one can selectively enhance or suppress spectral weights of specific photon-dressed states. This establishes a powerful approach not only for interpreting photoemission spectra in driven systems but also for tailoring quantum states on ultrafast timescales.

In summary, we propose general, symmetry-based Floquet optical selection rules, which intertwine the symmetries of the material, the pumping laser, and the probe laser within the Floquet framework. These rules provide qualitative and predictive insights into the spectral features of light-induced sidebands in TrARPES measurements. Using monolayer BP as a prototypical system, we validate these rules through fully ab initio TDDFT simulations and demonstrate their explanatory power across different pump-probe configurations. Beyond reproducing previously known features, our simulations uncover distinct spectral weight distributions that are naturally explained within the proposed framework. While our analysis is taking BP as an example, the methodology is transferable to a broad class of quantum materials and experimental setups. Our theoretical framework provides a crucial tool for manipulating the symmetry of light-matter hybrid states in ultrafast spectroscopy, paving the way for advancements in symmetry-dominated ultrafast studies for more quantum materials.

In the present work, all computational tasks were executed through the utilization of the real-space grid-based code, Octopus (59,60). To commence, we elucidate the technical details for the ground-state calculations. The Kohn-Sham (KS) equations were solved iteratively to self-consistency with a relative convergence of the density as 10−7, and the grid spacing was set to 0.36 bohr during the calculations. The adiabatic local density approximation and Hartwigsen-Goedecker-Hutter pseudopotentials (61) were used for the monolayer BP. In addition, aΓ-centered 12 by 10 by 1 k-grid in reciprocal space was used, and thezaxis, orthogonal to the monolayer plane, was characterized using nonperiodic boundaries with a real-space length of 120 bohr. The lattice parameters along thexandydirections were 4.625 and 3.299 Å, respectively. The spin-orbit coupling was not considered in the present analysis. The bandgap of the monolayer BP was 0.82 eV in our calculations.

whereApu=cEpuΩϵpuwithEpuas the electric field andϵpuas the polarization direction.Ωis the frequency, andTpuis the total pulse duration of the pumping laser.Θ(t)is the time step function, ensuring that the pumping laserApu(t)is zero everywhere except fort∈[0,Tpu].

The physical meaning of the symbols inEq. 9is similar to that inEq. 8but for the probe laser. Please note that the results presented in this work do not rely on the specific shape of the pumping and probe laser, so we have used these particular forms for their convenience and simplicity.

To obtain the photoemission spectra of the monolayer BP under different pump-probe conditions, we used the t-SURFFP (50,51) to evaluate photoemission probabilities from crystal surfaces without explicitly constructing continuum scattering states. The system is modeled as a slab geometry, which is periodic in-plane and finite along the out-of-plane direction.

wherej^(t)=−i∇−A(t)/cis the single-particle current operator, and the flux integral is taken over the surfaceSwith normal parallel to the nonperiodic direction.Equation 13allows for efficient computation of the (Tr)ARPES signal using only the time-evolved wave functions evaluated on the surfaceS, where scattering states are well approximated by Volkov waves. This makes the method particularly well suited for systems with slab geometries.

As for the calculations of Floquet band structures, we carried out the noninteracting Floquet TDDFT approach merged in the Octopus code (25). This approach provides a quasi-static characterization of the pumping light-driven electronic states by performing a Floquet expansion of the TDDFT Hamiltonian, without explicitly including the probe pulse. An effective vector potential amplitude was used, corresponding to the value of the shaped pumping pulse at the temporal overlap with the probe pulse in the TrARPES simulations. Artificial doping of monolayer BP was also explored to visualize CB contributions in the ARPES intensity plot by adding 0.025 electronic charges per unit cell here in theResults. We note that such slight doping has minimal effects on the band structures.

We thank S.W. Jung and K.S. Kim for helpful discussions.

Funding:This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grants no. 12234011 and no. 12374053) and the National Key Basic Research and Development Program of China (grant no. 2024YFA1409100). B.F. and W.D. acknowledge the support of the Basic Science Center Project of NSFC (grant no. 52388201), Innovation Program for Quantum Science and Technology (grant no. 2023ZD0300500), and the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Chip (ICFC). U.D.G. acknowledges support from the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Doctoral Network TIMES (grant no. 101118915), SPARKLE (grant no. 101169225), the Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR) under the PRIN 2022 (grant no. 2022PX279E_003), and Next Generation EUPartenariato Esteso NQSTI–Spoke 2 (THENCE-PE00000023). A.R. acknowledges support from the Cluster of Excellence “CUI: Advanced Imaging of Matter”—EXC 2056—project ID 390715994, and Grupos Consolidados (IT1453-22). A.R. also acknowledges support from the Max Planck-New York City Center for Non-Equilibrium Quantum Phenomena. The Flatiron Institute is a division of the Simons Foundation.

Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.