Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are commonly treated with immunosuppressive therapies that increase the risk for infections, including hepatitis B (HepB) virus. Adult patients with IBD have suboptimal seroprotection rates after vaccination with a 3-dose recombinant recombinant HepB vaccine. Heplisav-B is an adjuvanted 2-dose HepB series that is more immunogenic in the general adult population. Herein, we evaluated the immunogenicity of Heplisav-B in adult patients with IBD.

We conducted a prospective observational study of adult patients with IBD who were not seroprotected to HepB virus and received a Heplisav-B series with postimmunization HepB surface antibody (anti-HBs) serologic testing. Postimmunization anti-HBs ≥10 IU/mL was considered seroprotection. The primary outcome was the rate of seroprotection. Secondary outcomes were rates of seroprotection in different age groups, those on immunosuppressive therapy, and previous HepB vaccine nonresponders using a univariate analysis.

Eighty-five patients met the inclusion criteria with the majority (72%) achieving seroprotection with a median anti-HBs level of 48.7 IU/mL and 28 patients (33%) having an anti-HBs level >100 IU/mL. Those on immunosuppressive therapy [49 (58%), 18 nonresponders, odds ratio: 0.34, 95% CI: 0.12-0.99] and primary nonresponders to a previous HepB series [22 (26%), 11 nonresponders, odds ratio: 0.26, 95% CI: 0.09-0.73] were less likely to achieve seroprotection. Seven patients who did not respond received a third dose of Heplisav-B, and 2 achieved seroprotection.

Heplisav-B achieved higher rates of seroprotection than those seen with 3-dose recombinant HepB vaccines in patients with IBD and may be the preferred option.

Heplisav-B [HepB- cytidine phospho-guanosine (CpG)] is a 2-dose adjuvanted recombinant HepB series approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2017 with a new cytosine phosphoguanine adjuvant that is more immunogenic in the general adult population and in those with chronic kidney disease or diabetes mellitus.17,18It was subsequently approved by the European Medicines Agency for use in Europe in February 2021 and by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency for use in the UK in February 2023. In February 2018, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommended HepB-CpG to prevent HBV infection in adults aged 19 years and older. In a systematic review analyzing 4 randomized controlled trials involving general adult subjects, seroprotective anti-HB levels were reached in 90% to 100% of participants receiving HepB-CpG, compared with 70.5% to 90.2% of participants receiving 3-dose recombinant HepB with aluminum adjuvant series.19There is limited data on the immunogenicity of HepB-CpG in patients with IBD or other immunosuppressed populations. A retrospective observational study demonstrated a high rate of seroprotection (78.3%) in patients with IBD vaccinated with HepB-CpG, but it was limited due to a challenge dose to assess an anamnestic response not being provided, a complete 2-dose series not being given to a large portion (32%) of patients, and its retrospective nature.20In addition, a recent study showed that most patients with IBD who received a 3-dose HepB series have an anamnestic response and sustained seroprotection to HBV despite prolonged exposure to immunosuppressive therapy.21The primary aim of this prospective observational study was to determine the rates of seroprotection after completion of HepB-CpG in patients with IBD. We hypothesized that we would see higher rates of seroconversion compared with historical rates, given that HepB-CpG has superior immunogenicity in the general population.

This single-center, observational, and prospective study was conducted between November 2019 and May 2023 at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Participants were eligible if they met the following inclusion criteria: (1) a history of chronic (>3 mo) UC or CD diagnosed and documented by standard clinical, radiographic, endoscopic, and histopathologic criteria, (2) age 18 years or older, (3) had been on stable IBD therapy for at least 3 months, (4) did not respond to a challenge dose of HepB if they had previously completed a HepB vaccine series and had an anti-HB level <10 IU/mL, (5) completion of 2 doses of the HepB series HepB-CpG recombinant, adjuvanted HepB recorded in the Wisconsin Immunization Registry (WIR), (6) and had an anti-HB level measured 4 to 8 weeks postimmunization, which was used to establish seroprotection against HBV. Patients were not eligible for this study and were excluded if they: (1) did not complete the 2-dose HepB series HepB-CpG, (2) did not have an anti-HBs level measured postimmunization, (3) had an autoimmune condition other than IBD that required immunosuppressive therapy, and (4) were a member of a vulnerable group that included those who were pregnant, lacked decision-making capacity, and were non-English speaking.

Patients with IBD who met the inclusion and exclusion criteria underwent venipuncture during a clinical visit to measure anti-HB levels. Immunization, medical, and medication histories were reviewed. Anti-HB levels were measured 4 to 8 weeks after the second dose, and anti-HB levels ≥10 IU/mL were considered to be seroprotective. If they were not determined to be seroprotected after the full 2-dose HepB-CpG HepB series, a third dose was recommended, with repeated anti-HB levels measured to assess seroprotection.

The primary outcome measured in this study was the rate of seroprotection in adult patients with IBD after vaccination with HepB-CpG. The secondary outcomes of our study included determining predictors of seroprotection by comparing those who received systemic immunosuppressive therapy and those who did not, seroprotection rates between age groups, seroprotection rates between those who received a previous HepB vaccination series before HepB-CpG and those who did not, and seroprotection rates in those who needed a third dose of HepB-CpG after failing a 2-dose series and those who did not.

We compared all variables using either the χ2or Fisher exact test. Age was expressed as mean and SD for normally distributed data. As the quantitative HepB antibody variable was non-normally distributed, we summarized the data using medians and interquartile ranges. Predictors of seroprotection were analyzed using a logistic regression model reporting odds ratios (ORs), 95% confidence limits, andPvalues set at 0.05. We conducted only a univariate analysis owing to the limited sample size of our study. We corrected for missing categorical data using the case-deletion correction method. Continuous missing data were assessed to determine the level of missingness and excluded if more than 50% of the data were missing with no data excluded. AllPvalues were statistically significant if thePvalue of the test was 0.05 or less. All analyses were conducted using STATA version 18 (StataCorp. 2023. Stata Statistical Software: Release 18.: StataCorp LLC.).

Eighty-five patients met the inclusion criteria with a mean age of 50 years. Forty-four (52%) were males, and the majority were Caucasian (92%; Table1). About a quarter of the cohort, 22 (26%) were previous HepB primary nonresponders. At the time of vaccination, the majority 65 (76%) were on advanced therapy; 33 (39%) were on TNF monotherapy or combination therapy, 21 (25%) were on vedolizumab monotherapy, and 10 (12%) patients were on ustekinumab monotherapy or combination therapy.

Patients on TNF monotherapy, TNF combination therapy, ustekinumab monotherapy or combination therapy, tofacitinib therapy, or corticosteroids.

CD indicates Crohn's disease; HepB, hepatitis B; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; UC, ulcerative colitis.

Bold values are statistical significance ofpvalue.

Most of our cohort (72%) achieved seroprotection after vaccination with the HepB-CpG series with a median anti-HB level of 48.7 IU/mL (Table2). Twenty-eight patients (33%) had anti-HB levels ≥100 IU/mL. Seven (8%) patients received a third dose of the HepB-CpG vaccine after not responding to the original 2-dose series, and 2 patients responded after the third dose.

Patients on thiopurine monotherapy, TNF monotherapy, TNF combination therapy, ustekinumab monotherapy or combination therapy, tofacitinib therapy, or corticosteroids.

Patients who had anti-HBs >10 after 2-dose series of HepB-CpG.

Patients who had anti-HBs <10 after 2-dose series of HepB-CpG.

Patients who received a HepB vaccine series and did not achieve seroprotection and did not respond to a HepB challenge dose before receiving HepB-CpG.

Seven of the 24 nonresponders received a third dose after having anti-HBs <10 after 2-dose series of HepB-CpG.

CD indicates Crohn's disease; HepB, hepatitis B; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IQR, interquartile range; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; UC, ulcerative colitis.

Those on systemic immunosuppressive therapy were less likely to respond to HepB-CpG than those on nonsystemic immunosuppressive therapy (n = 49 vs N = 36,P= 0.042). Patients who were previous primary HepB nonresponders were less likely to respond to HepB-CpG when compared with those who were HepB naïve (n = 22 vs N = 63,P= 0.008). Those 40 years of age or older were less likely to respond to HepB-CpG B when compared with those younger than 40 years, although this difference was not statistically significant. There were no significant differences in sex, IBD diagnosis, and use of thiopurine monotherapy, vedolizumab monotherapy, anti-TNF monotherapy, anti-TNF combination therapy, ustekinumab therapy, or tofacitinib therapy between the two groups.

In a univariate analysis evaluating seroprotection after the second dose, systemic immunosuppressive therapy (OR: 0.34,P= 0.047) and a history of nonresponse to a previous HepB series (OR: 0.26,P= 0.011) were predictive of a poor response to HepB-CpG (Table3). Older age (≥40 y; OR: 0.26,P= 0.086) was also predictive of nonresponse to HepB-CpG, although this difference was not statistically significant. No other variables were associated with increased or decreased response rates to HepB-CpG in the univariate model.

Patients on thiopurine monotherapy, TNF monotherapy, TNF combination therapy, ustekinumab monotherapy or combination therapy, tofacitinib therapy, or corticosteroids.

Patients who had anti-HBs >10 after 2-dose series of HepB-CpG.

CD indicates Crohn's disease; HepB, hepatitis B; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; OR, odds ratio; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; UC, ulcerative colitis.

Patients with IBD are at high risk for the reactivation of HBV infection due to immunosuppressive therapies.27Response rates to the 3-dose recombinant HepB series are suboptimal in this patient population.28To the best of our knowledge, this is the first prospective observational study to evaluate seroprotection of the 2-dose HepB-CpG series in patients with IBD with seroprotection rates of 72%. This is greater than the response rate ranging from 34% to 59% in studies investigating the widely used 3-dose recombinant HepB series in populations with similar immunosuppression therapy profiles.29,30Further dividing patients into subgroups allowed us to examine predictors of seroprotection to HepB-CpG.

Immunosuppressive therapies including corticosteroids, biologics, and immunomodulators are associated with poor vaccine response.31We saw a significantly lower seroprotection rate to HepB-CpG in patients with IBD on systemic immunosuppressive therapy compared with those on nonsystemic immunosuppressive therapy. This is consistent with previous literature examining HepB response in patients with IBD on immunosuppressive therapy. Altunöz et al32reported a significantly lower response rate to HepB in patients with IBD on systemic immunosuppressive therapy (corticosteroids, azathioprine, and anti-TNF) compared with patients not on systemic immunosuppressive therapy. Concerning the influence of anti-TNF agents on HepB response in patients with IBD, Gisbert et al30found a decreased response rate among patients on anti-TNF therapy (46%) compared with those who were not (62%). Although we saw a lower rate of seroprotection to HepB-CpG in patients on anti-TNF therapy compared with those who were not, this difference was not statistically significant. The literature on the effect of vedolizumab and ustekinumab therapy on HepB response rate in patients with IBD is limited. While we observed a higher rate of seroprotection to HepB-CpG in patients on vedolizumab therapy compared with those who were not, this difference was not statistically significant. In addition, while we found a lower rate of seroprotection to HepB-CpG in patients on ustekinumab therapy compared with those who were not, this response was also not statistically significant in univariate analysis.

Few data are available on the effectiveness of revaccination in primary HepB nonresponders to the 3-dose recombinant HepB series in patients with IBD. In their retrospective cohort study, Pratt Jr. et al33demonstrated that after initial HepB vaccine nonresponse, patients with IBD are more likely to develop seroprotection to HBV after 3 additional vaccine doses, rather than 1 or 2 alone. While this demonstrates the importance of an additional 3-dose revaccination strategy with widely used HepB schedules, the effectiveness of revaccination with HepB-CpG after primary HepB failure in patients with IBD has not been studied. In our study, out of the 7 patients who received a third dose of HepB-CpG after not responding to the original 2-dose series, 2 (29%) achieved seroprotection. In addition, patients who failed a 2-dose series of HepB-CpG and received a third dose were significantly less likely to achieve seroprotection when compared with those who responded to a 2-dose series.

Increasing age contributes to decreased vaccine response due to changes in immune function.34Age-associated alterations in lymph nodes, reduced production of B lymphocytes, and impaired activation of T lymphocytes contribute to a decrease in vaccine effectiveness.35As a result, older patients have a significantly increased risk of nonresponse to HepB.36We found a significantly lower rate of seroprotection to HepB-CpG in patients with IBD older than 40 years of age when compared with those younger than 40 years of age, but this difference was not statistically significant in univariate analysis. The absence of statistical significance concerning age in our study may be due to its limited sample size. Based on these observations, it is essential to test for immunogenicity to HBV at the time of IBD diagnosis and minimize the time to HepB vaccination.

Patients who have an anti-HB level <10 after a primary HepB series are considered primary nonresponders. HepB-CpG has demonstrated a high rate of seroprotection in primary HepB nonresponders, including those with chronic medical conditions such as human immunodeficiency virus.37,38The data on HepB-CpG efficacy in patients with IBD who are primary HepB nonresponders are limited. Twenty-two participants in our study failed a previous HepB series, and 11 (50%) responded to HepB-CpG. In addition, we observed a significantly lower rate of seroprotection to HepB-CpG in patients with IBD who were primary HepB nonresponders when compared with those who were HepB naïve. This could be attributed to differences in certain characteristics between the two groups. Predictors of HepB nonresponse have been shown to include increasing age, male gender, tobacco use, obesity, immunosuppressive therapy, chronic disease, and genetic predisposition.39,40A recent study investigating the utility of a third HepB-CpG dose in patients with IBD who did not seroconvert after a 2-dose series (28.1%) demonstrated that patients who had diabetes, chronic kidney disease, or were male were more likely to not respond to a primary 2-dose series.41The majority of patients (56.7%) did not respond to the initial 2-dose series of HepB-CpG seroconverted after a third dose.

There are many advantages to HepB-CpG when compared with the widely available HepB series other than its increased immune response. HepB-CpG is more cost-effective for patients with IBD than historically used HepB schedules with a similar safety profile in the general population.42In addition, when compared with the traditional 3-dose recombinant HepB series with a schedule of 3 doses over 6 months, HepB-CpG has fewer doses in a shorter time (2 doses over 1 mo), which may increase patient compliance and offers faster protection against HBV infection. In their nested cohort study, Bruxvoort et al43observed a significantly higher rate of HepB vaccine series completion with HepB-CpG when compared with the 3-dose series. Oster et al44demonstrated that the use of a 2-dose instead of a 3-dose HepB series would raise the potential adults seroprotected at one year by 275,000 per one million persons. Lastly, HepB-CpG is interchangeable, and patients who begin a 3-dose vaccination series can complete the series with 2 additional doses of HepB-CpG. Given the higher seroprotection rate and easier immunization schedule of HepB-CpG, this may be the preferred option for patients with IBD in the United States, UK, and other countries where it is approved for use.

Our study has many notable strengths. This is the first prospective observational study to assess the immunogenicity of HepB-CpG in patients with IBD. We examined patients with IBD on stable and diverse treatment regimens at a gastroenterology tertiary care center reflecting current practice recommendations. We provided a challenge dose with HepB-CpG to individuals with a previous HepB immunization history who were not seroprotected to determine whether they were true primary nonresponders to HepB. Due to the strict inclusion and exclusion criteria of our study, potential biases and confounding variables were limited. We carried out multiple secondary analyses to evaluate the immune response of HepB-CpG in several subgroups of our IBD participants. While many vaccine coverage studies rely on subject survey responses and incomplete electronic medical records, the vaccination history of our subjects was verified using a validated statewide immunization registry.

Our study was not without limitations. Its prospective and observational nature makes it more prone to bias and confounding due to the lack of randomization of exposure. The limited sample size of our study could have resulted in some analyses not reaching statistical significance due to a decrease in statistical power. Some sample sizes were small, particularly those in the thiopurine monotherapy and tofacitinib cohort, making it difficult to draw associations for specific subgroups. As a single-center study, our participants may not necessarily represent the qualities of the general IBD patient population. We observed a level of homogeneity in our study, with participants predominantly identifying as white, which precludes extrapolating the results to a population with greater racial diversity. Noting these limitations, the relationships we have reported will support the future design of larger and controlled investigations.

HepB-CpG is a 2-dose adjuvanted vaccine that achieved higher rates of seroprotection than the commonly used 3-dose recombinant HepB series in patients with IBD. Given that patients with IBD are recommended to get immunized against HBV, HepB-CpG may be the preferred option due to its superior seroprotection rate and easier immunization schedule. Future controlled studies are needed to better elucidate predictors of immunogenicity to HepB-CpG in patients with IBD on non-TNF biologics and other novel therapies.