Acute unstable syndesmosis injuries require accurate reduction and stable fixation to improve short-term and long-term outcomes. Several different fixation methods have been established for acute syndesmosis injuries, each with pros and cons. Although some meta-analyses have reported better outcomes with suture-buttons than screws, the optimal fixation method remains uncertain because of heterogeneous study results and limited comparisons of emerging techniques. This network meta-analysis combining randomised and observational studies aims to determine the optimal fixation method for acute syndesmosis injuries.

Five electronic databases (PubMed, Cochrane Library, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, Wanfang Data and Embase) will be comprehensively searched from their inception through 1 June 2025 for randomised and observational studies, published in English or Chinese, that compared two or more fixation methods for acute syndesmosis injuries. Inclusion and exclusion criteria will be used for selection based on patient, intervention, comparison, outcome and study standards. Risk of bias will be evaluated by the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool 2 and the Newcastle–Ottawa scale, respectively. Conventional pairwise meta-analyses with the DerSimonian–Laird random effects model will be conducted first, followed by network meta-analyses with a three-level Bayesian hierarchical model. The outcome measures include functional outcomes, radiological indicators and postoperative complications. Data analysis will be conducted using Review Manager 5.3 and R 4.1.2. Heterogeneity, transitivity and inconsistency tests, subgroup and sensitivity analyses and publication bias will also be assessed.

No ethical approval is required because all the data will be collected from published research. The results of this study will be published in a peer-reviewed journal.

This comprehensive network meta-analysis (NMA) aims to compare different fixation methods for patients with acute syndesmosis injuries.

The NMA will simultaneously compare the efficacy and safety of multiple fixation methods and rank each intervention according to their effectiveness.

The study will include randomised and observational studies, and statistical analyses of NMA will be implemented using a three-level Bayesian hierarchical model.

Our results will be limited by the quantity and quality of the available studies for inclusion.

Most isolated syndesmosis injuries, or so-called high ankle sprains, are treated conservatively. Acute syndesmosis injuries with ankle fractures are usually unstable, requiring accurate reduction and stable fixation. Metallic syndesmosis screws were considered the gold standard5; however, they still have some drawbacks, such as the need for secondary screw removal, screw loosening or breakage.1For these reasons, new fixation methods have been introduced to clinical practice. For example, the suture button has become a promising fixation method for acute syndesmosis injuries.6However, the optimal fixation method for acute syndesmosis injuries remains controversial.

Previous meta-analyses have made great efforts to compare the different fixation methods; however, these studies all had significant limitations and did not provide reliable results.7,13The 2023 meta-analysis by Xuet alshowed that suture button had significantly better functional scores and lower reoperation rates and local irritation rates in patients with syndesmosis injuries.14In another study, Liuet alfound that dynamic fixation had significantly improved functional scores compared with the metal and bioabsorbable screws.15Notably, Chenet alshowed that neither the functional outcome nor the complications significantly differed between fixation with TightRope and screw in the treatment of syndesmotic injuries.16However, these meta-analyses were all traditional pairwise meta-analyses, with direct comparison of only two interventions. In contrast, network meta-analysis (NMA) is a well-established statistical methodology in evidence-based medicine. NMA can compare multiple interventions (≥2) directly and indirectly, even without a direct head-to-head comparison.17Meanwhile, NMA allows us to rank the estimated effects of each from best to worst, so NMA has been increasingly used in the healthcare system.

To better understand fixation methods for acute syndesmosis injuries, we will conduct a comprehensive NMA that incorporates more recent studies, including RCTs and observational studies. The goal is to compare the efficacy and safety of different fixation methods in the treatment of acute syndesmosis injuries.

The NMA protocol has been reported following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) guideline.21The PRISMA-P checklist is shown in theonline supplemental materials S1. This study will be conducted by conventional pairwise meta-analyses and Bayesian NFA simultaneously. This protocol has been registered on INPLASY with registration number INPLASY202480027.

This systematic review and NMA will address the following research question: what is the optimal fixation method for acute ankle syndesmosis injuries? The eligibility criteria for this NMA are summarised according to the population–interventions–comparators–outcomes–study design (PICOS) framework.

The review will include data from adult patients aged between 18 and 60 years with acute syndesmosis injuries diagnosed by radiological evidence or an intraoperative confirmation test. Patients with a prior history of ankle ligament injuries or fractures will be excluded. Biomechanical studies will not be conducted.

This study will include the studies comparing two or more of the following interventions: metallic syndesmosis screw, Endo-Buttons, Suture-Buttons (TightRope or ZipRope), bioabsorbable screw, elastic syndesmosis hook plate, anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL) repair with suture anchor, AITFL repair with suture anchor combining screw,22Nice knot elastic fixation23and hybrid fixation (suture-button combining screw).24One or two 3.5/4.5 mm screws penetrating three or four layers of syndesmosis cortical bone will be included. Studies that adopted titanium cable annular fixation will be excluded,25owing to the rarity of related clinical cases.

The functional outcomes, radiological indicators, postoperative complications 3, 6 and 12 months after surgery and final follow-up will be analysed. The most commonly used scoring systems for the functional outcome include the following: American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) ankle-hindfoot scale, Olerud–Molander Ankle (OMA) scale,26visual analogue scale27and the time to full weight bearing. The AOFAS scale is divided into subjective (pain and function) and objective (alignment), with 100 being the best result.28The OMA scale is a patient self-administered questionnaire, which has been recommended for scientific investigations.26Radiological indicators comprise postoperative tibiofibular overlap, postoperative tibiofibular clear spaces and medial clear spaces in the plain film.2In addition, postoperative complications, such as surgical site infection, implant irritation, fixation failure, malreduction and reoperation (not including planned implant removal), will be evaluated.

PubMed, Cochrane Library, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, Wanfang Data and Embase will be comprehensively searched for literature published from database inception up to 1 June 2025, related to the fixation methods for acute tibiofibular syndesmosis injuries. The search strategy will employ a combination of subject terms and free-text keywords. The search strategy for the PubMed database is presented inonline supplemental file 2. Clinical trial registry websites will also be searched for unpublished or grey literature (http://clinicaltrials.gov/,http://www.chictr.org/cn/). Studies will be limited to those published in English or Chinese.

After the duplicate literature is removed automatically by Endnote, the titles and abstracts of all records will be independently screened by two reviewers (YX and JS). Then, the full-text articles of the remaining studies will be obtained and further screened independently by two reviewers (YX and JS). Any study that does not meet the eligibility criteria will be removed. If disagreements cannot be resolved by discussion between the two reviewers, a third reviewer (WS) will be consulted to reach an agreement. The study selection process will be presented using a PRISMA flow diagram (figure 1).

Two reviewers (WS and DT) will independently extract data from all the included studies according to the standardised data extraction table. The following information will be extracted: publication (eg, author, publication year, and country), study design (eg, randomization process, blinding method, and follow-up duration), participants (eg, sample size, age, sex distribution, injury mechanism, concomitant injuries or fractures), intervention characteristics (eg, detailed fixation method in each group, number of screws, number of cortices engaged and time to full weight bearing) and relevant outcomes data. If relevant information is provided in the figures, data will be extracted from the graphs through the Engauge Digitizer software. Any disagreement between the two reviewers will be resolved by another reviewer (JS). In cases where analyses of RCTs were performed by both intention-to-treat (ITT) and per-protocol methods, only the data from the ITT will be adopted.

The risk of bias (RoB) of all RCTs and observational studies will be assessed using the Cochrane RoB 2 tool31and the Newcastle–Ottawa Scale (NOS),32respectively. RoB 2 evaluates bias at the outcome level across five domains: (1) randomisation process, (2) deviations from the intended interventions, (3) missing outcome data, (4) outcome measurement and (5) selective reporting. Two reviewers (XD and ZP) will conduct the RoB assessment independently, and any disagreement will be resolved by a discussion with another reviewer (QG) if necessary.

If at least three studies provide related outcome data, conventional pairwise direct meta-analyses between two interventions will be performed. The evidence from RCTs and observational studies will be analysed separately. For postoperative complications, the effect size will be assessed by relative risk (RR) and corresponding 95% CIs. For differences in functional scores and radiological indicators, the effect size will be assessed by weighted mean difference and corresponding 95% CIs. The DerSimonian–Laird random effects model will be used to pool outcome data using Review Manager Version 5.3. The Hartung–Knapp adjustment will be applied to the DerSimonian–Laird method to conservatively estimate CIs, as recommended for meta-analyses with limited studies.33 34The I2statistic will be used to evaluate the heterogeneity of the included studies.35I2values of >50% suggest substantial variability between studies. The trial sequential analysis will be conducted to calculate the required information size.36The type I error is 0.05, and the RR reduction (RRR) is 15%.

A three-level Bayesian hierarchical model will be employed to further analyse the data in this NMA, incorporating evidence of RCTs and observational studies.29First, the NMA will be performed separately using data from RCTs and observational studies. Second, the results from the randomised and observational studies will be combined without bias adjustments. Third, the analysis from step 2 will be repeated, incorporating bias adjustments. The NMA will be performed using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation, with a burn-in of 10 000 iterations and sampling of 50 000 iterations. Network geometry will be applied to show all the interactions among the included studies. The global and local consistency between the direct and indirect evidence will be evaluated by the design-by-treatment interaction model37and node-splitting analysis individually.38The relative rankings for each intervention will be assessed according to the surface under the cumulative ranking curve values.39All statistical analyses of NMA will be implemented with R version 4.1.2.

For our pairwise analyses, subgroup analyses will be conducted to investigate the heterogeneity of the included studies, such as the number of screws used, fracture types (Weber type B or C, pronation–external rotation or supination–external rotation), three or four cortical bones. For both pairwise analysis and NMA, sensitivity analyses will be conducted to assess the reliability of pooled results by removing studies with a high overall risk of bias.

Following standard Cochrane methodology, the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach will be used to conclude the evidence certainty.42It consists of five domains, including study limitations, consistency of effect, indirectness, imprecision and publication bias. RCTs initially had a high certainty evidence; however, they may be rated down by the five factors mentioned above. Observational studies start as low certainty evidence. It may be further rated down by the same five factors and rated up if there are significant effects for pooled estimates. Furthermore, using a framework that considers the certainty of evidence of randomised and non-randomised studies, the evidence base for each outcome will be clearly labelled in the ‘Summary of Findings’ table.19The ultimate assessments of evidence quality will be summarised using GRADE profiler (version 3.6).

No ethical approval is required because all data will be collected from published research. The final results of this study will be published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Although anatomical reduction and stable fixation are recommended for treating acute syndesmosis injuries, the optimal fixation method is still debated. Metallic syndesmosis screws could provide rigid, static fixation; however, they frequently accompany complications, such as screw loosening or breakage. Biodegradable screws are increasingly used for acute syndesmosis injuries; however, their application is limited and doubted owing to the lower mechanical stability and sterile wound problems. The suture button may offer sufficient stable fixation of the tibiofibular syndesmosis without the need for a second screw removal. Some meta-analyses compared different fixation methods; however, the optimal choice cannot be determined because of numerous methodological limitations.7,15Unfortunately, these were all conventional pairwise meta-analyses, which could only compare two interventions. Some meta-analyses combined data from the RCTs and observational studies to provide ‘real-world’ evidence. Naive pooling is the most common and simple method for incorporating data among these meta-analyses.30It treats all study data the same, regardless of the study designs. It cannot adjust the potential bias owing to trial design.29Thus, naive pooling is not recommended for an NMA with various trial designs nowadays. On the contrary, the three-level Bayesian hierarchical model has been considered the most flexible technique because of its ability to adjust biases.

This study will be the first NMA to comprehensively compare different fixation methods for acute syndesmosis injuries. Both RCTs and observational studies will be included to strengthen the statistical power. Meanwhile, the NMA contains potential limitations that may affect the reliability of conclusions. First, the quality of included studies may be poor because of the heterogeneity between studies. Second, the three-level Bayesian hierarchical model still has deficiencies, although it is the most effective approach to NMA incorporating RCTs and observational studies. We hope that the results of this NMA will provide more information about the efficacy and safety of different fixation methods for acute syndesmosis injuries and offer strong evidence for the surgeon in the clinical practice of the treatment of acute syndesmosis injuries.