Intestinal failure in advanced malignancy is most commonly due to mechanical bowel obstruction. Palliative home parenteral nutrition (HPN) is an option for such patients to meet their nutritional needs. However, there are limited data on overall survival and predictive factors. This study aimed to evaluate the survival of patients receiving palliative HPN and the impact of patient factors on survival.

This is a single-centre retrospective observational study of patients referred for palliative HPN from 1 January 2020 to 19 November 2024 at the Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. Demographic, nutritional and medical data were analysed. Survival rates were compared using Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox regression.

84 patients were referred and 77 were discharged with HPN (median age was 60.9 years (IQR: 51.3–70.4), female 77%). 78% of the underlying primary malignancies were gynaecological and gastrointestinal. Malignant bowel obstruction was the main indication for HPN (86%). Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (PS) scores were ≤2 in 82% of patients and 75% had an estimated prognosis of >3 months. Median survival was 58 days (IQR 31–108) with a 3-month mortality of 69%. There was no statistical difference in survival by PS, estimated prognosis, underlying malignancy or modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS).

The overall survival in our study is modest. PS, prognosis, mGPS or tumour type did not show a significant impact on survival. This highlights the challenges in artificial nutrition and emphasises the role of a multidisciplinary team in the care of these patients.

Our study showed that the overall survival of patients on palliative HPN was modest.

There did not appear to be any significant difference in overall survival stratified by estimated prognosis, performance status, modified Glasgow Prognostic Score or tumour type.

Our study highlights the ongoing challenges in the field of artificial nutrition in palliative care. Predicting prognosis and survival remains complex, underscoring the importance of shared decision-making with patients and caregivers through a multidisciplinary team approach.

Many studies have shown that palliative HPN has the potential to improve nutritional status8 9and impact on quality of life (QoL),9,11performance status (PS)9and prolong survival.1012,14However, a 2018 Cochrane review concluded that due to the limited robust evidence, it is uncertain whether HPN improves QoL or survival in patients with MBO.15In addition, some studies have also shown a higher risk of parenteral nutrition (PN) related complications in patients with advanced malignancy.16Consequently, the decision for HPN in advanced cancer can be controversial and fraught with challenges, especially given the perceived burden and potential risks.

Survival in palliative HPN has been reported in several studies. A large multicentre study reported a 3-month survival rate of 50% among 414 patients.23This aligns with a 2015 review showing a 3-month survival rate of 45% and a median survival of 83 days.24However, a Cochrane review reported variable median survival periods from 15 to 155 days (range: 3–1278 days).15More recently, a study of 232 patients found a median overall survival of 150 days.25Overall, the evidence on HPN’s impact on survival in advanced malignancy is inconsistent, putting in question the true benefit and impact of HPN on survival.

We aimed to evaluate the overall survival of our patients on palliative HPN and examine the impact of various patient factors on survival.

This study included data from Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (CUH), a large tertiary teaching hospital and an integrated IF unit for the East of England with links to 17 local hospitals in the region. All adults aged 18 years and over, with chronic IF and active cancer, who were set up on HPN between 1 January 2020 and 19 November 2024 were included in this case series. The Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology reporting guideline was followed (online supplemental file).

The home parenteral support set-up process for palliative HPN patients at CUH involves a multidisciplinary team (MDT) discussion between the primary managing team and the feeding issues MDT (FIMDT) at CUH (comprising consultant gastroenterologist specialising in IF, consultant elderly care physician, palliative care consultant, dietitian, nutrition nurse specialist and speech and language therapist). Every case referred for consideration of palliative HPN is discussed at this weekly meeting, either in-person or virtually if the referral source is from a district hospital. Patients referred to the FIMDT are primarily inpatients at CUH or a regional district hospital and are under the care of other specialty teams, typically oncology or surgery. Several factors are discussed at the meeting, including clinical status, estimated prognosis, PS and biochemical indices, to ensure that the benefits outweigh the burdens of HPN support for the patient. Depending on various patient and logistic factors, some patients may be set up on HPN remotely at their local district hospitals with regular input from our IF team, instead of transferring to CUH.

Patient and medical characteristics: age on admission, sex, type of underlying malignancy, presence of metastases, presence of peritoneal disease, underlying cause of IF.

Nutritional factors: weight, body mass index (BMI), presence of oedema and ascites.

HPN discharge factors: date of decision for HPN set-up, estimated prognosis, ECOG PS, date of discharge on HPN, length of hospital stay, discharge destination, place of death and cause of death.

HPN factors: type of HPN regimen, type of central access, whether HPS had been weaned off due to re-establishment of oral intake.

Venting Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy (PEG) tube: Date of insertion and presence of any complications.

Survival was calculated from the date of discharge with HPN to death, date of when HPN stopped if prior to study end date or censor date (19 November 2024). Date of discharge with HPN was considered the starting point as the time out of hospital and at home is considered most important for a palliative patient with limited prognosis. Survival and mortality at 3 months were calculated.

Patient and medical characteristics were described using means (STD) for continuous variables, median (IQR) for non-parametric variables and frequencies (percentages) for categorical variables. Survival was examined with a Cox regression using a univariate approach to identify risk factors statistically significantly associated with survival. Survival was displayed using Kaplan-Meier curves for overall survival and survival by key factors (estimated prognosis, PS, presence of oedema and mGPS). Differences in survival by key factors were tested using Cox-regression analyses. All statistical analyses were conducted using STATA V.14 (StataCorp, Texas, USA).

Overall, there were 84 referrals for HPN consideration and 77 patients subsequently set up on HPN over the study period, with 53 patients set up as inpatients in CUH and 24 patients set up remotely as inpatients at their district hospitals. There were two patients who had two episodes of HPN. There has been a steady increase in HPN over the last 4 years with 12 patients in 2020 and 20 patients in 2024, respectively.

Characteristics of the patients are shown intable 1. The median age of the cohort was 60.9 years, with 77% being female. The primary underlying malignancy was gastrointestinal (47%), followed by gynaecological (31%), and the remaining being a mix of other cancers. 95% of patients had metastases and 80% with peritoneal disease. The main cause of IF was MBO (86%). Biochemistry on referral for HPN showed elevated serum CRP (median 21, IQR: 9–42) and hypoalbumineamia (median 26, IQR: 20–31). Urea, creatinine and liver function tests (ALP and ALT) were within normal range. As the most common indication for HPN was MBO, 58% of patients had a nasogastric tube for drainage and 10% had a venting PEG tube inserted (size: 24F), with 1 patient developing an infection at the gastrostomy site.

Values are median (IQR) and frequencies (%). Missing data are indicated by including the sample size of variables where the total is not n=77.

ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine transaminase; BMI, body mass index; CRP, C reactive protein; HPN, home parenteral nutrition; PEG, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy; PN, parenteral nutrition.

Patients’ weights were lower on initiation of PN (median 61 kg) compared with their baseline weight (median 69 kg), though BMI on initiation of PN was healthy (median 22.7kg/m2). Weight on discharge had increased with initiation of PN. Oedema was present in 24% of patients. Ascites was present in 52% of patients with 35% having moderate to severe ascites.

At the time of referral for HPN, 82% had a PS of ≤ 2 (table 2). The estimated prognosis provided by the main oncology team was predicted to be 3–6 months in majority of cases. Median length of stay from admission to discharge on HPN was 30 days (IQR: 25–45). The median number of days between decision to start the HPN set-up and discharge on HPN was 16 days (IQR: 13–26). The only complication that was observed during these admissions were catheter-related blood-stream infections in 10% of the cohort. The most common PN admixture on discharge were multichamber bags (MCB) (73%) and the most common central venous access device was a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) (95%).

Values are median (IQR) and frequencies (%). Missing data are indicated by including the sample size of variables where the total is not n=77.

Hybrid refers to a combination of MCB and compounded PN.

FIMDT, feeding issues multidisciplinary team; HPN, home PN; MCB, multichamber bags; PICC, peripherally inserted central catheter; PN, parenteral nutrition.

Overall, 68 patients died within the study period (table 3). Median survival was 58 days (figure 1a). Survival at 3 and 6 months was 31% and 10%, respectively. There was no significant difference in survival by key decision criteria for palliative HPN set-up such as underlying malignancy, estimated prognosis and PS (figure 1b–d). Overall survival by degree of ascites and mGPS also did not show any significant difference (figure 1e,f). 14% of patients weaned off PN prior to death. Disease progression was the cause of death in 17 patients (table 4). The main place of death was hospice or hospital. There was a lack of documented information on place of death and cause of death.

*Values are presented as median survival (IQR in parentheses) and *unadjusted Hazard ratios (95% CI in parentheses) with P-value for each key factor.

HPN, home parenteral nutrition; N/A, not available.

To our knowledge, this is one of the largest observational studies evaluating palliative HPN in the UK in the post-COVID-19 era. During the study period, the number of referrals for HPN consideration in advanced malignancy increased from 12 in 2020 to 20 in 2024. The main indications were MBO not amenable to surgical intervention, similar to previous studies and consistent with the latest BANS report where 69% of new HPN registrants with ‘gastrointestinal obstruction’ had an underlying malignancy.7There was a female predominance consistent with previous studies1and reflects the high rates of gynaecological malignancies at 31% in our cohort, similar to previously reported data.26Many studies have reported primary abdominal cancers to be the most common reason for requiring palliative HPN126,28and this is consistent in our study with nearly half of our patients with underlying gastrointestinal cancers.

The median overall survival in our study was modest at 58 days with a 3-month survival of 31%. This contrasts with a single-centre study in Poland that reported a higher median survival of 89 days and a 3-month and 6-month survival of 48% and 26%.28A UK multicentre study reported an overall survival of 150 days (126–232)25which would be at the higher range of previously reported data. Both studies looked purely at HPN use in the setting of MBO. Our study cohort includes all patients with chronic IF due to various reasons, not just MBO, thereby providing a more accurate representation of real-world practice. In addition, the latter study defined survival by using the date of admission as the starting point which in part could account for their higher median survival.25Our median survival of 58 days is comparable to a systematic review by Onget al, that evaluated survival in patients on PN with peritoneal carcinomatosis and reported a pool median survival of 63.8 days (95% CI: 52.8 to 74.8).14Our results also fall within the range reported in a Cochrane review15and a more recent systematic review.26Typically, it would take on average 14 days for a patient to be set up on HPN in our hospital. In our study, it took a median of 16 days (range 13–26 days) from the date of MDT decision to date of discharge with HPN. This is similar to a previous UK study which reported the same median time from referral to discharge of 16 days.29We used the date of discharge from hospital with HPN as the first point of measure for overall survival as this would be a true reflection of actual time spent at home and is what most studies have used. However, discharge date can be influenced by other factors that may delay discharge home, outside of the HPN process, which may have decreased our survival data. Most studies typically have not reported their median length of stay when HPN is set up. In our cohort, the median length of stay was 30 days with a range of 25–45 days thereby potentially affecting our overall survival. Some may argue that opting for HPN may reduce the valuable time patients can spend at home. However, an internal audit in our centre revealed that nearly half of the patients sampled were not ready for discharge even when HPN set-up was available, due to reasons such as ongoing in-patient chemotherapy or social issues. Also, the time from referral to discharge has reduced significantly in recent years,29making this treatment more justifiable for patients.

Many studies have tried to elicit factors that could impact on survival and help in clinical decision-making. Bozzettiet alreported tumour spread to be a significant prognostic variable with a 3-month survival of 56.9% in those without metastatic disease compared with 44.9% in those with metastatic disease.23Keaneet alalso showed a correlation between the presence of metastatic disease and lower overall survival, though it did not meet statistical significance.17In our study, 95% of our patients had metastatic disease, which could in part account for the modest overall survival rate. The BIFA 2020 position statement recommends selecting patients with low serum markers of inflammation (CRP <10 mg/L and albumin >32 dg/L).2In our study, the median CRP and serum albumin levels were 21 mg/L and 26 g/L, respectively. This finding may suggest that these patients were referred for HPN later in their disease progression, potentially accounting for our lower overall survival rate.

Predicting life expectancy in patients with advanced cancer is widely recognised as challenging and often inaccurate.30A systematic review of doctors’ survival predictions in patients with cancer demonstrated a tendency among physicians to overestimate survival. Furthermore, a recent study from seven studies concluded that oncologists may both overestimate and underestimate survival times.30 31Despite these clinical challenges, physicians continue to use cancer-related prognostic estimates as a guide for making clinical decisions regarding artificial nutrition. Our analysis found no significant difference in overall survival for prognosis estimates of <3 months, 3–6 months or >6 months. To our knowledge, no other study has examined differences in survival by estimated prognosis.

Our study provides more recent real-world data on overall survival of patients on palliative HPN, with no differences observed by prognostic factors. Our study has several limitations. First, estimated prognosis and ECOG PS score was not available for a small proportion of patients due to the lack of documentation in the clinical notes or when HPN set-ups were done remotely with district hospitals in our region. Second, no data on QoL were recorded as it is not currently part of clinical practice. We concur with other researchers that more research on QoL in palliative HPN is essential and will enhance our understanding of the risk–benefit balance. It would also be worthwhile to assess differences in QoL in patients with (out) a venting PEG. Finally, we acknowledge that our findings are based on a single-centre retrospective analysis. Further multicentre collaborations and prospective studies will be valuable in strengthening data in this area.

In summary, although several prognostic variables have been described in the literature, none were found to significantly impact survival in our study. This underscores the complexities involved in clinical decision-making and highlights the necessity for an MDT to discuss each patient on an individual basis. We acknowledge that decisions regarding the initiation of HPN in patients with palliative malignancy are complex and influenced not only by patient factors, but by factors such as country, clinician attitudes and local healthcare systems.

Dr Mohammed Tauseef Sharip assisted with part of the data collection.