Ultrafast electron microscopy aims for imaging transient
phenomena
occurring on nanoscale. One of its goals is to visualize localized
optical and plasmonic modes generated by coherent excitation in the
vicinity of various types of nanostructures. Such imaging capability
was enabled by photon-induced near-field optical microscopy, which
is based on spectral filtering of electrons inelastically scattered
due to the stimulated interaction with the near-field. Here, we report
on the development of ultrafast four-dimensional (4D) scanning transmission
electron microscopy, which allows us to image the transverse components
of the optical near-field while avoiding the need of electron spectral
filtering. We demonstrate that this method is capable of imaging the
integrated Lorentz force generated by optical near-fields of a tungsten
nanotip and the ponderomotive potential of an optical standing wave
with a spatial resolution of 21 nm.

One of the fundamental dynamical
processes occurring on subnanometer
spatial scales and femtosecond time scales is light-matter interaction.
When a material is illuminated by a light wave, the oscillatory motion
of electrons with respect to heavy static ions leads to formation
of oscillating dipoles which emit the electromagnetic field at the
frequency of the incident field. In homogeneous materials, this effect
gives rise to a refractive index because of the phase delay of the
emitted wave, whose interference with the incident wave slows down
the phase velocity of light. When the oscillating dipoles are excited
in a nanostructure with spatial dimensions smaller than the wavelength
of the excitation light field, the superposition of the dipole-like
radiation emitted by the nanostructure with the incident wave leads
to a local enhancement of the electric field amplitude of the field
oscillating at the optical frequency. Such local field enhancement
has many applications, for example, surpassing the resolution limit
in optical microscopy or enhancing the
nonlinear optical interactions driven in metamaterials or individual
nanophotonic systems.−The spatial and spectral distributions of the induced
electromagnetic near-fields determine the functionality of nanophotonic
devices. However, characterization of the near-field properties often
rely on numerical simulations, which typically represent approximate
solutions.

Optical near-fields can be experimentally visualized
on their natural
length and time scales using photon-induced near-field electron microscopy
(PINEM) utilizing the electrons inelastically scattered by the interaction
with the localized electromagnetic mode to form an image of the near-field
distribution (more precisely the distribution of the Lorentz force
integrated along the electron trajectory). Since its invention,−this technique has been applied for imaging biological structures,−plasmonic excitations−or optical near-fields of nanostructures.−The electron-photon coupling can be understood as a harmonic phase
modulation at the light frequency imprinted on the electron wave function. In the particle picture, the electron absorbs
or emits individual photons of the coherent excitation field in a
stimulated manner. Such interaction is prohibited in vacuum due to
different dispersion relations of electrons and photons preventing
to fulfill the energy and momentum conservation laws. When a photon
is spatially confined at a distance shorter than its wavelength, its
momentum becomes delocalized due to Heisenberg uncertainty principle
(the same applies for classical fields due to the Fourier-conjugate
relationship between spatial localization and wave vector spread)
and both the momentum and energy are conserved during inelastic scattering
of electrons. Because this process is stimulated, its probability
is many orders of magnitude larger than the probability of spontaneous
electron energy loss, making PINEM a more sensitive alternative to
imaging of the localized photon density of states based on electron
energy-loss spectroscopy.

Due to
a short interaction time of only few femtoseconds in the
case of nanostructures with subwavelength dimensions, the electron-photon
coupling is rather weak and ultrashort optical pulses with high field
amplitudes are required to excite the near-fields. Efficiency of coupling
between electrons and localized light modes can be enhanced in the
vicinity of periodic nanostructures,−in evanescent fields leaking
from a dielectric crystal,or from an optical
cavity.−Alternatively to optical near-fields, the electrons can inelastically
scatter of optical fields generated at thin membranes−or via the interaction with optical ponderomotive potential in vacuum.−The PINEM scheme has been modified by adding a second coherent optical
interaction allowing to resolve both the amplitude and phase of the
optical near-fields.−The instrumentation typically used for PINEM-type imaging involves
an ultrafast transmission electron microscope with an electron spectrometer
or energy filter. In this configuration, the technique is sensitive
only to the component of the electric field along the direction of
propagation of electrons.,Because the resulting
image does not contain direct information about the local electric
field but rather about the total electron momentum change corresponding
to the Lorentz force integrated over the interaction distance, it
is not possible to reconstruct the full three-dimensional (3D) vectorial
electromagnetic field from these images.

Here we propose and
demonstrate a novel approach as an alternative
to PINEM, enabling the visualization of the interaction between electrons
and optical fields in electron microscopes without the need for an
electron spectrometer. The method is based on ultrafast 4D scanning
transmission electron microscopy (U4DSTEM, experimental setup is shown
inFigurea, details
can be found inSupporting Information,
Experimental setup section), by which we monitor the deflection of
20 keV electrons due to the interaction with localized optical fields
or with ponderomotive potential of an optical standing wave as a function
of beam position in the sample plane. By processing the scattered
electron images obtained while scanning the electron beam across the
sample we obtain information about the strength and direction of the
Lorentz force acting on the electron during the interaction with the
optical fields.

Ultrafast 4D scanning transmission electron microscopy
(U4DSTEM).
(a) Layout of the U4DSTEM experimental setup. (b, c) Illustration
of electron phase-fronts iny–zplane in the
case of the interaction with (b) a localized optical near-field and
(c) the ponderomotive potential of an optical standing wave. (d) Gray
scale: scanning transmission electron image of the tungsten nanotip.
Color scale shows the measured electron scattering patterns in five
positions marked by green points labeled as (i)–(v). (e) Evolution
of the number of electrons elastically scattered by the interaction
with the optical near-field of a nanotip as a function of the mutual
time delay Δtbetween electron and light pulses.
Color scale shows the electron scattering patterns measured in time
delays of the electron pulse with respect to the laser pulse of Δt= −1,25 ps, −0,3 ps, 0 ps, 0,4 ps and 1,25
ps in order from left image to right.

whereĤint[r(t)]={p̂+eA[r(t),t]}2/(2m)is the interaction Hamiltonian of an electron
with chargeeand massminteracting
with the electromagnetic field with vector potentialA(r,t) in vacuum andr(t) is the unperturbed classical trajectory of the electron.
The coupling between an electron and the electromagnetic field is
described by two terms inĤint. The
PINEM-type interaction is described by a term linear in the field
strength ≈p0.A(r,t), wherep0= (0,0,pz) is the initial electron
momentum andA(r,t) is
the vector potential. The second term responsible for phase modulation
of the electron wave is the ponderomotive term ≈|A(r,t)|2, which becomes important
when the interaction occurs in vacuum. When we focus on the former
case of linear coupling, the scalar product between the initial electron
momentum and the vector potential suggests that only the longitudinal
momentum component of the electron is modulated. However, in the optical
near-field region, the amplitude of the vector potential changes rapidly
in the transverse direction in thex–yplane
leading to a transverse dependence of the interaction strength. As
a consequence, electron phase fronts become tilted with respect to
the planar phase fronts of the initial electron wave and the tilt
depends on the phase of the oscillating vector potential, which the
electron experiences (seeFigureb). Alternatively, the electron phase fronts may be
tilted due to ponderomotive interaction with a spatially modulated
optical fields in vacuum (seeFigurec). The tilted electron waves are deflected in the
transverse plane and form a scattered electron image at the detector.

We note that there is one significant difference between the final
transverse and longitudinal electron momentum distributions after
the interaction with the optical fields. When we consider a strongly
localized optical near-field, the electron wave feels periodic oscillations
of the vector potential when traveling through. The periodicity of
the field in the time domain translates to the periodic phase modulation
of the electron wave function in the direction of electron propagation
when expressed in the electron’s rest framez′= z–vt. It is this periodicity in space and time that leads to the discrete
peaks in the longitudinal electron momentum and its kinetic energy
spectra. When such periodicity is missing in the transverse spatial
direction, no separated peaks are expected in the electron transverse
momentum spectra. The coherent peaks are only observed in the case
of electrons diffracting on a periodic pattern. We come to the same conclusion when considering the particle
picture of the interaction. When photons are localized in the transverse
direction at a much smaller spatial scale than the wavelength of the
exciting light, they become strongly delocalized in the transverse
momentum space. The localization of the field in thez-direction in the laboratory frame is removed in the electron’s
rest frame allowing the appearance of the discrete peaks in the energy
and longitudinal momentum spectra.

whereFj=e[E+ (v×B)]jdenotes thej-th component of the Lorentz force with the electric and magnetic
fieldsE= R­{Ẽ(r,ω)g(t– Δt)­eiωt+iφ0} andB= R­{B̃(r,ω)g(t– Δt)­eiωt+iφ0}, respectively. Here Δtrepresents the electron arrival time andg(t– Δt) and φ0are the envelope and phase of the optical fields, respectively.
The spatial distributions of the electromagnetic fieldsẼ(r,ω) andB̃(r,ω) at frequency ω are obtained from a numerical solution
of Maxwell′s equations (for details seeSupporting Information, section Numerical simulations). The
electric and magnetic fields are in the case of quasimonochromatic
pulses related to the vector potential viaE= −∂A/∂t(we assume constant electrostatic
potential corresponding to zero electrostatic field) andB= ∇ ×A. When describing the interaction
of electrons with the ponderomotive potential in vacuum, the Lorentz
force can be integrated over the optical cycle to give the nonrelativistic
ponderomotive forceFj= −e2/(4mω2)∇j⟨|E|2⟩.

U4DSTEM principle is demonstrated on two model examples. In the first
example, we image the transverse component of the optical near-field
generated by coherent excitation on the surface of a tungsten nanotip (for details on preparation of the nanotips
seeSupporting Information, section Preparation
of nanotips). The layout of the experimental setup is shown inFigurea. A pulsed laser
beam with a wavelength of 1030 nm and a pulse duration of 250 fs is
incident to the nanotip from the direction perpendicular to the plane
defined by the tip symmetry axis and the propagation direction of
the electron beam. The excitation light is linearly polarized along
the nanotip symmetry axis. The pulsed electron beam with a kinetic
energy of 20 keV, repetition rate of 500 kHz and a pulse duration
of 500 fs, is focused on the nanotip situated at a working distance
of the electron microscope of 11.5 mm. To generate an almost collimated
electron beam with a current sufficient for U4DSTEM imaging, we use
the highest probe current setting of the electron microscope. The
beam divergence is reduced by introducing an objective lens aperture
with a diameter of 64 μm. The resulting electron beam has a
spot size in focus of 21 nm and a divergence angle of 1.3 mrad.

The strength of the transverse component of the Lorentz force acting
on the electrons is measured as a function of the position of the
electron beam in the sample plane by detecting the scattered electron
images. InFigured we show the bright-field scanning transmission electron microscopy
(STEM) image of the nanotip apex with five selected positions of the
electron beam labeled (i)–(v). The images detected by the pixel
detector in each of these positions are shown in the upper part ofFigured. We observe that
the electrons are scattered in the transverse direction by the interaction
with the optical near-field. The scattered images carry information
about the strength and the direction of the Lorenz force (the main
axis of the ellipse rotates according to the preferential polarization
of the electric component of the near-field).

To rule out a
significant contribution from elastic electron scattering
caused directly by the nanotip surface, we measure the electron scattering
patterns as a function of the time delay Δtbetween the electron and laser pulses with the electron beam position
fixed in the spot (iii). The measured population of scattered electrons
is shown inFiguree as a function of Δt(black curve) along
with the scattered electron images in five selected time delays (color
scale). The data clearly show that electron deflection is observed
only when the two pulses arrive at the nanotip at the same time, confirming
that elastic electron scattering originates from the interaction with
the optical near-field instead of the interaction with the nanotip
itself.

The transverse components of the near-field are obtained
by processing
the U4DSTEM data measured at the optimal time overlap between the
electron and light pulses. Because the electrons arrive to the sample
at different times within the pulse envelope, they experience different
amplitude and phase of the oscillating near-field, which is generated
by a femtosecond optical pulse. The maximum transverse momentum change
of the electrons corresponding to the amplitude of the Lorentz force
can be obtained by analyzing the maximum electron deflection in the
particular beam position in the sample plane. However, because of
the small amount of electrons detected per pixel, the image processing
by fitting the streaked electron images exhibits high noise.

For this reason, we apply an alternative data processing method
in which we first numerically determine the function describing the
relation between the maximum of the Lorentz force and the total number
of electrons deflected out of the detector region illuminated by the
undeflected electron beam. The maximum change in transverse momentum
of the electrons Δp⊥in each
position on the sample is then determined purely by counting the deflected
electrons. The azimuthal angle α of the maximum of the Lorentz
force acting on the electrons in thex–yplane
is obtained by fitting each image of the scattered electrons by a
two-dimensional (2D) Gaussian function and determining the direction
of its main axis. Thexandycomponents
of Δp⊥are then Δpx= Δp⊥cos­(α) and Δpy= Δp⊥sin­(α) (details of data processing are described inSupporting Information, section Data acquisition
and processing). The measured spatial maps of Δpxand Δpyare shown inFigurea,b compared to the numerical simulations shown inFigurec,d. The amplitude
of the measured transverse momentum change of the electrons allows
us to estimate the maximum electric field amplitude at the tip surface
to beEy= 3.1 ± 0.3 GV/m. The uncertainty
was estimated based on the fact that we only exactly know the shape
of thex–yprojection of the tip while the
electron deflection is influenced by the extension of the field inzdirection see (Supporting Information, section Numerical simulations andFigure S5) for more details about the assumed shape of the nanotip. The amplitude
of the electric field of the excitation pulse in the experiments isE0= 0.7 ± 0.05 GV/m giving the field enhancement
factor of ξexp= 4.4 ± 0.5, which agrees well with the value of ξsim= 4.55 obtained using numerical simulations (for details seeSupporting Information, section Numerical simulations).
InFiguree we compare
the measured (black curve) and numerically calculated (red curve)
spatial decay of the transverse momentum change of the electrons Δpyobtained by integrating the
data in the region ofFigurea,b labeled by the dashed lines.

Imaging of the transverse
component of Lorentz force of optical
near-field generated on the surface of a tungsten nanotip by coherent
optical excitation. (a) Maximum of the measuredy-component of the transverse momentum change of the electrons Δpyand (c) itsx-component Δpxcompared to the numerical results shown in (b, d). (e) Comparison
of the measured (black curve) and the calculated (red curve) spatial
profiles of Δpyobtained by integrating the data in the region marked by dashed
lines in (a, b). (f) Maximum of the total transverse momentum change
of the electrons Δp⊥induced
by the near-field of a blunter tip with larger radius of curvatureof the apex. Panels (a–e) use the same scale.

Bright-field STEM images of the nanotip measured
with the pulsed
electron beam are used to determine the spatial resolution of the
method, which is 21 nm in this experiment. We note that the finite
beam width causes the observed shift of the near-field maxima shown
inFiguree with respect
to the tip surface (x= 0 nm) because the signal
corresponds to the convolution of a sharply decaying function with
zero values inside the tip, which describes the near-field amplitude,
with the transverse spatial distribution of the electron beam. InFiguref we show an image
of the amplitude of the integrated transverse optical near-field by
measuring the maximum of the total transverse momentum change of the
electrons Δp⊥induced by
the near-field of a blunter tip with a larger radius of curvature
of the apex. From the smaller value of the observed momentum change
close to the tip apex and from the fact that the interaction time
increases in the case of the blunter tip, we can deduce that the field
enhancement is smaller compared to the case shown inFigurea. We also examined the role
of the polarization state of the excitation light. Data measured with
the polarization along the propagation direction of the electron beam
(perpendicular to the tip axis) yielded suppressed transverse scattering
of the electrons (seeFigure S1in Supporting
Information, section Data acquisition and processing).

where we assume a slowly varying envelope
approximation |∇G­(r,t)|≪|kxG(r,t)|. The U4DSTEM image of the optical standing
wave is shown inFigurea,b, where we plot the maximum electron momentum change Δpxas a function of the electron
beam position in the sample plane. Due to the high gradient of the
optical intensity inx-direction, the electrons are
deflected depending on their position with respect to the standing
wave. From the maximum measured momentum change Δpxcorresponding to the trajectories of
electrons deflected by the largest angles we estimate the peak intensity
of the optical standing wave to be 6.52TW·cm–2(seeSupporting Information, section
Data processingimaging of the optical standing wave for details).
The optical standing wave was imaged by scanning the focused electron
beam with its focus located in the plane of the standing wave. Since
the dimensions of the electron beam focus are much smaller than the
period of the standing wave, the electron beam experiences no spatial
periodic phase modulation which would lead to Kapitza-Dirac type scattering or phase shifts measured in previous works. In contrast, we observe position dependent deflection
corresponding to the local ponderomotive force.

Imaging of ponderomotive
potential of an optical standing wave
in vacuum. (a) Color scale shows the maximum electron momentum change
Δpxas a function
of the electron beam position in the sample plane. (b) Detail of the
image shown ina. Both panels use the same color scale.

In principle, the method is also suitable
for imaging continuous
evanescent fields of resonant structures where absorption/emission
of several hundreds of photons by a single electron has been demonstrated
in classical PINEM experiments. The spatial
resolution of U4DSTEM is in our case limited by the probe size generated
by the objective lens in a working distance of approximately 15 mm.
To obtain sufficient signal/noise for determination of the integrated
Lorentz force we need to detect approximately 50–100 electrons
per pixel in the sample plane. To reach this value at the repetition
rate of our experiment of 500 kHz we needed to use the objective lens
aperture with the size of 64 um, which in combination with the electron
lens aberration limits the spatial resolution. The resolution may
be improved in the future by implementing higher repetition rates
allowing to generate a highly collimated pulsed electron beam less
affected by the aberrations of the objective lens, with a smaller
spot size while keeping the average electron current at the same level.

In general case the sensitivity of U4DSTEM imaging is limited by
the minimum electron beam deflection angle, which can be resolved,
unless other case specific data processing methods are suitable (seeSupporting Information, section Data processingimaging
of the optical standing wave for details). For our experimental conditions,
this limit is posed by the angular size of individual detector pixels,
which is 0.33 mrad. The corresponding minimum electric field amplitude
that can be detected on the tip surface isE≈
1 GV/m. We note that this number can be significantly smaller for
phase-matched structures extended in the electron propagation direction,
where the coupling between electrons and photons is strongly enhanced.
The detection sensitivity may be further influenced by elastic electron
scattering from the sample itself and by the background signal coming
from the excitation light scattered to the detector. Although hybrid
pixel detectors are not sensitive to individual low-energy photons,
when the nanostructure is excited by a femtosecond optical pulse with
high peak intensity, many scattered photons can be incident on each
pixel within a detection time window of a few nanoseconds. The background
optical signal can be avoided by deflecting the electrons by a weak
electric or magnetic field and blocking the photons incident on the
detector. Alternatively, the optical background can be fully mitigated
by using infrared light with photon energy below the band gap of silicon,
which forms the active layer of hybrid-pixel detectors.

In conclusion,
the U4DSTEM represents an alternative technique
to PINEM, which allows us to image the transverse component of the
integrated Lorentz force of the optical near-field excited in the
vicinity of a metallic nanotip by coherent optical radiation and the
ponderomotive potential of an optical standing wave. U4DSTEM can be
utilized to image the local density of optical modes of various types
of nanophotonic and plasmonic structures, metamaterials or photonic
crystals. Combined with the possibility of tuning the frequency of
coherent optical excitation, this technique may provide spectral resolution
similar to electron energy gain spectroscopy. It offers two significant advantages compared to PINEM. First, it
does not require an electron spectrometer, which together with a suitable
electron detector represents significant costs in ultrafast electron
microscope setup. Second, the U4DSTEM technique can be implemented
in low-energy scanning electron microscopes, making it more accessible
to users.

The authors acknowledge funding from the Czech Science Foundation
(project 22-13001K), Charles University (SVV-2023-260720, PRIMUS/19/SCI/05,
GAUK 90424) and the European Union (ERC, eWaveShaper, 101039339).
Views and opinions expressed are, however, those of the author(s)
only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or
the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European
Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.
This work was supported by TERAFIT project No. CZ.02.01.01/00/22\_008/0004594
funded by OP JAK, call Excellent Research. All of the data that support
the plots and the other findings of this study are publicly available
at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.14824588.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsphotonics.5c00864.

M.K. conceived
the study. P.K., M.K., K.M., and M.C.Ch.M. performed the experiments
and analyzed the data. A.K. and D.B. prepared the nanotips. P.K. and
N.L.S. performed the numerical simulations. P.K. and M.K. wrote the
manuscript with the contribution from all coauthors.

The work reported in
this manuscript was submitted to the arXiv preprint server previous
to publication in this journal; the associated paper can be found
as follows: Koutenský, P.; Laštovičková
Streshkova, N.; Moriová, K.; Chirita Mihaila, M. C.; Burda,
D.; Knápek, A.; Kozák, M. Ultrafast 4D scanning transmission
electron microscopy for imaging of localized optical fields. 2025,
arXiv:2502.07338. arXiv.org e-Print archive.https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07338(accessed Feb 11th, 2025).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.