The pleiotropic drug resistance (PDR) proteins, which are full-sized ABCG transporters belonging to the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family, play an indispensable role in regulating various physiological and developmental processes of plants. However, thePDRtransporters and their functional roles inArtemisia argyi, a significant traditional medicinal plant in Asia, remain poorly understood.

In this study, a total of 68PDRgenes, distributed across 17 chromosomes, were identified in the genome ofArtemisia argyiand classified into five distinct subgroups based on phylogenetic analysis and domain types. The evolutionary characteristics investigation of theAarPDRgene family demonstrated that the 9AarPDRgenes had a high conservation between the genomes ofArtemisia argyiand Arabidopsis during the evolution of dicots. Cis-element analysis revealed thatAarPDRsmight respond to diverse environmental stresses and multiple plant hormones. Furthermore, the expression analysis in different tissues and developmental stages of leaves indicated that variousAarPDRsdisplayed distinct expression profiles within or among subfamilies, and theAarPDRsexpression could be easily induced by the light conditions. Besides, theAarPDRfamily proteins had a potential function in metabolite transportation.

TheAarPDRswere characterized by integrating genome analysis, transcriptome, and metabolite profiling. The results can provide useful clues for future studies aimed at the functional characterization ofAarPDRgenes.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12870-025-07144-y.

ATP-Binding Cassette (ABC) Transporters represent a highly conserved and functionally significant superfamily of membrane transport proteins that play an indispensable role in the transmembrane transport of diverse molecular substrates, encompassing toxic xenobiotics, endogenous hormones, and a wide spectrum of structurally and functionally specialized metabolites [1]. ABC transporters are ubiquitously present in all domains of life, ranging from prokaryotes to eukaryotes [2]. Additionally, compared to other organisms, terrestrial plants have a significantly higher number of ABC transporter genes [3]. Depending on the number of two core function domains (the nucleotide-binding domains, NBDs, and transmembrane domains, TMDs) and structural differences, ABC proteins are subdivided into full-size, half-size, and soluble transporters. The ordering of these two fundamental domains can be either reversed (the NBD comes before the TMD) or forward (the TMD comes before the NBD). Many half-size ABC transporters produce homo- or heterodimeric complexes to perform their functional roles [4]. The NBD domains are responsible for ATP binding and hydrolysis, thereby providing the driving force for transport. These domains comprise several highly conserved motifs, including the Walker A and B motifs, the ABC signature motif, as well as the H-loop and Q-loop. The TMDs, consisting of 5–6 α-helices, are involved in substrate recognition and solute movement [5]. According to the Human Genome Organization (HUGO) designation, but including subfamily (I) absent from most animal genomes, nine subfamilies of ABC transporters have been reported in the harbor of plants [6]. In particular, the ABCG subfamily is significantly enlarged in plants. For instance, the Arabidopsis genome contained 46 ABCG genes, and the rice (Oryza sativa) harbored 56 such genes [7].

Compared to other subfamilies, the ABCG subfamily of either the half-size or full-size proteins presents the reverse arrangement of domains (NBD-TMD-type) [8]. In plants, the full- and half-sized transporters in the ABCG subfamily are referred to as the pleiotropic drug resistance (PDR) and white-brown complex (WBC), respectively. Additionally, the full-sizePDRfamily is only found in fungi and plants. Sequence comparison and phylogenetic analysis indicated that thePDRsoriginated from a duplication of a half-size WBC and before the separation of fungi and plants [9]. The formation of a functional unit for diverse molecular transport across membranes appears to require two TMDs and two NBDs [10]. Experimental evidence gathered has demonstrated that the ABCG proteins exhibit enormous functional variety. The ABCGs are known to transport substrates, typically across the plasma membrane, such as secondary metabolites, plant hormones, and surface lipids [11]. Recent findings suggested that the plant ABCGs could secrete secondary metabolites to protect them from pathogens, and coevolved with the pathogen ABCGs [1]. It is acknowledged that the ABCGs are crucial for both the growth of plants and their interactions with the environment. SpTUR2 is the first plant PDR discovered from theSpirodella polyrhiza, which may play a role in the response to abiotic stress and promote tolerance to sclareol when expressed in Arabidopsis thaliana [12].

Plant-produced secondary metabolites (SMs) serve as both defense-related compounds and bioactive agents with potential applications for enhancing human health [13]. Numerous ABCG transporters have been demonstrated to play a pivotal role in the transport of SMs. For example, the tobacco (Nicotiana plumbaginifolia)NpPDR1/NpABC1protein belongs to the ABCG transporter subfamily and exhibits preferential expression in leaf epidermal cells and trichomes. It is proposed to be involved in the transport of the diterpene sclareol to the leaf surface [14]. In addition, it has been proven that theAaPDR3, which is identified fromArtemisia annua, is a trichome-specificPDRtransporter positioned in the plasma membrane, contributing to the sesquiterpene β-caryophyllene transportation [15]. The transporterCrTPT2, a full-sizeABCGfamily member ofCatharanthus roseus, has been identified as an efflux transporter of the catharanthine [16].PDR-type transporters mediate the release of antimicrobial chemicals, which act as a weapon to protect plants from infections. Therefore, thePDRslinked with pathogen resistance are useful genetic tools for producing crops that are resistant to pathogens. In Arabidopsis, the 15 full-size type transporterABCG29-40are also namedPDR1-12, and these transporters function extend far beyond detoxification and pathogen defense. For instance,ABCG29/PDR1is involved in the exportation of monolignols, which are necessary for lignin biosynthesis [17]. TransporterABCG32/PDR4contributes to the cuticle formation in leaves and flowers [18]. It has also been suggested that theAtABCG32homologsOsABCG31in rice andHvABCG31in barley also play a role in cuticle deposition [19].AtABCG37/AtPDR9and its homologAtABCG36/AtPDR8are involved in Auxin homeostasis [20,21]. Similarly, it is proposed thatABCG40/PDR12is a high-affinity abscisic acid (ABA) transporter, as demonstrated by the transport assay in a heterologous system [22]. Furthermore, certain ABCG transporter genes are critically involved in heavy metal detoxification mechanisms, thereby conferring tolerance to toxic metals. For instance,AtPDR8functions as a cadmium (Cd) efflux pump, whileAtPDR12mediates lead (Pb) efflux [23,24]. Despite increasing evidence demonstrating the crucial roles ofPDRtransporters in the transport of potential substrates in plants, direct transport assays are still lacking due to challenges with functional protein expression in heterologous cell systems, as well as the complex nature of certain substrates.

The importance of ABCG gene functions in plant development, responses to abiotic/biotic stress, or detoxification capabilities is becoming evident, and genetically manipulating these genes may allow researchers to enhance plant fitness and quality.Artemisia ArgyiLevl. et Vant. (A. argyi) is a perennial herb or slightly semi-shrublelike plant of the Artemisia genus, which has a long medicinal history in China. It is extremely necessary to investigate the functional effect of the ABCG genes ofA. argyifor the molecular breeding and metabolic engineering of high-qualityA. argyi. Nevertheless, as one of the most important traditional Chinese medicines, there is currently no information available regarding the ABCG genes ofA. argyi. In this work, thePDRgenes ofA. argyiwere identified by leveraging their complete genomic data to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the full-size ABCG (PDR) family inA. argyi. Meanwhile, the related physical and chemical information, phylogenetic relationships, motif composition, gene structures, chromosome distributions, collinearity analysis, and expression patterns were systematically analyzed. This study aims to lay a solid foundation for subsequent investigations into the functional roles of theAarPDRgene family inA. argyi.

Artemisia argyiplants employed in this study were provided by Hubei Duanyang Qiai Technology Co., Ltd., located in the authentic production area ofargyi(Qichun County, Hubei Province, China). Then, the fresh rhizomes were transplanted into the Medicinal Plant Garden of the Jiangxi University of Chinese Medicine to produce seedlings ofA. argyi.

The protein sequences ofPDRinA.thalianawere downloaded from the TAIR (https://www.arabidopsis.org/index.jsp). The homologousA. argyi PDRsequences were blasted based on theA. argyireference genome (PRJCA010808) in the National Genomics Data Center (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn), using local BLAST (bit score ≥ 1400%, identity ≥ 45%, and E-value ≤ 0.1). All obtained sequences ofAarPDRgenes were verified by the SMART database (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/) [25], NCBI CDD [26], and the PFAM [27]. The amino acid sequences matched thePLN03140superfamily (ABC transporter G family member) and had the completePDRdomain organization. The subcellular location was predicted by the online program (https://mu2py.biocomp.unibo.it/mempype/default/). Additionally, the molecular weights (MW), coding sequence lengths, and isoelectric point (pI) were computed through ExPASy (http://www.expasy.ch/tools/pi_tool.html).

Based on the alignments, a phylogenetic tree of 89PDRamino acid sequences fromA.thaliana,A. argyi,Nicotiana plumbaginifolia,Nicotiana tabacum,Artemisia annua, andPetunia hybridawas constructed using MEGA 7.0 via the Neighbor-Joining (NJ) method [28], and a bootstrap test with 1000 replicates.

To identify conserved motifs ofPDRproteins, the MEME online program (https://meme-suite.org/meme/) was employed, and the maximum number of motifs was set to 20. These results were displayed in MEME.xml format through TBtools software. The exon-intron structures ofAarPDRgenes were analyzed using the Gene Structure Display Server online program (GSDS:http://gsds.cbi.pku.edu.ch).

The chromosomal distribution information ofAarPDRgenes was visualized with the GFF file of theA. argyigenome from the National Genomics Data Center database using TBtools. The synteny analysis within the genome and collinear relationships between different species were performed using MCScanX software, and diagrams were generated using TBtools software. The upstream sequences (2000 bp) of the initiation codon (ATG) of eachAarPDRgene were obtained from theA. argyigenomic sequence, which were subsequently submitted to the Plant CARE database forcis-element distributions (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/plantcare/html/), and then visualized through TBtools.

Seedlings ofA. argyiwere transplanted to the field of the Medicinal Plant Garden at Jiangxi University of Chinese Medicine in November of the previous year, and only ambient light was used as a light source. Samples from young leaves were collected in April between 9 a.m. and 11 a.m. on sunny and overcast days, and the fresh samples were rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were stored at − 80℃ until used for RNA sequencing. Total RNA was extracted using the RNAprep pure plant kit (TIANGEN) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA concentration and integrity were analyzed using Qubit fluorescence quantifier (Made in Singapore) and Qsep400 high-throughput biofragment analyzer (Bioptic Inc., Taiwan, China), and then the effective concentration of the library was accurately quantified using Q-PCR. After that, the different libraries were sequenced in the Illumina Novaseq 6000 System (Metware Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China). The sequencing quality of transcriptomic data were given in TableS2−1 and Fig.S1. Low-quality reads and adapters were filtered using fastp. Differential gene expression analysis ofAarPDRswas conducted using the DESeq2 R package, and P-values were corrected based on Benjamini & Hochberg correction. Corrected P-values and log2 fold change were used as thresholds for significant differential expression.

The RNA-seq data of 4 differentA. argyitissues (root, flower, stem, leaf) were obtained from the project ID of the PRJCA010808 in the National Genomics Data Center. The RNA-seq dataset for the different developmental stages of leaves inA. argyifrom the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) with the accession number PRJNA804653, and the transcriptome data of MeJA treatment were downloaded from SRA repositories with accession number PRJNA785536. Then, differential expression analysis ofAarPDRswas conducted by the DSEeq2 R package.

The RNA extraction process was performed as described above to obtain the total RNA ofA. argyi. The first-strand cDNA samples were synthesized using the reverse transcriptase Kit (Takara, China). The AarActin was used as the reference gene, and the gene-specific primers utilized in this study are listed in TableS1−1. The qRT-PCR was performed on a CFX96 (Bio-Rad) using the SYBR qPCR kit (Genstar, Beijing, China). The qRT-PCR reaction was implemented with three technical replicates for each sample. The parameters were set as follows: 95℃ for 3 min, 40 cycles at 95℃ for 10 s, 30 s at 60℃, and elongation for 20 s at 72℃. To test the suitability of selected primers, melt curve analyses were performed. The relative expression values were calculated using the 2−ΔΔCtmethod.

Samples from young leaves were collected in April between 9 a.m. and 11 a.m. on sunny and overcast days (S/O group). The pulverized samples (500 mg) taken from the S/O group were weighed and sequentially transferred to a 20 mL head-space vial (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA) for HS-SPME-GC-MS. The identification and quantification of the 1,8-Cineole was performed using an Agilent Model 8890 GC and a 7000D mass spectrometer (Agilent), equipped with a capillary column of 30 m×0.25 mm×0.25 μm DB-5MS (5% phenyl-polymethylsiloxane). The carrier gas was helium, and the injector temperature was 250℃. The chromatographic temperature was programmed from 40 °C (for 3.5 min), elevating at 10 °C/min to 100 °C, at 7 °C/min to 180 °C, at 25 °C/min to 280 °C, hold for 5 min. The electron impact (EI) ionization mode under 70 eV was used to record the mass spectra. The temperatures of quadrupole mass detector, ion source, and transfer line were intended to be at 150, 230, and 280 °C, respectively. The ion monitoring (SIM) mode was employed as the scanning mode of the MS, and this was aimed at identifying and quantifying the analytes. The above-mentioned methods were utilized as per the previously reported work [29]. And the comparison with the library was supported by Wuhan Metware Biotechnology Co., Ltd.

A total of 68 PDR proteins with an NBD-TMD-NBD-TMD arrangement of domains were recognized in theA. argyigenome as belonging to the ABCG family. (Table1). Based on the domain organization, theAarPDRproteins were classified as full-size transporters. The main characteristics ofAarPDRgenes, including gene ID, amino acid size, molecular weights (MW), isoelectric points (pI), predicted topology, and predicted sub-cellular location, are listed in Table1. The amino acid size spans from 1036 to 1788, and the corresponding MW extends from 117.3 to 201 kDa. The isoelectric point of theAarPDRsfamily ranged from 6.03 to 8.77. Based on the predicted subcellular localization data, all identifiedAarPDRswere localized to the plasma membrane.

NBDnucleotide binding domain,TMDtransmembrane domain.

Here, we focused on the ABCG transporters involved in potential terpenoid transportation. We selected previously characterized ABCG transporters from Solanaceae, Asteraceae and Lemnoideae includedNicotiana plumbaginifolia(NpABC1/PDR1),Nicotiana tabacum(NtABCG1/NtPDR1),Petunia hybrida(PhPDR2,PhPDR1),Artemisia annua(AaABCG3/AaPDR3),Spirodela polyrrhiza(SpTUR2), along withArabidopsis thaliana(AtPDR1-AtPDR15) (Table S1−2). To analyze the evolutionary relationship ofAarPDRfamily members, a phylogenetic tree was built with the neighbor-joining algorithm. A total of89 PDR proteins ofA.thaliana,A. argyi,Nicotiana plumbaginifolia,Nicotiana tabacum,Artemisia annua, andPetunia hybridawere identified and used in the study. In this work, according to the phylogenetic analysis,68 AarPDRswere also mainly divided into five groups (Fig.1). Of these, group I contained 16AarPDRs, which had clear orthologous relationships with the described terpenoid transporter. It can be suggested that the phylogenetic distribution of theAarPDRsfamily is relatively conserved and might be associated with high similarity in function to specialized metabolite transportation.

To reveal the internal relationship of theAarPDRgene family, conserved motifs were predicted using MEME (Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation) (Fig.2A). The identified 20 conserved motifs’ sequence and length details are shown in Table S1−3. These results showed that mostAarPDRproteins contained all 20 motifs for each group, and the motifs are mainly arranged in the same order. However, the exon-intron structures ofAarPDRgenes exhibit certain differences (Fig. S3). In conclusion, the conserved motif compositions ofPDRgenes within the same group provide strong support for the phylogenetic analysis based on the subgroup classifications. A comparison of the amino acid sequences of theAarPDRproteins revealed that 5 subgroups ofAaPDRproteins shared a highly conservedPDRdomain, which included the Walker A and B sequences, the ABC signature, and fourPDRsignature regions (Fig.2B). The conservation of regions among subgroups proved the functional similarity.

The chromosomal distribution of allAarPDRgenes across the genome was analyzed, which showed that 68AarPDRgenes were unevenly dispersed over 17 chromosomes ofA. argyi, excepting chromosome 14 with noAarPDRgene distribution (Fig.3A). The bulk of theAarPDRgenes were found on chromosome 11 with 17AarPDRgenes, followed by chromosome 3 with 9AarPDRgenes. There were fiveAarPDRgenes scattered throughout chromosomes 2 and 5, and threeAarPDRgenes each located on chromosomes 4, 7, 8, 9, and 15, respectively. In addition, twoAarPDRgenes were each located on chromosomes 6, 10, and 17, respectively, while there was only a singleAarPDRgene each located on chromosomes 1, 12, 13, and 16, respectively.

The duplication events of theAarPDRgene in theA. argyigenome were observed due to the great influence of gene duplication on the emergence of new functionalities and gene families. Among them, 22 gene pairs were discovered to be duplicated as observed in Fig.3B. Moreover, the synteny ofPDRgene pairs between theA. argyigenome and theA.thalianagenome was constructed. Accordingly, 9AarPDRgenes exhibited syntenic relationship with the 5 homologous genes inA.thaliana(Fig.4and Table S1−4), implying that these genes were highly conserved during the evolution of dicots.

To explore the probable function and regulatory mechanisms ofAarPDRgenes, cis-elements (2000 bp upstream region from ATG) were investigated using Plant-CARE (Fig.5and TableS1−5). It was found that cis-elements in the promoter regions ofAarPDRgenes were varied, which might be related to the gene complex functions. ManyAarPDRgenes own hormone-responsive elements (53 genes-ABA, 32 genes-IAA, 38 genes-GA, 45 genes-MeJA, and 17 genes-SA), light-responsive elements (39 genes), circadian control elements (14 genes), and low-temperature responsive elements (31genes). Furthermore, 26 genes were identified to harbor defense- and stress-responsive regulatory elements, while 35 genes were found to possess drought-inducibility-related cis-elements. Overall, the analysis of the cis-elements revealed that the majority of theAarPDRgenes might be regulated via various environmental stresses and multiple plant hormones.

Based on the cis-element analysis ofAarPDRspromoters, the expression level ofAarPDRgenes may be influenced by illumination. To learn more about the potential functions ofAarPDRsin light response, the transcriptomic data under overcast and sunny conditions ofA. argyileaf were analyzed (Fig.6). Most of theAarPDRgenes showed an up-regulation trend under overcast conditions (low photosynthesis), while the expression ofAarPDRsin subfamily-V was not significantly regulated. Besides, some genes were down-regulated, such as Aarg02G019970 (subfamily-I), Aarg02G005380 (subfamily-III), Aarg11G024510 (subfamily-IV), Aarg03G021600 (subfamily-IV), Aarg04G023580 (subfamily-IV). In short, these results demonstrated that theAarPDRsin different subfamilies might be involved in the response to photosynthesis inA. argyi.

12 representativesAarPDRsfrom the same leaf samples under sunny and overcast conditions were explored using qRT-PCR to further verify the expression profiles of theAarPDRsgenes in response to environmental conditions (Fig.7). The expression of these genes was essentially consistent with the transcriptome data. The results indicated that Aarg05G023250, Aarg02G019970, Aarg03G021600, and Aarg11G024510 were significantly up-regulated under sunny conditions compared with overcast conditions. Whereas under sunny conditions, the majority ofAarPDRswere significantly down-regulated. Based on these findings, the potential function ofAarPDRgenes may be inferred under different photosynthetic conditions.

In order to explore the possible functions of theAarPDRs, the RNA-seq data available on the website were used to present the tissue-specific expression of the 68AarPDRgenes (Fig.8A, B). We analyzed the PDR family genes in four different tissues (root, flower, stem, leaf) and four developmental stages of leaves (leaf buds, young leaves, mature leaves, old leaves).AarPDRgenes may have functions in particular tissues or developmental stages, as indicated by the preferential expression of the majority of these genes in particular tissues. TheAarPDRswere classified into five groups (group I, II, III, IV, V), and the genes within the same groups may present different expression patterns. TheAarPDRsin different groups exhibited distinct temporal and spatial expression profiles. TheAarPDRsin cluster I showed high expression in root and flower tissues.AarPDRsin cluster II were preferentially expressed in the root and stem. The majority ofAarPDRsin cluster III seemed to show higher expression profiles in the leaf.AarPDRsin cluster IV were preferentially expressed in root and flower.AarPDRsin cluster V showed preferential expression in the stem and leaf. Furthermore, most of the subfamily gene members showed leaf developmental stage-specific expression profiles. For instance, the majority ofAarPDRsin cluster I were greatly expressed at the late developmental stage of the leaf. In brief, variousAarPDRsdisplayed distinct expression profiles within or among subfamilies.

Based on the cis-element analysis of theAarPDRs, the hormones might influence the expression patterns ofAarPDRgenes. The expression patterns ofAarPDRgenes were evaluated using the transcriptomic data from the MeJA treatment. Compared with the control group, the majority ofPDRgene expression levels were down-regulated in the MeJA-treated group, except for several genes that showed upregulation, including Aarg0G039700.1, Aarg11G003420.1, Aarg11G003440.1, Aarg10G058670.1, Aarg02G028090.1, and Aarg03G002410.1 (Fig.9).

To gain a more comprehensive understanding of the functional roles ofPDRfamily genes inA. argyi, a functional annotation ofAarPDRtranscripts was performed. A graphic representation of the top 20 GO terms for molecular function (MF), biological process (BP), and cellular component (CC) was generated (Fig.10A). GO annotation enrichment indicated that 68AarPDRproteins were annotated with 130 GO terms, which included 122-BP terms, 2-CC terms, 6-MF terms (Fig.10B). In molecular function, all of theAarPDRgenes were involved in ABC-type transporter activity. Furthermore, GO enrichment analysis revealed that 12AarPDRgenes were recognized as having xenobiotic transport function, 12AarPDRgenes were associated with reactive oxygen species (ROS) response, 10AarPDRgenes were classified into hormone transport, and 8AarPDRgenes were found to have efflux transmembrane transporter activity. The KEGG pathway analysis revealed that these indicatedAarPDRgenes were homologous to genes of ABC transporters (ko02010), and were associated with membrane transport processes as well as environmental information processing pathways (Fig. S4).

We systematically investigated the primary monoterpene 1,8-cineole inA. argyiand conducted Pearson’s correlation analysis to explore the relationship betweenAarPDRsand photosynthesis-induced changes in target terpenoids (Table2, Fig. S5 and Table S1−6). The Total Ion Chromatogram and specific component 1,8-Cineole of Artemisia argyi were presented in Fig. S6. Notably, the results revealed that the expression of 15AarPDRsshowed a considerable correlation with the content of 1,8-cineole in different photosynthesis conditions. In addition, 12 of 15AarPDRsgenes present a strong positive association with 1,8-cineole. Whereas theAarPDRswere not classified in the same branch (group I) as known terpenoid-related proteins. The findings suggested that five indicated groups ofAarPDRsmight be involved in the transportation of monoterpene 1,8-cineole. The function of theAarPDRsgenes in different groups needs to be further investigated.

ABCG transporter proteins are a group of transmembrane transport proteins that can be found in various plant species and possess a wide range of functions [2]. In plants, the ABCG subfamily is considerably larger than in other kingdoms. One explanation for this phenomenon can be ascribed to the sessile lifestyle, which necessitates the export of toxic substances and the vast array of secondary metabolites generated in plants, and many of which must cross membranes to reach their site of function [30]. The full-size ABCG subfamily members can also be known asPDRtransporters. Recently, the release of theA. argyigenome sequence has made it available to explore gene family members. So far, the biological functions of mostAarPDRs remain unclear, and the identification of putative orthologs in different species will benefit the functional investigation of AarPDRs. In this study, we identified a total of 68 genes encodingPDRproteins in theA. argyigenome, which could be phylogenetically classified into 5 subfamilies based on phylogenetic analysis (Fig.1). The findings showed that theA. argyi PDRgene family was larger than the 15PDRmembers reported forA.thaliana. It has been indicated thatN. tabacumhas 32PDRgenes [31] and 22PDRmembers inS. lycopersicum[32].Medicago truncatulaandGlycine maxhave PDRs, with 24 and 29, respectively. Such high levels of protein redundancy/clustering might suggest that the adaptation to new transportation functions has caused the duplication of somePDRgenes [33]. Our duplication analysis suggested that duplication events were essential for thePDRgene genomic expansion inA. argyi. In addition, collinearity analysis was performed betweenA. argyiandA.thaliana, and it was found that several homologous pairs exhibited syntenic relationships.A. thaliana, as a model species of dicotyledons, the collinearity indicated the conservation of the members of thePDRgene family during the evolutionary process, and this finding could provide certain assistance for the functional analysis of thePDRgene family inA. argyi.

The investigation of thePDRdistinctive domains and conserved motifs suggested that the 5 different subfamilyAarPDRproteins contained the highly conserved NBD domain (a Walker A box, a Walker B box, and an ABC signature), which was essential for binding and hydrolysis of ATP to drive transport. The ABCG transporter is markedly expanded in plants, and this expansion of ABCGs appears to be associated with functional diversification, which may have contributed to plant survival in plant environments during evolution [3,4]. The ABCG transporters revealed an unusual feature in eukaryotic ABC transporters with reverse organization of domains (NBD-TMD-type), in which not individual helices but the entire TMD rotates as a solid body during the transport of molecules. The MacB-type ABC protein can be regarded as a candidate for the originator of eukaryotic ABCG families. The MacB is a fused NBD-TMD ABC protein with the NBD preceding the TMD [34]. Growing evidence indicated that differences in the promoter region were often associated with variations in gene activity [35]. In gene promoter regions, cis-regulatory elements have a crucial role in modulating gene expression in response to developmental cues and environmental fluctuations. The cis-regulatory elements of theAarPDRgenes analysis showed that manyAarPDRscontained hormone-responsive elements (abscisic acid -responsiveness, MeJA and salicylic acid response elements, auxin and gibberellin-responsive elements). Meanwhile, the promoter region ofAarPDRswas found to contain light-responsive elements, circadian clock regulatory elements, low-temperature response elements, defense- and stress-related regulatory elements, as well as drought-inducibility elements. Accordingly, manyAarPDRgenes were associated with plant development and responded to various abiotic stressors. The biosynthesis and accumulation of secondary metabolites (SMs) in medicinal plants are significantly influenced by environmental factors such as light intensity, water availability, and temperature conditions etc [36]. Therefore, the analysis of cis-elements provides a clue for further functional studies ofAarPDRgenes regarding the regulatory mechanism in the growth and development of medicinal plants.

It has been suggested that gene expression patterns correlate with function [6]. It can be considered that light is a crucial environmental factor to produce specialized metabolites in plants [37]. Light intensity has a major impact on the accumulation of SMs in medicinal plants, just like it does on other physiological processes [36]. To explore the secondary metabolites transporter response to light, the gene expression ofPDRswas detected under different illumination conditions ofA. argyi. The majority ofAarPDRsexhibited upregulated expression in the leaf under conditions of low photosynthesis (Fig.6). Additionally, the qRT-PCR examination revealed that the majority ofAarPDRswere significantly up-regulated under overcast conditions. The upregulation of gene expression suggested thatAarPDRsmight be beneficial in maintaining the supply of SMs to sink cells when the supply derived from photosynthate metabolism was diminished. The tissue-specific expression patterns ofAarPDRgenes provide valuable insights into their functional sites within the plants. As shown in Fig.8, we downloaded the RNA-seq data ofA. argyiin various organs, i.e., leaf, flower, stem, root, and different developmental stages of leaves. The results of heatmaps indicated that theA. argyi PDRgene had spatiotemporal expression characteristics. For instance, inArabidopsis, some ABCGs are expressed only in specific plant organs, which may be related to redundant functions [8]. The majority ofAarPDRsin cluster I were highly expressed at the late developmental stage of the leaf, which might be related to the increased secondary metabolites. The gene expression profiles of theA. argyi PDRsuggested their specific functions in different organs and developmental stages of leaves. In addition, it was found that mostAarPDRgenes were induced by MeJA, indicating the vital effect of these genes in hormone responses. According to the previously reported works,PDRsas phytohormone transporters perform important functions in regulating plant development and metabolism [38,39].

The ABCG transporters in Arabidopsis present functional/substrate diversity. For instance, a delayed stomata response to ABA and decreased drought tolerance were found due to the absence of the full-sizedAtABCG40/PDR12[40]. The heterologous expression ofAtABCG29/PDR1confirmed its role as a p-coumaryl alcohol exporter, suggesting its involvement in transporting phenolic chemicals [17].AtABCG32/PDR4has been reported to have a function in cuticle constitution [41]. Furthermore, some ABCG transporters were functionally redundant; for example, bothAtABCG36/PDR8andAtABCG40/PDR12were involved in the pathogen reaction [42]. Reverse genetics is a major method to provide functional insights into the ABCG gene family. However, the complexity of physiological metabolic pathways in plants, coupled with phenotypic pleiotropy resulting from gene mutations, makes it difficult to confirm the substrate transport specificity. Additionally, overexpression of plant ABCG transporters has been successfully achieved in several systems, including plant cells, yeast, bacteria, mammals, insects, and Xenopus [43]. Investigating the substrate spectrum ofPDRproteins is also not a trivial task due to their functional/substrate diversity. Here, only one preliminary functional characterization ofAarPDRwas performed by GO annotation and KEGG pathway analysis. The functional annotation ofAarPDRshighlights their crucial role in regulating the transport ofA. argyimetabolites and facilitating environmental adaptation (Fig.10).

In plants,PDRsubgroup proteins have been reported to exhibit a similarly diverse array of functions, including detoxification, the translocation of different secondary metabolites, phytohormone transport, and stomata movement [23,44]. Secondary metabolites are a class of low-molecular-weight compounds that are essential to the life cycle of plants, influence their interactions with the environment, and contribute to the plant’s response to biotic and abiotic challenges. It has been reported thatPDRgenes play a crucial role in terpenoid transportation in other plant species [2]. Our correlation analysis results also revealed that 15 candidateAarPDRshad significant correlations with the variation of the primary monoterpene 1,8-cineole under different photosynthetic conditions (Table2). Furthermore, theAarPDRtransporters might be beneficial to the volatile terpenoids traverse the cytosol and cross the plasma membrane to exit the cell by active transport (Fig.11). It should be noted that there are few reports onAarPDRsinvolved in secondary metabolite transport inA. argyi, and therefore, further exploration of their functions holds significant research value.

In summary, the members of thePDRgene family inA. argyiwere identified for the first time. A comprehensive analysis of theA. argyigenome identified a total of 68AarPDRgenes, which were divided into five subfamilies based on phylogenetic relationship. A phylogenetic comparison and synteny analysis ofPDRgenes fromArabidopsisandA. argyiprovide valuable insights into the evolutionary traits of theAarPDRgenes. The motif organization and gene structure analysis revealed that theAarPDRmembers within the same subfamily were relatively conserved. The investigation results of chromosomal distribution and collinearity demonstrated that the duplication events of theAarPDRgenes in theA. argyigenome might be linked to their functional redundancy. Furthermore, a systematic investigation of cis-regulatory elements, gene expression patterns, and functional annotation/classification of theAarPDRgene family revealed thatAarPDRsplay a pivotal functional role in mediating metabolite transport and enhancing environmental adaptation inA. argyi. These findings may provide a foundational framework for further understanding the biological functions ofAarPDRgenes inA. argyi.

H.X.Y. conceived the research, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript. C.M., M.S.X. analyzed data. G.X.M., T.L.P., L.B. edited the manuscript. All authors have reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

This research was funded by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (20224BAB216107); the Science Project for Education Department of Jiangxi Province (GJJ211269); the Scientifical Research Foundation for Doctors of Jiangxi University of Chinese Medicine (2021BSZR020); the Science and Technology Innovation Team Development Plan (CXTD22010); the PhD Research Startup Foundation of Jiangxi University of Chinese Medicine (2021BSZR002).