Over 46 million people are living with rheumatic heart disease (RHD) globally, resulting in 380 000 premature deaths each year. Effective RHD prevention strategies are known but their implementation in low-resource settings has lagged. This study evaluated the feasibility and effectiveness of integrating secondary antibiotic prophylaxis into primary health centres to improve access and adherence to RHD care.

We conducted a hybrid type III study using a mixed-method, pre–post design to evaluate a package of implementation strategies centred on decentralised RHD care and use of an electronic medical record in Gulu and Lira, Uganda. We combined clinical and programmatic data with provider and patient interviews to assess effectiveness, adoption and acceptability. The mean difference in the annualised percentage of days adherent to benzathine penicillin G (BPG) monthly injections predecentralisation and postdecentralisation was calculated using linear mixed effect regression. Thematic analysis was used to analyse qualitative data.

We decentralised 151 patients (median age 17.9 years, 64% female) from district hospitals to eight primary health centres. The percentage of days adherent to BPG was 77.2% predecentralisation and 80.5% postdecentralisation (mean difference 3.25, (95% CI −0.72 to 6.86), p=0.081), which was statistically non-inferior at the −10% non-inferiority margin. Interview data identified knowledge, confidence and intrinsic motivation as major determinants of provider adoption. Patients expressed mixed feelings towards pain control and provider services, but convenience and financial savings resulted in a high level of acceptability. The electronic registry presented challenges in a naive environment but showed a strong potential as an oversight tool at the district level.

This study is the first to demonstrate that decentralised RHD care is effective in sub-Saharan Africa. Lessons learnt provide a platform for future integration of RHD services countrywide, with implications for increasing access to and scale-up of secondary prevention measures for RHD care in Uganda.

Rheumatic heart disease (RHD) is a disease of poverty, with the largest burden in sub-Saharan Africa. Secondary antibiotic prophylaxis is a well-known and effective RHD prevention strategy, but its implementation and optimisation has lagged.

This study presents an evaluation approach of a previously undescribed decentralised care model for RHD and demonstrates that secondary prophylaxis administration can be done at primary health centres without compromising quality and patient acceptability. Our findings demonstrate the feasibility of integrating RHD secondary prophylaxis services that could inform the design of RHD programmes in Uganda and other endemic countries.

RHD programmes elsewhere in Uganda and countries with a similar RHD profiles should emphasise investing in frontline health worker training and leveraging registry data and case management systems to guide RHD service delivery.

Several opportunities exist for the prevention of RHD, including secondary antibiotic prophylaxis (hereafter, ‘prophylaxis’), which the WHO recognises as a cornerstone of RHD control.6 7In 2018, the World Health Assembly mandated Member States to act on RHD by integrating RHD programmes into existing national health infrastructure and increasing country-specific research on challenges to implementation of RHD prevention and care.8However, there exist no published models for RHD care in primary health centres in LMICs apart from programmes implemented in the 1970s and 1980s. These programmes focused primarily on prophylaxis following acute rheumatic fever (ARF),9rather than prophylaxis among persons with diagnosed RHD. As a result, there is a major gap in the evidence for the feasibility of RHD programmes in LMICs.

The ADD-RHD (Active Case Detection and Decentralised Dynamic Registry to Improve the Uptake of Rheumatic Heart Disease Secondary Prevention) programme was designed to demonstrate the feasibility of integrating RHD secondary prophylaxis management into primary healthcare, by shifting prophylaxis from regional hospitals to local clinics where injections could be given by primary healthcare nurses. The programme included several complementary implementation strategies, including an electronic patient registry. This paper reports the principal findings of the ADD-RHD programme, with implications for RHD programmes in other countries where RHD remains endemic.

The study used a pre–post design to assess effectiveness and implementation outcomes. For the primary effectiveness outcome (adherence to prophylaxis), we conducted a non-inferiority analysis that compared adherence between district hospital-based and primary health centre-based care predecentralisation and postdecentralisation, respectively. Subanalyses looked at adherence per district. For implementation outcomes,15we focused on acceptability and adoption of the programme. Cost was also assessed as part of a formal economic evaluation, which is being published separately.

Data on patients’ attendance for prophylaxis at health centres were collected via monthly logs by healthcare workers, as well as recorded in the ACT application. To ensure data quality, research staff also captured these data in a REDCap database hosted at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, which was used for analysis.18 19Descriptive statistics were calculated for participant demographic and clinical characteristics. Adherence was calculated as the annualised percentage of days covered by prophylaxis in the predecentralisation and postdecentralisation periods. The null hypothesis for the primary (non-inferiority) analysis was that adherence during the postdecentralisation period would not be more than 10% worse than during predecentralisation (ie, an a priori defined non-inferiority margin of −10%). The lower bound of the 95% CI for the mean difference in adherence was used to formally assess non-inferiority between time periods with a lower confidence limit of less than −10% leading to rejection of the null hypothesis.20Adverse cardiovascular events were tracked in both periods as part of secondary clinical outcomes. Cardiovascular events were defined as any new or worsening heart failure, atrial fibrillation, infective endocarditis, recurrent episode of ARF and death from any cause.

Linear mixed effect regression was used to estimate the mean difference in the annualised percentage of days adherent to prophylaxis postdecentralisation when compared with the predecentralisation period. Models included an identity link function to model the continuous response distribution, random subject-specific and site-specific intercepts to account for the nesting of responses within subjects and sites, and a fixed effect term for time period providing the contrast of interest. Parametric bootstrap resampling (1000 resamples) was used to obtain 95% CIs for the mean difference in the percentage of days adherent. Models were fit to data on all participants for the primary analyses. In subanalyses, we assessed differences in adherence for participants in Lira and Gulu districts separately. P values formally testing whether adherence was superior during the postdecentralisation period were obtained using the Satterthwaite approximation to the model degrees of freedom.

The taxonomy of implementation outcomes proposed by Proctoret al15was used to guide the data collection, measurement and analysis of implementation. We conducted provider semistructured individual interviews immediately prior to decentralisation, as well as provider and patient semistructured individual interviews 12 months after decentralisation. All providers who were participating in the programme and provided informed consent were interviewed both predecentralisation and postdecentralisation. We used maximum variation purposeful sampling to select at least two patients with high and low adherence at 12 months at each participating health centre. We conducted a total of 32 patient interviews and 63 provider interviews (32 before decentralisation and 31 after decentralisation), with 25 providers participating at both time points. Research nurses with experience in qualitative data collection used semistructured interview guides and conducted interviews in respondents’ preferred language. Interview data were complemented by monthly health facility surveys and field diaries from support staff to provide additional context on the implementation process.

We used thematic analysis to assess patient and provider interview data. Codebooks were developed separately for provider and patient interviews. For provider interviews, codes were developed inductively, with the initial codebook informed by interview guides and interview debrief session notes. Three authors with experience in qualitative data analysis (NWM, JP and KD) collectively coded 10% of interviews. Emergent codes and coding discrepancies were resolved through iterative discussion. The remaining interviews were individually coded by team members and discussed at analysis meetings. NWM and KD led the identification of emergent themes and subthemes, which were synthesised and presented to the full author team for consensus. Coding was done using Atlasi.ti V.24.1.1.24We considered quantitative and qualitative results in parallel and explored each for confirming and disconfirming evidence, but no formal data mixing strategies were used.

In the design stages of the ADD-RHD programme, members of the research team held community engagement and stakeholder meetings with local and district health administrators to solicit feedback on programmatic and logistical aspects of the study. Anecdotal accounts of issues faced by patients in the two district hospitals were incorporated into the design of the programme and informed the implementation strategies. No formal dissemination of the study’s findings is planned but the results are being used to improve patient care at participating health facilities and the referral hospital in both districts where RHD follow-ups are done.

A total of 151 participants were included in the predecentralisation and postdecentralisation periods.Figure 1outlines the process for identifying registrants who participated in the programme. Participants had a median age of 17.9 years and 64% were female (table 1). Lira contributed to approximately two-thirds of the study population.

ARF, acute rheumatic fever; RHD, rheumatic heart disease.

In a pooled analysis of participants from both districts, the percentage of days adherent to secondary antibiotic prophylaxis was 77.2 (24.2) days predecentralisation and 80.5 (18.5) days postdecentralisation under the ADD-RHD programme. The mean difference in the percentage of days adherent was non-inferior in the postdecentralisation period (3.25 95% CI (−0.72 to 6.86)) with a trend towards decentralised care being superior (p=0.081) (table 2;figure 2). In subanalyses of Lira and Gulu districts, the intervention remained non-inferior for both districts.

Mean (95%) and p value obtained from linear mixed effects regression.

The qualitative data provided confirmatory evidence to support the adherence measures, with providers and patients describing regular, successful appointment attendance. Where challenges arose, such as difficulty finding money for transport, they were intermittent. Despite the mapping during the selection process, a few decentralised facilities were still a notable distance from patient residences. Other challenges were variable delays at individual facilities or conflicting schedules with schooling and exams. The major determinants of adherence that were observed by providers were the role of pain control as a positive motivator of adherence and the negative impact of BPG and supplies stockouts on effective provision of timely care.

In addition to BPG, provider training on adequate pain control during injections was part of the suite of implementation strategies supporting decentralisation. Pain control emerged as a predictor of the provider and patient experience during appointments. Prior to ADD-RHD, providers experienced distress from difficulties while delivering BPG injections. They subsequently felt empowered after receiving ADD-RHD training that included techniques for using lignocaine to achieve patient pain control. Improved pain control facilitated a good rapport between providers and patients and resulted in a higher level of confidence and trust. In several instances, patients requested by name a particular provider with whom they’d previously had a positive experience.

Conversely, poor pain control was linked with poor attendance.

Patients detailed mixed feelings on pain control, with some sharing strong accounts of injection pain experienced while others spoke to receiving good overall service, including injections. Positive experiences were often associated with ‘trained’ or preferred providers (additional quotations inonline supplemental table 2).

Qualitative interviews revealed a widespread stockout of medicines and supplies for prophylaxis, which limited the effectiveness of ADD-RHD implementation strategies. Although BPG was the most consequential, lignocaine and consumables, such as specific syringe sizes, were also affected. This proved to be a significant impediment in a setting where the majority of patients come from low socioeconomic circumstances—many could not afford to purchase their own medication. Underlying system-level challenges were the main causes, including the long drug requisition process and general delays in government procurement and delivery of stock. Providers ascribed defaulting from care and missing subsequent appointments as a direct consequence of stockouts, particularly for those patients who frequently had to buy their own medicines. Providers were empathetic given the circumstances and resorted to coping mechanisms—including borrowing from other facilities or using their own money to buy in some instances.

Quantitative programmatic data revealed the differential impact of BPG drug availability on implementation, with three out of four facilities in Lira experiencing >50% of months of stockouts compared with none in Gulu (online supplemental table 3). This was confirmed through interviews where multiple Gulu providers confirmed supply was more constant.

Lack of money to travel was highlighted by patients as a limiting factor to monthly injections attendance, so the convenience of shorter distances to health centres was a major mechanism facilitating improved adherence.

In a minority of instances, patient attendance was affected by their perception of welcomeness, or lack thereof, at the health centre. Perceived rudeness from providers, particularly related to missed appointments, caused patients to skip appointments for fear of being reprimanded, leading to missed injections. Though less frequent, patients also attributed incomplete adherence to instances when nurses were not available. This was particularly challenging during the first 2 months postdecentralisation in Lira, where the programme implementation was interrupted by general health worker strikes across the districts.

Interviews with providers revealed a clear pathway from an increase in knowledge and skills needed to provide painless BPG injections to confidence in the ability to provide RHD care. ADD-RHD training supported some of this growth, as evidenced by dramatic changes in the ways that providers described their RHD knowledge across pre-rollout and post-rollout interviews. However, the skills gained through successful repetitions of in-service care were a more significant contributor, creating a positive feedback loop of self-efficacy and confidence (figure 3). Self-perceived competence in their injection and counselling skills directly increased provider commitment to RHD care and, notably, led to a sense of enjoyment in the work, which indirectly influenced ongoing adoption of ADD-RHD components.

ADD-RHD provided compensation to participating providers, which several highlighted as a facilitator in their decision to prioritise RHD patients for service (see also Acceptability, below). However, this was dwarfed by the intrinsic motivation of providers, who described feeling a deep responsibility to patients, with and without RHD, and a sense of satisfaction at being able to provide a new dimension of care. The intrinsic motivation effect was reflected in differential levels of ongoing adoption—of the 36 providers originally trained (20 Gulu, 16 Lira), nearly 75%, (14 Gulu, 12 Lira) continued to give injections 12 months after decentralisation, which was confirmed in the providers’ descriptions of their workflow. Despite high rates of adoption, engaged providers still faced systemic challenges, including insufficient staffing and high workloads at health centre III/IVs. This limited participating providers’ capacity to manage patients who required additional support, such as proactive reminders or follow-up after repeated missed appointments, attenuating the ADD-RHD programme’s effectiveness.

Providers in predecentralisation interviews expressed a sense of responsibility for and acceptance of the necessity for managing RHD patients but also alluded to concerns about their lack of RHD knowledge and skills surrounding the management of adverse events. For those with prior experience giving injections, drug stockouts were a worry. Following ADD-RHD implementation, self-described enthusiastic nurses who went out of their way to care for patients provided strong evidence for programme acceptability.

Patient interviews revealed convenience as a major determinant of acceptability of ADD-RHD, facilitating regular appointment attendance. The most important dimension of convenience was reduced transport costs, which participants described in detail.

Other facilitators influencing acceptability were welcoming nurses, counselling and reminders received, and a sense of being prioritised for services. Although many patients reported receiving equally good care at health centres as at their previous referral hospital, there were some mixed reactions. Bad injection experiences, poor communication and rudeness from health workers (often isolated to a particular health worker) were the most common barriers. Despite these, multiple patients also expressed a level of tolerance, preferring the health centre setting even given experiences with less than ideal care. Quantitative data offered confirmatory evidence for the acceptability of ADD-RHD, showing that the majority of BPG injections (78%) were received from patients’ designated decentralised clinics. Among those received elsewhere, 13% were from other public and private health clinics in the region and just 9% from the Lira Regional Referral Hospital. No injections were received at Gulu Regional Referral Hospital after decentralisation (online supplemental table 4).

The ACT application, an electronic RHD registry, was initially designed as one of the two core implementation strategies to facilitate ADD-RHD programme adoption and patient management at health centres. As originally designed, the intention was for all participating nurses to input the injections they administered, and personalised logins were allocated to each trained nurse to allow for this. With few exceptions, providers expressed positive sentiments during post-rollout interviews about the potential usefulness of ACT. That said, ultimately a combination of challenges related to infrastructure (power and internet outages), technology (requiring individual logins) and health centre culture (restricting who had authority to store and access tablets) limited participating HCIII/IV teams’ ability to fully integrate ACT into their workflow. By the end of the study, only 5 (3 Lira, 2 Gulu) out of the 41 (21 Lira, 20 Gulu) trained providers had entered more than 10 BPG injections into ACT. However, we observed an unplanned adaptation during rollout, with ADD-RHD research staff at the district level frequently using the ACT application for identification and outreach to patients at risk of loss to follow-up.

Adverse cardiovascular events including severe penicillin reactions (anaphylaxis) and deaths were monitored in both predecentralisation and postdecentralisation periods. Overall, four adverse cardiovascular events were recorded during predecentralisation and seven postdecentralisation (including one anaphylactic reaction, which was managed without further complications). A total of four deaths were recorded postdecentralisation (all deaths were from registrants in Lira district).

This study evaluated a programme to improve the implementation of SAP for RHD in two districts in Northern Uganda. The programme moved SAP from research clinics based at referral hospitals into the general primary healthcare system, and it was supported by several other implementation strategies such as upskilling of primary healthcare nurses. The programme had high levels of adoption, was deemed acceptable to patients and providers, and achieved statistically non-inferior levels of SAP adherence. Taken together, our findings demonstrate the feasibility of delivering SAP through the general primary healthcare system in Uganda.

Our evaluation identified several key determinants of implementation that help explain the programme’s success. First and foremost, it made getting SAP injections much more convenient for patients and their families, reducing time and financial costs. The primary healthcare nurses at the study sites were generally engaged in the programme and were motivated to gain new knowledge to better care for their patients. While the ACT software for case management was not widely adopted by primary healthcare nurses, it helped programme managers identify individuals at risk of default and work with clinics to provide additional adherence support. By contrast, irregularities in the supply of medicines and other consumables hindered implementation and likely had an adverse effect on adherence. Finally, while some primary healthcare nurses were very skilled at pain control and had good patient rapport, this was not the case universally, and the absence of good pain control and rapport made the programme less acceptable among a subset of patients.

The literature on SAP programmes in primary healthcare settings is very limited. SAP programmes among Indigenous Australians have been studied the most and provide a few points of comparison. The determinants of SAP adoption and implementation appear to be similar across diverse settings and include transportation/access barriers, fear of injection site pain, limited health literacy (patients) and training (providers) around RHD, and patient–provider rapport.25 26This suggests that some of the implementation strategies tried in this study might be generalisable to other health systems. On the other hand, baseline adherence to SAP was higher in this study (77%) than in an Australian programme (46%), and the latter was unsuccessful at improving adherence.27More research is needed to determine which health system factors and social determinants are most amenable to improvement via implementation science approaches.

To our knowledge, this is the first study of a real-world programme on SAP for RHD in sub-Saharan Africa. It provides important insights for the design of RHD programmes elsewhere in Uganda and countries with a similar RHD profile. It underscores the need to invest heavily in training frontline health workers and maximise use of registry data and case management systems to support ongoing implementation and adherence. Inadequate access to BPG and other commodities is a critical determinant of implementation that this programme only partially mitigated; in the future, we will need to work more closely with district managers and planners to develop medicine-specific implementation strategies that work within existing procurement and distribution systems. We will also need to further develop our training materials to foster patient-centred care (rapport, empathy) and ensure adequate pain management for each injection given.

In two districts in Northern Uganda, a programme on integrating SAP into primary healthcare settings achieved satisfactory levels of medication adherence and was deemed acceptable to patients and providers. Our research shows that the principles of an effective SAP programme include delivering services close to where persons with RHD live, training providers to deliver patient-centred care, using digital tools to support case management, and ensuring adequate supplies of drugs and consumables. Our findings can inform the design of SAP programmes in other countries where RHD remains endemic.

The authors acknowledge all the local and international stakeholders who informed the programme components. Specifically, we would like to thank the District Health Officers, staff at the local and district health centres, WHO stakeholders and the Cincinnati technology design team (Nicholas Felicelli, Kristen Tillman and Riley Morrison) for their input and design of the ACT application.