Scientific assessment is a crucial first step in establishing effective communication between healthcare teams and caregivers. Given the lack of reliable and effective tools to comprehensively assess the quality of communication between healthcare teams and caregivers of cancer patients in China. This study aimed to translated and culturally adapted the Caregiver-Centered Communication Questionnaire (CCCQ) and assessed its psychometric properties in caregivers of cancer patients in China.

CCCQ was translated into Chinese following Brislin’s model and culturally adapted according to a Delphi expert panel. Then pretested and refined the Chinese versions of the CCCQ (CCCQ-C) among 10 caregivers. A cross-sectional survey was conducted among 600 caregivers of cancer patients from October to December 2024. Psychometric properties of CCCQ-C were evaluated exploratory factor analysis (EFA), confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), McDonald’s omega coefficient, and test-retest reliability.

The CCCQ-C demonstrated strong content validity (I-CVI = 0.800 ~ 1.000, S-CVI = 0.980) and internal consistency (McDonald’s omega = 0.965). EFA identified five factors explaining 71.014% cumulative variance, while CFA confirmed good model fit. Test-retest reliability was excellent (r= 0.820, ICC = 0.806). The overall questionnaire remained unchanged in terms of 5 dimensions and 30 items during the process of translation and validation.

In China’s medical environment for cancer patients, CCCQ-C demonstrates acceptable psychometric properties, making it a reliable and effective assessment tool for evaluating communication between healthcare teams and caregivers. This provides valuable guidance for future practice, research and policy making.

In 2022, approximately 20 million new cancer cases occurred globally. China accounted for 23.91% of global cases, approximately 4.8247 million cases, demonstrating a persistent upward trend [1]. Cancer and its treatment impose substantial physical and psychological challenges on patients, rendering cancer a chronic disease requiring long-term care [2,3]. In China, 70%-80% of cancer patients require care from caregivers [4]. A single patient with terminal cancer typically necessitates care from 2 to 4 caregivers [5]. Influenced by deep-rooted Confucian culture, caregivers in China are predominantly family members, such as parents, children, or spouses [5]. These caregivers must provide comprehensive physical and psychological care for patients. They also endure the anticipatory grief of losing a loved one. Furthermore, they serve as key participants in medical decision-making processes. This role involves facing multiple challenges, such as making treatment decisions under uncertainty, financial pressures, and role conflicts. All these factors result in caregivers experiencing immense physical and psychological stress [6–9].

Multiple studies indicate that effective communication between healthcare teams and caregivers alleviates caregivers’ psychological burdens and enhances their coping abilities [10,11]. Such communication improves quality of life for both patients and caregivers [12]. Moreover, it reduces patient readmission rates [13]. The five core elements of effective communication are: exchange of information, fostering health relationships with the healthcare team, recognizing and responding to emotions, managing care, and decision making [14]. Unlike Western cultures, under the profound influence of Confucian culture, Chinese people often deem silence as a virtue. They are more inclined to adopt an indirect communication style and tend to share “positive emotions” rather than “worries and suffering” [15]. Consequently, caregivers frequently adopt emotional avoidance or inefficient communication patterns. They rarely proactively seek professional assistance. Most caregivers cannot identify their unmet communication needs. This behavior impedes healthcare teams’ understanding of caregiver and patient needs, compromises caregiver well-being, reduces care quality, and ultimately directly impacts patient treatment outcomes [16,17].

Scientific assessment is the initial step for communication improvement. This tool will help healthcare teams accurately identify caregiver needs and enhance communication quality. However, existing scales primarily focus on doctor-patient and patient’s family communication in China [18,19]. Until 2024, Chen et al. adapted the Quality of Communication-Family caregiver (QOC-F) questionnaire for Chinese contexts [20]. This questionnaire evaluates communication between cancer patients’ families and healthcare teams. However, it contains only two dimensions, emphasizes medical information delivery, and critically, is not caregiver-centered [20]. Thus, in China, there is an urgent need for a comprehensive and localized tool to assess communication between healthcare team and caregiver.

Therefore, this study aims to translate and culturally adapt the CCCQ, evaluating its psychometric properties among Chinese cancer patient caregivers to develop a tool for assessing communication between the healthcare team and caregivers in China. Using this tool enables a comprehensive assessment of the communication between healthcare team and caregivers within the Chinese healthcare context. Additionally, it helps identify the blind spots or misunderstandings in the communication, providing a basis for developing targeted communication strategies and training to enhance communication effectiveness and improve the overall quality of care for cancer patients.

The cross-sectional study was conducted in two phases: (1) translation and cultural adaptation of the CCCQ, and (2) assessment of the communication measurement properties of CCCQ-C.

This study was conducted in three tertiary public hospitals in Fujian Province from October to December 2024. The inclusion criteria were as follows: Caregivers were required to be aged ≥ 18 years. They should be caregivers of patients diagnosed with malignant tumors according to pathological criteria, providing care services free of charge, including relatives (spouses, children, or other relatives) or friends. The duration of care had to be ≥ 1 month, and they should currently still be providing care to the patient. They needed to possess a certain level of communication and read ability, be able to independently complete the questionnaire. Additionally, they had to agree to take part in the study. The exclusion criteria were: patients and caregivers who were healthcare workers.

The sample size was calculated based on 10 times the number of items in the questionnaire [24], considering a 10% loss in response rate. Using the formula common in cross-sectional research in medical statistics (number of items * 10 / anticipated response rate), the calculation was: 30 items * 10 / 0.9 = 334 participants. Furthermore, separate samples of at least 200 participants each are recommended for effective exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) [28]. Ultimately, 650 caregivers of cancer patients were successfully recruited from the three hospitals.

General demographic information and clinical data on caregivers include gender, education, religion, place of residence, employment status, monthly income, relationship with patients, and chronic disease history. Collect information about the patient’s condition, including cancer types, cancer staging, and therapeutic method type of medical insurance reimbursement. The data were reported by the caregivers or retrieved from their medical records.

It comprised 30 items grouped into five dimensions: exchange of information (5 items), fostering health relationships with health-care team (10 items), recognizing and responding to emotions (5 items), managing care (4 items), and decision making (6 items). Likert 5 scale was used to score, with a point 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The total score ranged from 30 to 150, with higher scores indicating better communication effectiveness.

The 30 items of the CCCQ were independently translated into Chinese by two associate professors of nursing who had studied abroad for five years and were proficient in both English and Chinese. They then cross-checked CCCQ-C I, recorded the differences between the two translations, and discussed them.

The two translated versions were compared with the original questionnaire. All noted differences were discussed until a consensus was reached. The final product of this expert review was CCCQ-C II.

To ensure semantic equivalence, two English associate professors who had a bilingual background and had never been exposed to the original questionnaire were invited to back translate CCCQ-C II into English.

To ensure semantic equivalence, a review panel consisting of three bilingual (Chinese and English) experts with over 20 years of working experience was established for this study. The panel members included a head nurse in clinical oncology and a professor of psychology and nursing. The review panel independently evaluated the semantic, empirical and conceptual equivalence of the CCCQ, CCCQ-C II and the back-translated CCCQ. Based on the evaluation results, the research team and the review panel discussed and adjusted the CCCQ-C II questionnaire again according to the Chinese language habits and cultural background, and finally formed the “pre-final version” of the CCCQ-C suitable for the Chinese language environment.

The final version of the CCCQ-C was pre-tested with 10 caregivers of cancer patients to identify items that did not conform to Chinese language habits or were difficult to understand. The final version of CCCQ was determined by modifying the corresponding entries based on the comments of the primary caregivers involved in the pre-testing.

Recruitment was conducted in the oncology outpatient department or ward by one researcher. Those who met the criteria were informed of the research purpose, emphasizing the anonymous coding and data confidentiality of the questionnaire. After obtaining consent, they signed the written informed consent form. Subsequently, they independently completed the anonymous questionnaire under the guidance of another researcher. The completeness of the questionnaires was checked on the spot upon collection, and any missing items were verified and filled in with the caregivers on the spot. To verify the test reliability, 43 caregivers completed the CCCQ-C test again two weeks after the baseline assessment.

The data of this study were analyzed using SPSS 26.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA), SPSS AU (Qingsi Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China), and the psych package of R version 4.3.3. Categorical data were described by frequency and percentage. Normal distribution was determined by skewness and kurtosis tests. Measurements with an absolute kurtosis less than 10 and an absolute skewness less than 3 were considered to follow a normal distribution [31], and were expressed as mean and standard deviation. The Standard Error of Measurement (SEM) of the CCCQ-C and the Minimal Detectable Change (MDC) were also calculated, with MDC = 1.96√2×SEM [32], to determine the minimum change not attributable to measurement error. Item analysis was conducted using the total score item decision value method and Pearson correlation coefficient. Reliability was verified by McDonald’s omega, test-retest reliability. Assessment of floor and ceiling effects. Validity was evaluated using content validity index, exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, convergent and discriminant validity. A P value < 0.05 indicated that all statistical tests were statistically significant.

Item analysis included critical ratio and correlation analysis. (a) Critical ratio: The total scores of 600 CCCQ-C questionnaires were ranked using an independent sample t-test, and the top 27% and bottom 27% of respondents were divided into high-score and low-score groups. If the critical ratio was less than 3.000 or the P value was greater than 0.05, it indicated that the item had insufficient discrimination and should be deleted [33]. (b) Correlation analysis: Pearson correlation analysis was used to assess the consistency of each item with the overall questionnaire. If the correlation coefficient r value was less than 0.200 or the P value was greater than 0.01, the item should be deleted [34].

The Content Validity Index (CVI) of the CCCQ-C was evaluated by an expert panel. The selection criteria for experts were: (a) professional title: intermediate or above; (b) educational background: bachelor degree or above; (c) working years: ≥ 10 years; (d) familiar with the knowledge related to the localization and development of measurement tools; (e) understanding of medical and nursing communication related to cancer diseases; and (f) agreement and voluntary participation in this study. Semantic equivalence was scored using a 4-point Likert scale, ranging from “inappropriate” to “most appropriate”, and the final CVI was 1.00. Content validity was also evaluated using a 4-point rating scale, where “1” indicated unimportant and “4” indicated highly relevant. If more than 20% of the expert group members (i.e., a score < 2) considered an item inappropriate, it needed to be modified. All items were independently evaluated by the experts. The CVI was calculated as the proportion of items with a score ≥ 3 to the total number of items, and a CVI ≥ 0.80 indicated good validity [27]. A total of 6 experts with over 15 years of work experience and senior professional titles were invited, including 2 head nurses in the field of clinical oncology nursing, 2 directors of oncology departments in the clinical medical field, and 2 associate professors in the field of medical communication psychology.

EFA: The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) test and Bartlett test were conducted to assess the adequacy of sampling. When the KMO > 0.80 and the Bartlett chi-square test is statistically significant, it indicates that the questionnaire is suitable for exploratory factor analysis [34]. A polychoric correlation matrix was established to perform the exploratory factor analysis to evaluate its construct validity. To determine the number of factors to be extracted, the study used parallel analysis of Horn and Velicer’s Minimum Average Partial (MAP) test based on the polychoric correlation matrix. The parallel analysis method involves conducting 1000 repeated calculations and comparing the actual eigenvalues with the 95th percentile of the randomly generated eigenvalues to determine the number of factors [35]. The MAP test determined the number of factors based on the lowest average partial correlation square value in the correlation matrix [36]. Unweighted least squares and maximum variance orthogonal rotation methods were used to extract the factor loading matrix [37], where factor loading values greater than 0.40 and common factors explaining 50% of the total variance indicate good structural validity of the questionnaire.

CFA: The core purpose is to verify whether the number of factors and factor loadings of the observed variables conform to the pre-established theoretical framework. The maximum likelihood method was used for model validation, and the model fit was evaluated through fit indices. Parts of the model that did not fit were adjusted based on the Modification Index (MI) to form the best model [38,39]. The selected fit indices include: (a) Chi-square to degrees of freedom ratio (χ²/df, CMIN/DF): a value between 1 and 3 indicates a good fit of the questionnaire; (b) Goodness-of-Fit Index (GFI), Normed Fit Index (NFI), Comparative Fit Index (CFI), and Incremental Fit Index (IFI): >0.9 indicate a good fit, and > 0.8 indicate an acceptable fit; (c) Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA): 0.1 > RMSEA ≥ 0.08 indicates an acceptable fit, and 0.08 > RMSEA ≥ 0.05 indicates a good fit; (d) Factor loadings of each item should be no less than 0.30.

Convergent validity can also be evaluated based on the Average Variance Extracted (AVE) and Composite Reliability (CR). AVE reflects the proportion of variance explained by a latent variable that comes from its constituent items. CR serves as a key indicator for assessing the internal consistency of a latent variable composed of multiple measurement items. When the AVE value exceeds 0.36 and the CR value exceeds 0.7, it indicates that the latent variable demonstrates acceptable convergent validity.

Discriminant validity refers to the ability of a scale to distinguish between different types of respondents. T-tests or chi-square tests are used to compare the scale scores between different groups. IfP< 0.05, it indicates a statistically significant difference, suggesting that the scale has the ability to distinguish between different groups, and the discriminant validity is good [34].

Reliability analysis includes internal consistency reliability and test-retest reliability. (a) Internal consistency reliability: It reflects the homogeneity or internal correlation among the items of the questionnaire. McDonald’s omega coefficient (Ω) is usually used to estimate each extracted factor. An Ω value exceeding 0.7 indicates good internal consistency [40]. (b) Test-retest reliability: It reflects the stability of the measurement tool. The typical retest interval for questionnaires is 2 to 4 weeks [34]. In this study, Pearson correlation analysis was used to assess the correlation between the scores before and after. The closer the correlation coefficient is to 1, the higher the test-retest reliability. The Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) of the two measurement results was calculated to evaluate the degree of absolute consistency. Generally, the ICC should be greater than 0.70.

If 15% of the patients report values at the minimum or maximum range [34], it is considered that there are floor and ceiling effects.

Consent was obtained from Dr. Demiris, the author of the original questionnaire, before translating the original questionnaire into Chinese. Ethical approval from the research hospitals was obtained prior to conducting the study, with the ethical approval number 2024KS-161-1.

A total of 650 questionnaires were distributed, and all 650 were retrieved, yielding a 100.0% recovery rate with no missing data. After excluding 50 invalid questionnaires (20 completed in less than 100 s and 30 where the neutral option was selected for all items), 600 valid questionnaires were ultimately obtained, yielding an effective response rate of 92.31%. Among the 600 caregivers, 56.00% (n= 336) were female, 45.83% had a college degree or above, and 52.50% (n= 315) were urban residents. Among the caregivers, 46.50% (n= 279) were spouses of cancer patients. Among the 600 cancer patients receiving care, 47.50% had gastrointestinal cancer. For detailed data, please refer to Table1.

The total score of CCCQ-C was 122.810 ± 21.013, with the SEM of 0.858 and the MDC of 2.378. The scores of each dimension were ranked as follows: Fostering health relationships with health-care team, decision making, exchange of information, recognizing and responding to emotions, and managing care. For detailed data, please refer to Table2.

Cultural adjustments were implemented as follows: (a) Based on feedback from the expert panel during the harmonization process, the content was revised as follows: item 8 “My health-care team shows that he/she is committed to my loved one’s care.” was modified to “My health-care team demonstrates their commitment to caring for my loved ones.“; Item 24 “My health-care team helps me navigate the complex health-care system.” was modified to “My health-care team helps me cope with a complex medical system.“; Item 26 “My health-care team discusses with me when and where we will talk.” was modified to “My health-care team communicates with me to determine the time and place for discussions.“; Item 27 " My health-care team discusses with me the roles of the team.” was modified to “My health-care team communicates the responsibilities of team members to me”. (b) Based on the pretest results, all 10 caregivers were able to understand the content of the questionnaire without any comprehension problems. However, six of the 10 caregivers recommended changing the term “open and honest” in item 6 to “candidly” for clarity; four suggested changing “loved ones” to “family and friends” in items 8, 11, 12, 13, 19, and 25 to improve comprehension. Finally, incorporating the above revisions resulted in a culturally and linguistically adapted version. The final version of the CCCQ-C comprised 30 items.

For item analysis, the total scores of the 600 questionnaires were ranked. Caregivers scoring in the top 27% and the bottom 27% were categorized into high-score and low-score groups, respectively. Independent t-tests revealed that the critical ratios for the score differences between the high-score and low-score groups ranged from 10.128 to 28.251 (allP< 0.001), indicating that each item of the CCCQ-C had good discriminatory power. For all 600 caregivers, the Pearson correlation coefficient (r) between each item score and the total score ranged from 0.367 to 0.817 (allP< 0.001), exceeding the recommended threshold of 0.20 for item-total correlation. Therefore, all 30 items were retained in the CCCQ-C.

Six expert panel members independently evaluated the content validity of the CCCQ-C. The item-level content validity index (I-CVI) ranged from 0.800 to 1.000, and the scale-level content validity index (S-CVI) was 0.980. All items met the acceptable criterion, indicating that the CCCQ-C had good content validity.

The total sample (n= 600) was randomly split into two equal subsamples, A and B. Subsample A (n= 300) was used for EFA. The results showed that the KMO value was 0.904, and Bartlett’s test of sphericity indicated χ2 = 8959.695 (P< 0.001). Factors were extracted from the polychoric correlation matrix using the psych package in R. The number of factors to retain was determined using Horn’s parallel analysis and the MAP test. Both methods indicated a five-factor solution. These five common factors accounted for 34.768%, 18.711%, 18.409%, 14.462%, and 13.650% of the variance, respectively. The cumulative variance contribution rate reached 71.014%. The specific values are shown in Table3; Figs.1and2. Using the unweighted least squares extraction method followed by varimax rotation, all items exhibited factor loadings exceeding 0.400 on their primary factor, with no significant cross-loadings. The rotated factor matrix clearly showed the assignment of items to factors. Therefore, the CCCQ-C retained its original 5 dimensions and 30 items. The specific results are shown in Table4.

Confirmatory factor analysis was conducted using sample set B (n= 300). An initial model (M1) was established, and maximum likelihood estimation was used to fit the data. The results showed that the goodness of fit index (GFI) was poor (0.766 < 0.8). Subsequently, the MI for each item was analyzed. An MI value greater than 20 indicated a strong relationship between the two measurement items, suggested that a covariance relationship could be established to improve model fit. It was found that the MI value between Q22 and Q21 was 55.668. Establishing a covariance relationship between these two items under the F3 dimension was expected to reduce the chi-square value by 55.668. After the first optimization, the GFI of the model reached 0.775 but still performed poorly. Further modifications involved establishing covariance relationships between the following item pairs: Q7 and Q6, Q12 and Q29, Q21 and Q20, and Q27 and Q8. Ultimately, the modified model achieved a GFI of 0.809 (> 0.8) and an NFI value of 0.854 (> 0.8), indicating an acceptable fit. Other main fit indicators also performed well (Table5). Therefore, no items were deleted, and the final version of the CCCQ-C retained its original 5 dimensions and 30 items. The standardized solutions and paths for the parameter estimation of the modified model were shown in Fig.3.

Convergent and discriminant validity tests were conducted on 600 samples. All items and dimensions of the CCCQ-C were retained.

Convergent validity showed that the AVE of the exchange of information dimension is 0.531, and the CR is 0.846; the AVE of the fostering health relationships with the healthcare-team dimension is 0.447, and the CR is 0.884; the AVE of the recognizing and responding to emotions dimension is 0.616, and the CR is 0.889; the AVE of the managing care dimension is 0.376, and the CR is 0.702; the AVE of the decision making dimension is 0.514, and the CR is 0.861. The AVE of all five dimensions was greater than 0.36 and the CR was greater than 0.7, indicating that the CCCQ-C has good convergent validity.

The discriminant validity test revealed significant differences in certain demographic variables. Caregivers who had a primary school education and a monthly income exceeding 10,000 yuan, as well as caregivers of patients who had other medical reimbursement types, received combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy, or were at Stage I of the disease, had significantly higher scores. For detailed data, please refer to Table6.

The McDonald’s omega coefficient of the 600 CCCQ-C questionnaires was 0.965, with each dimension ranging from 0.941 to 0.953, indicating that the overall questionnaire and each dimension had good internal consistency. The Pearson correlation coefficients between the 43 retested questionnaires two weeks apart and the initial questionnaires were 0.728 to 0.761, all greater than 0.7 (P< 0.01), and the total score was 0.820, with the ICC being 0.806, indicating that the scale had good stability. Therefore, no items or dimensions were deleted.

Among the 600 total samples, the distribution proportion of the highest score (150) was 0.17%, and the distribution proportion of the lowest score (30) was 0%. Neither exceeded 15%. This indicates that there were no floor or ceiling effects in the data of this study.

This study followed Brislin’s translation principles and Chinese language norms to translate and modify the original questionnaire. Experts with over 20 years of bilingual background and rich experience in communicating with cancer caregivers, from fields such as medicine, nursing, and psychology, were selected for harmonization. They evaluated the questionnaire items and provided constructive suggestions to ensure the content equivalence and adaptability of the CCCQ-C. Additionally, multiple caregivers were invited to participate in the pretest, and cultural sensitivity adjustments were made. For instance, Item 8 (“My health-care team shows that he/she is committed to my loved one’s care.“) replaced “loved ones” with “family and friends”, aligning with the collectivist emphasis on extended family relationships in Chinese culture. Similarly, Item 24 (“navigate the complex health-care system.“) was changed to “coping with a complex medical system” to reflect China’s unique medical context. Ensuring compliance with Chinese idiom expression habits and word order patterns. The CCCQ-C was eventually formed. Among 600 surveyed caregivers, 51 with primary school education fully understood the items and provided accurate ratings, indicating that the CCCQ-C uses plain language aligned with caregivers’ cognitive levels, effectively overcoming educational barriers.

Item analysis showed that there are significant differences in the scores of all items between the high-score group and the low-score group, confirming that the CCCQ-C can effectively distinguish the communication levels between healthcare teams and caregivers. Its validity was verified through assessments of content validity, structural validity, and convergent and discriminant validity. EFA showed that the questionnaire’s content was well-explained by extracted common factors, with clear dimensional assignments. CFA of the adjusted model demonstrated good fit indices, affirming the translated questionnaire’s validity. Reliability testing, including internal consistency and test-retest reliability, yielded satisfactory results. The critical ratio, EFA and test-retest reliability analyses conducted in this study ensured demonstrated that the CCCQ-C has good item discrimination, structural validity and temporal stability in cross-cultural settings [38,39]. This compensates for the deficiencies of the original questionnaire in terms of reliability and validity testing. The final Chinese version of the questionnaire has the same factor structure as the original questionnaire, including 5 dimensions and 30 items. The total score difference is not significant, indicating its comparability for cross-regional research.

The item with the lowest average score was Item 15 (“My health-care team tries to determine if I feel anxious, depressed, or stressed.“), which was consistent with the original questionnaire. This suggested that, whether in Western countries or in China, healthcare teams tended to overlook the emotional suppression that caregivers may experience. The item with the highest average score in the CCCQ-C was item 20 (“My health-care team helps me make choices and implement plans.“), while in the CCCQ, the item with the highest average score was item 4 (“I feel comfortable sharing information with my health-care team.“). This may reflect the differences in the relationship between healthcare teams and caregivers in different countries. In China, caregivers view the healthcare team as an “authoritative supporter” and rely on their guidance and assistance in the decision making process [41], rather than an equal exchange of information. This difference reduces the equality of communication between healthcare teams and caregivers, making this item different from the original questionnaire.

In the dimension of “fostering health relationships with health-care team”, the CCCQ-C score was the highest. This might be related to the fact that in the Chinese social context, maintaining a good doctor-patient relationship is an important factor influencing the patient’s treatment outcome [42], and caregivers establish a trusting relationship with the healthcare team to ensure the quality of medical care for the patient. The CCCQ-C scored the lowest in the “managing care” dimension. Reflecting that there are still deficiencies in care management by the healthcare team in China, which is consistent with what Zhao proposed that in the Chinese medical environment, there is a lack of continuous communication channels between caregivers and the healthcare team, a cognitive bias of medical staff towards care needs, and a lack of collaboration mechanisms [43].

Furthermore, the discriminant validity shows that caregivers with a primary school education, a monthly income of over 10,000 yuan, those who care for patient with other types of medical reimbursement (combined medical insurance and commercial insurance), those who receive combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy, and those caring for patient with stage I tumors have higher CCCQ-C scores. This reflects the interaction between the Chinese medical environment and social culture. Caregivers with lower education levels may have higher trust in healthcare teams, lower communication expectations, and be more likely to perceive positive communication [41,44]. High income and supplementary commercial insurance reimbursement (for expenses outside the basic medical insurance coverage) reduce the economic burden and anxiety of caregivers, enhance their resource acquisition ability and communication initiative [45]. The complexity of combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy prompts caregivers to strengthen information sharing and emotional support with the healthcare teams [46]. Meanwhile, the optimistic prognosis, simple treatment, and lighter decision making burden of stage I patients make it easier for caregivers’ needs to be met through basic communication [47].

The CCCQ-C can be used as a localized tool to evaluate the communication quality between healthcare teams and caregivers in the Chinese medical environment. Based on the findings of this study, there are multiple implications for clinical practice, research, and policy. In terms of clinical practice: First, given the lowest average score on item 15 of the CCCQ-C, healthcare teams should pay attention to the emotional state of caregivers and incorporate their emotional issues into the overall care plan, implementing diverse psychological support methods to alleviate their stress. Second, based on the results of discriminant validity, healthcare teams need to be aware of the obstacles to communication caused by educational level, economic status, and patient condition for caregivers. They should strengthen professional training to enhance members’ ability to identify the differences in communication needs of caregivers under different circumstances and implement differentiated communication strategies. Third, in light of the questionnaire scores, healthcare teams should recognize that in the Chinese medical environment, caregivers have a high level of trust and dependence on the authority of healthcare teams. In communication, they should not only play a professional guiding role but also treat caregivers as important partners, enhance interaction equality, improve collaboration mechanisms, and clarify the responsibilities and work processes of all parties. In terms of research: First, given that the convergent validity of the CCCQ-C in the dimensions of “fostering health relationships with health-care team” and “managing care” did not reach the ideal threshold, subsequent research should further optimize its applicability in the Chinese medical environment. Second, combined with qualitative research, analyze the effective communication status between healthcare teams and caregivers in this environment, identify deficiencies and promoting/hindering factors, and provide a basis for the training and education of medical staff and the formulation of corresponding countermeasures or measures. Third, in conjunction with existing communication scales for cancer patients’ families and nurse-patient treatment communication, explore the three-party communication strategy model among healthcare teams, patients, and caregivers. Fourth, although East Asian countries are generally influenced by Eastern culture, they are not completely homogeneous. Each country has its own cultural and medical environmental diversity and differences [48–50]. Research in various languages can be conducted in other countries. Compare the application differences of CCCQ-C between China and other countries and construct communication models that fit their respective cultures. In terms of policy-making: First, formulate training policies, requiring medical institutions to incorporate communication skills training between medical staff and patients into the regular training system for medical staff and conduct specialized training on effective communication. Second, improve caregiver support policies, covering economic assistance, psychological support, and skills training, while optimizing the medical insurance reimbursement process and increasing the reimbursement ratio to reduce the economic burden on caregivers and alleviate communication anxiety caused by economic pressure.

Although this study provided many inspirations, there are still limitations. Firstly, the convenience sampling method was adopted, and the samples were mainly from a single province in southern China. The clinical convenience sampling method may limit the generalizability of the research results to other populations. Future studies can expand the regions and conduct stratified sampling in multiple hospitals to obtain more diverse and inclusive samples. Additionally, this study encompassed friends as caregivers, but the data collection mainly focused on family members, and no information was obtained about friends as caregivers. Therefore, the applicable population was not fully covered.

The CCCQ-C consists of 5 dimensions and 30 items. The 5 dimensions cover the exchange of information, fostering health relationships with health-care team, recognizing and responding to emotions, managing care, and decision making. When evaluating the communication quality between healthcare teams and caregivers in the Chinese cancer care environment, the questionnaire demonstrates good and acceptable psychometric properties and is a reliable and effective measurement tool. It provides valuable guidance for future practice, research, and policy making.

Special thanks to all study participants for their contribution to the research.