Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) commonly exhibits biallelic inactivation ofVHLgenes, profoundly impacting intracellular metabolic pathways and utilization of metabolic substrates. The aims of this study were to validate the metabolomic profile previously identified in ccRCC surgical specimens, to construct a metabolic classification in ccRCC, and to exploratorily investigate metabolic biomarkers of systemic therapy response.

We first examined the metabolome in 52 paired tumor/normal surgical ccRCC samples, and then compared the metabolites using paired t-test. Unsupervised clustering analysis was done, and the patients were divided into four subgroups. Then tumor grade and transcriptome analyses were compared among the four groups. Finally, to compare the metabolome according to the effect of systemic therapy, we analyzed 9 patients with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (VEGF-TKI) and 11 patients with immune checkpoint blockade (ICB), respectively.

The upper stream of glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway were commonly activated, along with elevated glutamine levels and reduced proteinogenic amino acids (AAs) other than glutamine in ccRCC tissues, consistent with prior findings. Lactate levels, previously reported as elevated, varied across metabolic subgroups. he Metabolic subgroups enriched with high-grade tumors demonstrated lower expression of VEGF pathway-related genes. VEGF-TKI responders showed decreased levels of some fatty acids. ICI responders exhibited reduced levels of tryptophan and hydroquinone. alongside increased levels of pyruvic acid-oxime, 3-hydroxypropinoic acid, and hydroxylamine.

We validated the landscape of the ccRCC metabolome and identified some metabolites as potential biomarkers for predicting therapeutic response in RCC.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12885-025-14661-4.

Keywords:Biomarker, Clear cell renal cell carcinoma, Kidney cancer, Metabolome.

Worldwide, an estimated 434,849 cases of kidney cancer will be diagnosed and 155,953 will die from it in 2022 (GLOBOCAN 2022:https://gco.iarc.who.int/today/en/dataviz/). Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) accounts for 70–80% of all renal cell carcinomas (RCCs), and the biallelic inactivation ofVHL(von Hippel-Lindau) genes is observed in around 90% of ccRCCs [1,2]. Approximately one quarter of patients with RCC have locally advanced or metastatic lesions at diagnosis, and another quarter of patients will develop metastatic disease after curative local therapy [1,3]. Patients with unresectable lesions require systemic therapy for disease control, and the main strategies in recent standard systemic therapies are vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway interruption, immune checkpoint blockade (ICB), and their combination treatments [4,5]. Combined ICB therapy with nivolumab and ipilimumab (NI) provides durable response of 5 years or longer in more than 30% of patients; however, more than two thirds of these patients have initial or adaptive resistance [6]. Combination regimens with an anti-PD-1 and a tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting the VEGF receptor (VEGF-TKI) show higher response rates, but fewer patients achieve durable response [7–10]. Durable responses with nivolumab monotherapy or a VEGF-TKI monotherapy are even rarer [6–11]. There is a need to develop biomarkers that predict therapeutic response and to develop strategies to overcome treatment resistance.

ccRCC is essentially a metabolic disease characterized by a reprogramming of energetic metabolism [12–15]. Since inactivation of VHL protein induces the accumulation of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) [16], HIFs are constantly activated in most ccRCC cells even under normoxia [17]. HIFs are transcription factors that regulate a wide range of gene expression, including glycolysis-related genes and pentose phosphate pathway (PPP)-related genes, e.g.,GLUT1(glucose transporter 1),PKM2(pyruvate kinase isoform M2),HK1(hexokinase-1),HK2(hexokinase-2),LDHA(lactate dehydrogenase-A), andPDK1(pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase-1) [13,18]. The accumulation of HIFs and the expression of HIF-regulated genes in ccRCC well explain the so-called Warburg effect, which has long been known that solid tumors use aerobic glucose metabolism and glycolysis rather than the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and oxidative phosphorylation as energy sources [19–21]. HIFs also promote lipid deposition [15,22,23] and angiogenesis [24]. The fact that HIFs accumulate even under normoxia, while there are abundant blood vessels carrying metabolic sources, may make a difference in the metabolome between ccRCC and other types of cancer.

Besides, alterations in Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway genes are observed [1,2], and the pathway is widely activated in ccRCC [25–28]. Moreover, mTOR inhibition is a part of treatment strategies for ccRCC [29,30]. mTOR activation could suppress amino acid production by inhibiting autophagy [31]. In previous reports of ccRCC, amino acids (AAs) other than glutamine are low in contrast to other cancers [32–39].

Many previous reports have mentioned that intra-tumoral immune cells are highly relevant to metabolic sources in the tumor microenvironment [40–42]. For instance, since activation of innate and adaptive immune cells requires glucose, these cells and cancer cells compete for glucose. Lactate suppresses the functions of CD8 positive T cells and helper T cells. However, immunosuppressive CD4 positive T cells, regulatory T cells, can survive in a low glucose, high lactate environment [43]. Glutamine can be a source for fuel adenosine triphosphate production in T cells, macrophages, antitumor immune cells, and ccRCC cells [44–46]. A tryptophan catabolic product, kynurenine, suppresses T cell function [47,48].

In this study, we investigated the metabolome in ccRCC surgical specimens and designed (1) to validate the metabolome in ccRCC surgical specimens, (2) to construct tumor metabolic classification in ccRCC, (3) to exploratorily investigate metabolic status that could promise benefit from systemic therapy (VEGF-TKI and ICB).

We examined specimens histologically diagnosed with ccRCC by a pathologist between 2010 and 2016 at Yamagata University Hospital. The samples were fresh frozen and stored at − 80℃ before metabolomic characterization. Disease- and patient-associated metadata, including tumor nuclear grade, metastatic status, and patient characteristics, were also obtained.

Tumor tissues and surrounding normal tissues were resected from patients with ccRCC. The resected tissue samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, weighed, and stored at − 80 °C until metabolite extraction.

Metabolites were extracted from kidney tissues. The cells were washed twice with 5% mannitol solution (8 mL and then 4 mL) and then treated with 800-µL methanol and 150-µL Milli-Q water containing 5-µg 2-isopropylmalic acid as an internal control. The metabolite extract was transferred to a microfuge tube and dried using a Spin Dryer (TAITEC). Derivatization in the solid phase was performed as described below. The solid phase cartridge Presh-SPE AOS was supplied by AiSTI SCIENCE (Wakayama). The cell extract was mixed with 200-µL Milli-Q water and 800-µL acetonitrile and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. After centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The derivatization conditions were 3-min methoximation with 5-µL more than 5% methoxyamine solution and 10-min trimethylsilylation with 25-µL N-methyl-N-trimethylsilyl-trifluoroacetamide. The derivatized analytes were effectively eluted with 100-µL n-hexane, and 1.0 µL of the derivatized solution was injected into GCMS-TQ8050 (Shimadzu), a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer.

Metabolome analysis was performed on a GCMS-TQ8050 equipped with a BPX-5 capillary column (internal diameter: 30 m × 0.25 mm; film thickness: 0.25 μm) (SEG, Victoria). During GCMS-TQ8050 analysis, the inlet temperature was maintained at 250 °C, and helium was used as a carrier gas at a constant flow rate of 39.0 cm/s. The injector split ratio was set to 1:10. The GC column temperature was programmed to remain at 60 °C for 2 min and then rise from 60 °C to 330 °C at a rate of 15 °C per min, before being maintained at 330 °C for 3 min. The total GC run time was 23 min. The transfer-line and ion-source temperatures were 280 °C and 200 °C, respectively. The ionization voltage was 70 eV. Argon gas was used as a collision-induced dissociation gas. The metabolites were detected using the Smart Metabolites Database (Shimadzu), which contains the relevant MRM method file and data regarding the GC analytical conditions, MRM parameters, and retention index employed for metabolite measurements. The Automatic Adjustment of Retention Time function of GCMS solution software (Shimadzu) and a standard alkane series mixture (C7–C33) were used to correct the retention time. Peaks were identified automatically and confirmed manually based on the specific precursor and product ions and the retention time. Procedures and parameter settings for metabolite measurements were as previously described [49].

RNA was extracted from formalin fixed formalin embedded ccRCC samples. A library was constructed using the extracted RNA with Ion AmpliSeq Transcriptome Human Gene Expression Kit (A26325, Thermo Fisher scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.　Amplicon-based libraries for each transcripts were amplified from extracted RNAs specimens by RT-PCR. Quantification of libraries was carried out a 4150 TapeStation system (Agilent Technologies) using a D1000 ScreenTape (5067–5582, Agilent Technologies). Prepared library were performed on semi-conductor sequencer by Ion GeneStudio S5 (Thermo Fisher scientific) using Ion 540 Kit-OT2 and Ion 540 Chip (A27753, A27765, Thermo Fisher scientific). Sequenced data was analyzed usingin houseSTAR-RSEM nextflow pipeline using high performance computing system. The obtained sequenced reads were mapped with the human genome reference build GRCh38/hg38 by STAR program (https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR, Ver.2.7.10a), Ver.2.7.10a, and quantification of gene transcripts per million (TPM) were calculated by RSEM program (https://github.com/deweylab/RSEM, Ver.1.3.3).

ccRCC cell lines 786-O, A704, A498, and 769-P were purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). The cells were cultured as described previously [50]. RPMI 1640 medium (containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 50-µg/mL kanamycin) was used for RCC cell lines in the presence of 5% CO2at 37 °C in a high-humidity incubator. For cell migration and recovery, trypsin-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (T4049, Sigma-Aldrich) was used, and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was used as the wash solution before subculture and during various tests. Metabolome were measured before and after treatment of 100 nM rapamycine (Selleck Chemicals).

Metabolites with > 50% missing values were removed. Missing metabolites were estimated using k-Nearest Neighbors. Data scaling was adjusted with mean-centered and divided by the standard deviation of each variable to adjust for normal distribution (Supplementary Fig. 1). Comparing paired metabolites in normal and tumor tissues, all metabolites were analyzed with fold change (FC) of tumor/normal, Volcano plot was delineated and up- or down-metabolites with > 1.5|FC| and < 0.05 q using paired-t-test and false discovery rate correction were detected. Hierarchical clustering heatmap was portrayed with Euclidean distance and Ward method using all metabolites. Then subgroups were compared using quantitative enrichment analysis using KEGG library, and grade was compared among four groups divided by hierarchical clustering using one-way ANOVA. RNAseq data was compared among each cluster using Gene Set Enrichment analysis. A gene set used was “c2.cp.pid.v2025.1.Hs.symbols.gmt” in Human Collection (MSigDB). Number of permutations was 1000.

To compare the metabolome according to the effect of systemic therapy, we analyzed nine and eleven patients with VEGF-TKI and ICI, respectively. Hierarchical clustering heatmap was portrayed with Euclidean distance and Ward method using top 5 transcriptome detected by variable importance projection score in component 1 of partial least squares -discriminant analysis for predicting responder and non-responder. Responders were defined as patients who experienced shrinkage without new lesions. Statistical analyses were performed using MetaboAnalyst 6.0 (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca/), GSEA 4.4.0. (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/index.jsp) and R (version 3.3.1).

We analyzed 475 metabolites in 52 ccRCC lesions and paired adjacent normal tissues. Patient characteristics are shown in Table1. In addition, we did transcriptome analysis in 31 ccRCC lesions.

The calculated amounts of metabolites are shown in Supplementary Table 1. Comparisons between normal and tumor tissues showed statistically significant differences in 105 of 475 metabolites, with 29 metabolites increasing more than 1.5-fold and 67 metabolites decreasing less than 0.67-fold in tumor lesions (Fig.1A and Supplementary Table 2).

In tumor lesions, metabolites of the upper stream of glycolysis (i.e., glucose, fructose 1-phosphate [F1P], and glucose 6-phosphate [G6P]), PPP (i.e., ribulose 5-pohsphate [Ru5P] and ribose 5-phosphate [R5P]), and sugars (i.e., fructose, trehalose, maltose, and xylulose) were highly abundant, whereas the metabolites of proteinogenic AAs other than glutamine (i.e., serine, threonine, tyrosine, valine, leucine, isoleucine, and methionine, and histidine), purine metabolites (i.e., hypoxanthine and uric acid), catecholamines (i.e., norepinephrine and dopamine), and TCA cycle (i.e., 2-ketoglutarate and malic acid) were less abundant (Fig.1A and B). Tumor tissues contained high level of mannose 6-phosphate (M6P)(FC = 13.495 and q = 0.004 in mannose 6-phosphate-meto-6TMS(1), FC = 7.129 and q < 0.001 in mannose 6-phosphate-meto-6TMS(2)), and kynurenine (FC = 6.870 and q < 0.001 in kynurenine-3TMS), whereas the amount of tryptophan was lower in tumor tissue (FC = 0.358 and q < 0.001 in tryptophan-3TMS). The amount of lactate (FC = 1.01 and q = 0.645 in lactic acid-2TMS) did not show the difference between normal and tumor tissues in this cohort.

Many studies have shown that other types of cancer store AAs [39]. In this study, however, AAs were less abundant (Fig.1and Supplementary Table 2), which agrees with the findings of previous studies on ccRCC [32,34–36]. Since the mTOR pathway is commonly activated in ccRCC [25–28] and mTOR activation could suppress AA production by inhibiting autophagy [31], we examined the metabolic changes after rapamycin treatment in ccRCC cell lines. As expected, rapamycin treatment increased AAs (Supplementary Fig. 2).

To evaluate whether the metabolic signatures are uniform or broad across ccRCC tissues, we performed unsupervised consensus clustering analysis and show the results in Fig.2A. Metabolic subgroups A and C included a higher proportion of high-grade tumors a.009 for A vs. D; Fig.2B).

In metabolic subgroup A, consistent with the overall analysis, there was no increase in lactate levels; however, glutamine levels were decreased (Fig.2C and Supplementary Table 3). Enrichment analysis revealed that subgroup A had lower levels of metabolites associated with pyrimidine metabolism, beta-Alanine metabolism, and Nicotinate and nicotinamide metabolism (Fig.2D, Supplementary Fig.3, and Supplementary Table 4). Additionally, subgroup A exhibited reduced expressions of genes involved in the HIF1, HIF2, and VEGFR 1/2 pathways (Fig.2E and Supplementary Table 5).

In metabolic subgroup B, lactate levels were not elevated, and glutamine levels were high (Fig.2F and Supplementary Table 6). Compared to the other subgroups, subgroup B showed higher levels of metabolites relate to pyrimidine metabolism, beta-Alanine metabolism, and Nitrogen metabolism (Fig.2G, Supplementary Fig. 4, and Supplementary Table 7). Furthermore, subgroup B demonstrated increased expressions of genes associated with the HIF2, VEGFR 1/2, Integrin1, and CXCR4 pathways (Fig.2H and Supplementary Table 8).

In metabolic subgroup C, both lactate and glutamine levels were elevated, while tryptophan levels were not decreased (Fig.2I and Supplementary Table 9). Enrichment analysis indicated higher levels of metabolites involved in amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, fructose and mannose metabolism, and starch and sucrose metabolism. Although PPP was elevated across all metabolic subgroups, it was particularly pronounced in subgroup C (Fig.2J, Supplementary Fig. 5, and Supplementary Table 10). Subgroup C also showed reduced expressions of genes related to VEGFR 1/2, Integrin1, MYC, and IL6 pathways (Fig.2K and Supplementary Table 11).

In metabolic subgroup D, levels of lactate, FAs and AAs—including glutamine and tryptophan—were elevated (Fig.2L and Supplementary Table 12). Enrichment analysis revealed increased levels of metabolites associated with fatty acid metabolism, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis metabolism, and AA metabolism (Fig.2G, Supplementary Fig. 6, and Supplementary Table 13). Subgroup D exhibited lower expressions of genes related to Integrin1 pathways (Fig.2M and Supplementary Table 14).

Tumor specimens from TKI-VEGF responders showed poorly abundant FAs (Fig.3A).

Tumor specimens from ICB responders exhibited low levels of tryptophan and hydroquinone, and high levels of pyruvic acid-oxime, 3-hydroxypropinoic acid, and hydroxylamine (Fig.3B).

In this study, we firstly performed a comprehensive metabolomic analysis of ccRCC lesions and normal tissues in ccRCC surgical tissues, comparing their metabolic profiles. Consistent with previous reports [13,32–35,51,52], the upper stream of glycolysis and the PPP were commonly activated across ccRCC tissues (Figs.1and2). Our metabolomic analysis results were also consistent with in vitro studies showing that HIFs upregulate the upper stream of glycolysis and the PPP [18,53], and with comprehensive genomic analyses showing ccRCC harborsVHLinactivation, which induces HIF accumulation [2]. PPP contributes to reactive oxygen species scavenger by glutathione reduction via NADPH production and its suppression causes a decrease in ccRCC survival [51]. The levels of proteinogenic AAs, excluding glutamine, were low in ccRCC samples without distinguishing between essential and non-essential AAs, which is also consistent with the findings of previous studies on ccRCC [32,34–36]. Although the level of glutamine in tumor samples showed higher than that in normal samples, the correlation with other AAs (Figs.1and2) suggested that the low amino acid levels are due to something other thande novosynthase. In many other cancers, numerous studies have shown that AAs are abundantly contained, because AAs are used in cancer cells not only as substrates for protein synthesis but also as metabolites and metabolic regulators that support cancer cell growth, and that the demand for AAs increases with cancer growth [39,54]. We hypothesized that the differences between ccRCC and other cancers are caused by mTOR activation. To test this hypothesis, we suppressed mTOR activation using mTOR inhibitor rapamycin in several ccRCC cell lines, which showed increased AAs including glutamine as expected (Supplementary Fig. 2). Furthermore, this study showed metabolites related to TCA cycle were impaired. This result is consistent with the previous studies, which demonstrated mitochondrial dysfunction in ccRCC [52].

While many metabolites are consistent with previous reports, the mean lactate level in tumors was similar to that in normal samples in this cohort (Fig.1), in contrast to previous reports showing higher lactate levels in tumors [35]. We reasoned that the variation in lactate levels among ccRCC tissues may account for the differences between this study and previous studies. Therefore, we performed unsupervised consensus clustering analysis. As a result, lactate was abundant in metabolic subgroups C and D, which included a lower levels of gene expression related to Integrin 1 (Fig.2). This result supports that the Warburg effect plays an important role especially in ccRCC cells. Although recent developments in the field of metabolome analysis have shown that energy supply via pathways other than the Warburg effect (e.g. glutaminolysis) is more important in many solid tumors, ccRCC is the only tumor where a convincing shift towards glycolytic metabolism has been demonstrated among several tumors investigated by isotope tracing method using13C-labeled glucose [55]. Previous reports also indicated that the Warburg effect plays a greater role in energy supply in high-grade ccRCC, while lipid metabolism plays a role in low-grade cancers [56]. In this study, metabolic subgroup D contained high FAs and a higher proportion of low-grade cancers (Fig.2). In addition, ccRCC tissues contained more fructose. Previous reports have shown that fructose contributes to the Warburg effect, and this fructose pathway did not influence 2-deoxy-2-[18F]-fluroro-D-glucose (FDG) uptake [57]. FDG-positron emission tomography often fails to detect ccRCC, and patients with high FDG uptake had poor survival [58]. We also performed transcriptome to clarify the correlation between metabolomic subtypes and gene expression profile. Metabolic subgroups A and C, which had higher proportion of high-grade tumors, showed lower expression of HIF and VEGFR related-genes. However, the gene expression profile did not provide a clear reason for the differences in the metabolic subgroups.

The levels of FAs were low in ccRCC samples, except the patients in subgroup D. The pattern of FA level was similar between saturated FA/mono-unsaturated FA, which is synthesized from citrate in cells, and poly-unsaturated FA, which is not synthesized in cells. In addition, patients with low saturated FAs in tumor tissue showed better response for VEGF-TKI (Fig.3A). Yang et al. demonstrated that long chain acyl-CoA synthase 1 (ACSL1) is down-regulated in ccRCC and its down-regulation reduced fatty acid metabolism. Furthermore, the low level of ACLS1 is associated with higher sensitivity of a VEGF-TKI, pazopanib [59].

Kynurenine was highly contained through metabolic subgroups. Previous reports demonstrated that kynurenine facilitated differentiation from CD4 T cells to immune-suppressive T reg cells and PD-1 expression on CD8 T cells [60]. When comparing metabolites between responders and non-responders for ICB treatment, the levels of tryptophan were lower in responders (Fig.3B), potentially indicating mTOR pathway activation (Supplementary Fig. 1). The mTOR pathway, frequently activated in various cancers, including ccRCC, is known to regulate cell growth, proliferation, migration, metastasis, survival, autophagy, and metabolism. Recent studies revealed that the mTOR-mediated inflammatory response can promote the recruitment of immune cells to tumor microenvironment [61].

Despite its contributions, this study has limitations. First, the number of samples for which metabolomics was evaluated. In particular, the analyses for the effect of systemic therapy included too small number, which leads to difficulty in estimating without bias. Second, although we could cluster the relationship between renal cancer and metabolites, we could not demonstrate any clinical significance except for grade, and further studies are needed. Third, our methods did not show the origin of metabolites. Fourth, because metabolome is dynamic and reflects trivial changes, surgical procedure could affect the metabolome. Fifth, because ccRCC has intra-tumoral heterogeneity [62,63], it is not necessarily that the samples we examined may not be representative of the whole population. Finally, this study warrants further validated.

The upper stream of glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway were commonly enhanced and AAs other than glutamine were commonly low level in ccRCC. Lactate and glutamine levels varied among ccRCC subgroups. Metabolic subgroups, which poorly expressed HIFs and VEGFR related genes, had higher proportion of high-grade tumors. VEGF-TKI responders exhibited low levels of fatty acids. In addition, ICB responders showed lower levels of tryptophan.

Abbreviations: Ope., operation; PN, partial nephrectomy; RN, radical nephrectomy; Lap, laparoscopic; RAPN, robot-assisted partial nephrectomy; DM, diabetes mellitus; HL, hyperlipidemia; HU, hyperuricemia; F1,6BP, fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone phosphate; 6PGL, 6-phosphogluconolactonase; 6PG, 6-phosphogluconate; G3P, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; 1,3BPG, 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate; 3PG, 3-phosphoglycerate; 2PG, 2-phosphoglycerate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; PYR, pyruvate; LAC, lactate; ALA, alanine; 3PHP, 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate; 3PSER, 3-phosphoserine; SER, Serine; GLY, glycine; CYS, cysteine; AcCoA, acetyl coenzyme A; CIT, citrate; ACO, aconitate; ISC, isocitrate; AKG, α-ketoglutarate; SUCCoA, succinyl coenzyme A; SUC, succinate; FUM, fumarate; MAL, malate; OAA, oxaloacetate; ASP, aspartic acid; ASN, asparagine, ARG, arginine; PRO, proline; GLU, glutamic acid; GLN, glutamine; KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia Genes and Genomes; GSEA, gene set enrichment analysis; PID, pathway interaction database.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We would like to thank Enago (www.enago.jp) for the English language editing.