Although previous observational studies have revealed a significant relationship between tea consumption and reduced mortality risk, the associations of adding sugar or alternative sweeteners to tea with mortality risks are still largely unknown. This study aimed to evaluate the associations of consumption of unsweetened, sugar-sweetened, and artificially sweetened tea with all-cause and cause-specific mortality. A total of 180,344 participants in the UK Biobank were eligible for this study. Data for dietary consumption of unsweetened, sugar-sweetened, and artificially sweetened tea by a 24-hour dietary assessment tool were acquired. During a median follow-up of 11.7 years, 6809 deaths were recorded. Cox models with cubic splines showed significant associations between unsweetened and sugar-sweetened tea and lower all-cause mortality [HRs (95%CI), 0.78 (0.73–0.83)]. Unsweetened tea consumers also had lower risks for cancer and cardiovascular disease (CVD) mortality with the respective HRs (95%CI) of 0.81 (0.74–0.88) and 0.74 (0.64–0.86). The relationship between artificially sweetened tea and mortality risks was inconclusive. Furthermore, more amounts of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to tea may impact the association with mortality. Our findings highlighted that moderate intake of unsweetened and sugar-sweetened tea was associated with lower mortality risks.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12889-025-24063-7.

Tea is among the most popular beverages consumed both in the UK and worldwide [1]. As an extract produced from the leaves of the plant Camellia sinensis, tea contains high concentrations of several beneficial compounds, such as flavonoids, thearubigins, caffeine, and other antioxidants, which have been found to exert promising antioxidative, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer effects [1–4]. The health effects of tea intake have been widely investigated, and tea consumption has been considered a healthful life habit for the prevention of various human diseases, such as CVD and cancer [5,6].

Multiple lines of evidence have indicated that tea drinking has a negative correlation with mortality risks [7–10]. However, the effects of the intake of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to tea on mortality risks are still largely unknown. Despite health warnings, the consumption of sugar remains high worldwide, and the regular consumption of sugar in beverages has become a severe health problem globally [11]. In the UK, a sugar tax has been adopted to specifically target sugar-sweetened beverages because they can produce highly hidden calories that are harmful to health [12,13]. In the UK, tea was especially commonly consumed with sugar or alternative sweeteners [5]. However, unlike these commercially prepared beverages, sweetened tea often escapes the attention of public health campaigns, even though many people frequently sweeten tea at home to a degree that may rival or exceed sugar levels in pre-prepared sugar-sweetened beverages [14–16]. Currently, alternative sweeteners have been recommended as sugar substitutes, particularly for sugar-sweetened beverages [17]. However, multiple studies have reported inconsistent results regarding the benefits or harmful effects of alternative sweeteners [18–22], and they are currently not recommended by the WHO for weight management [23–25]. Several previous studies have revealed associations of sugar-sweetened and artificially sweetened beverages with several human diseases, such as hypertension, obesity, and type 2 diabetes [26–30]. Moreover, associations between sugar and artificially sweetened beverages and the risk of mortality have been explored in several studies. For instance, a recently published study of the UK Biobank cohort suggests that high sugar-sweetened beverage consumption is positively associated with all-cause mortality, but no significant associations of mortality risks with 100% fruit/vegetable juices and artificially sweetened beverages were found in 198,285 UK Biobank participants [31]. However, population-based studies have reported conflicting results, and limited studies have distinguished the effects of unsweetened, sugar-sweetened, and artificially sweetened tea intake on health outcomes. Therefore, further exploration of the effects of the amount of sugar and alternative sweeteners added to tea on health is warranted, and determining the long-term impact of such consumption is of great importance.

Herein, our study aimed to assess the relationship of sugar-sweetened, artificially sweetened, and unsweetened tea with all-cause and cause-specific mortality and to further illustrate the differing effects of the amount of sugar and alternative sweeteners added to tea and tea consumption on mortality risks in the UK Biobank, a large population-based cohort.

The UK Biobank is a large-scale prospective cohort study comprising 502,543 volunteer participants aged 37 to 73 years from the United Kingdom between 2006 and 2010. Participants completed a touch-screen questionnaire and a nurse-led interview, had physical measurements taken, and provided their socio-demographic and lifestyle information and biological samples as described in detail elsewhere [32,33]. All participants gave written informed consent. In our present analysis, a total of 210,968 participants who had completed at least 1 online 24-hour dietary recall questionnaire were included. Participants with an implausible energy intake (defined as those in the highest or lowest 1% of the distribution of the ratio of energy intake to estimated energy requirement: <3375 KJ or > 17292 KJ;n= 4220), those with cancer or cardiovascular disease (CVD) (n= 23769) at baseline, those who had overlap across unsweetened, sugar-sweetened, and artificially sweetened tea (n= 2132), and those who subsequently withdrew from the study (n= 503) were not included. As a result, 180,344 participants were included in the present study for further investigation.

Dietary information data of each participant were collected by utilizing a 24-hour dietary recall questionnaire called the Oxford WebQ, which provided information about the types and quantities of foods they consumed. Participants were invited to complete a total of 5 online questionnaires between April 2009 and June 2012. In each 24-hour dietary questionnaire, participants reported the number of tea drinks they had consumed in the previous 24 hours. In addition, they also reported whether they added sugar or sweeteners and the number of teaspoons/tablets of sugar or sweeteners added to tea. Participants were asked by the question in each 24-hour dietary questionnaire: “How many teaspoons/tablets of sweetener (e.g. Canderel) did you add to your tea/infusion (per drink)?” How many teaspoons of sugar did you add to your tea/infusion (per drink)?“. In each dietary recall, participants could be divided into 4 subgroups, including nonconsumers, unsweetened tea consumers, sugar-sweetened tea consumers, and artificially sweetened tea consumers. Because participants could participate a maximum of 5 times in the 24-hour dietary recall, we characterized participants who had consumed tea at any 1 dietary recall as tea drinkers, all other participants were classified as non-drinkers. The types of tea were also recorded, including black tea, green tea, herb tea, and other types. For each drinker, the mean number of drinks across multiple dietary recalls was calculated as the exposure variable. One drink was equal to approximately 250 mL. For the number of teaspoons/tablets of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to tea (per drink), we also used the mean intake.

Mortality information was acquired from death certificates according to the National Health Service Information Centre (England and Wales) and the National Health Service Central Register Scotland (Scotland). Death data were available until March 2021. We censored participants in the mortality analysis at this censoring date or the date of death, whichever occurred first. Specific death outcomes were classified by using the International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision. For this analysis, we measured all-cause mortality and mortality due to CVD (codes I00 to I99) and cancer (codes C00 to D48).

In our present analysis, the questionnaire was employed to select the following covariates of each participant at baseline: demographic variables including age, sex, ethnicity, Townsend deprivation index (TDI), and education level; smoking status, physical activity time, body mass index (BMI), and waist circumference; medical information, including hypertension, diabetes, family history of CVD, family history of cancer, long-standing illness, cholesterol-lowering drug use, blood pressure drug use, insulin drug use, vitamin, and mineral supplement use; and dietary intake of total energy, total sugar, fresh fruit, vegetables, red meat, processed meat, alcohol, milk, coffee, water, and water temperature. TDI was used as an area-based socioeconomic status, and negative TDI values suggested relative affluence. BMI was calculated by weight/height2. Long-standing illness was self-reported by the answer “yes or no” of each participant to the question “Do you have any long-standing illness, disability, or infirmity?” to assess the overall health status. The Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) was adopted to evaluate physical activity. Further details can be found in the UK Biobank protocol (https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/key-documents/). Any missing covariate data were imputed with multivariate imputation by chained equations for 5 data sets.

Baseline characteristics of all participants were summarized across tea intake as percentages for categorical variables and mean and standard deviations (SDs) for continuous variables. Baseline characteristics of the study population were compared across tea intake categories using analysis of variance (ANOVA) for continuous variables and chi-squared tests for categorical variables. The follow-up time of participants in the mortality analysis was identified from the date of attendance at the recruitment center to the date of the end of follow-up or the date of death, whichever occurred first. Cox proportional hazard models were employed to evaluate the prospective associations between unsweetened tea, sugar-sweetened tea, or artificially sweetened tea and all-cause, CVD, and cancer-specific mortality by calculating HRs and 95% CIs. Then, a nonparametrically cubic spline regression with knots at the 33rd and 67th was employed to illustrate the dose-dependent relationship between tea intake and mortality risks. Participants drinking tea were then categorized into 4 subgroups: 0–2 drinks/d, 2–4 drinks/d, and > 4 drinks/d. The proportional hazards assumption was tested using Schoenfeld residuals. Furthermore, we also investigated the potential impact of the amount of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to tea and total tea consumption on health outcomes. Participants were first divided into five groups based on the amount of sugar or alternative sweeteners that they added to their tea (unsweetened tea consumers, sugar-sweetened tea: 0–1, > 1 teaspoon/drink, artificially sweetened tea: 0–1, > 1 teaspoon/drink). Combined with tea consumption (0, 0–2, 2–4, > 4 drinks/day), we then created a new term with 20 combinations (5 × 4) of the amount of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to tea and tea consumption levels.

In our present analyses, 3 incremental models that included different covariates were employed. We adjusted for baseline age (continuous), sex (male or female), TDI (continuous), an education level (college degree or no college degree), ethnicity (white or other), smoking status (never, sometimes, or often), vigorous physical activity time (continuous), moderate physical activity time (continuous), light physical activity time (continuous), body mass index (continuous), hypertension (yes or no), diabetes (yes or no), family history of CVD (yes or no), family history of cancer (yes or no), long-standing illness (yes or no), cholesterol-lowering drug use (yes or no), blood pressure drug use (yes or no), insulin drug use (yes or no), vitamin and mineral supplement use (yes or no [vitamin A, B, C, D, or E; folic acid; or multivitamins or minerals]), and intake of total energy, total sugar, fresh fruit, vegetables, red meat, processed meat, alcohol, milk, coffee, and water.

To verify the robustness of the primary findings, we further performed several sensitivity analyses. We first excluded participants with outcome events during the first 2 years of follow-up. We then excluded participants with missing covariates. To maximize the representation of participants’ typical dietary habits, we also excluded a tea measurement if a participant had an unusual tea intake on any of 5 occasions. We removed the sugar added to tea from the total sugar and the energy produced by it from the total energy. We excluded participants who were drinking tea the year prior but not drinking tea the day before. We also accounted for environmental factors, including particulate matter less than 2.5 μm in diameter, between 2.5 and 10 μm in diameter, and greater than 10 μm in diameter; nitrogen dioxide; and green space percentage, proximity to a major road and distance to the coast. All analyses were performed using R software, version 4.1.1 (R Development Core Team, Vienna, Austria). Allp-values were two-sided and ap-value of less than 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance in all analyses. The study flow diagram is shown in Fig.1.

Table1summarizes the main characteristics of all participants by the presence of tea consumption. Among a total of 180,344 participants, 150,716 (83.6%) were tea consumers. Among tea consumers, most of them chose unsweetened tea (80.3%), followed by sugar-sweetened tea (13.3%) and artificially sweetened tea (6.4%). Drinkers of sugar-sweetened and artificially sweetened tea added an average of 1.09 teaspoons (SD, 0.58) and 1.38 teaspoons (SD, 0.61) of sugar and sweetener, respectively. Individuals with different tea categorizations had significant differences in all covariates. Nonconsumers of tea were more likely to drink coffee. Sugar-sweetened tea consumers were more likely to be male, from a lower social class, be heavy smokers, report hypertension, and generally have unhealthy diets, such as lower consumption of fruits and vegetables and higher consumption of processed meat and alcohol. Artificially sweetened tea drinkers were more likely to be older and obese and to report less physical time, be more likely to have diabetes, and a family history of CVD. Unsweetened tea consumers were of a higher social class and generally had healthier diets (Table1).

During a median follow-up of 11.7 years (IQR, 11.1 to 12.5 years; total person-years, 2115224), we recorded 6809 deaths (including 3870 cancer deaths and 1200 CVD deaths). First, we illustrated the associations of the consumption of unsweetened tea, sugar-sweetened tea, and artificially sweetened tea with all causes and cause-specific mortality risks. In the Cox proportional hazard models, drinkers of unsweetened tea had lower risks for all-cause mortality, cancer and CVD mortality than non-tea drinkers after adjustment for lifestyle, sociodemographic, and clinical factors, with hazard ratios and 95% confidence interval (HRs (95%CI)) of 0.78 (0.73–0.83), 0.81 (0.74–0.88), and 0.74 (0.64–0.86), respectively. Concerning drinkers of sugar-sweetened tea, lower risks for all-cause and cancer-specific mortality were detected in the adjusted model with HRs (95%CI) of 0.85 (0.78–0.93) and 0.87 (0.77–0.98), respectively, while no significant lower CVD mortality risks (HRs (95%CI): 0.91 (0.74–1.12)) were detected because of wide 95% CIs that included 1.0. In addition, there were no associations between artificially sweetened tea with all-cause, cancer, and CVD mortality (Table S1).

Furthermore, we illustrated the dose-response associations of categories of tea consumption with all-cause, cancer, and CVD mortality. Cox models with cubic splines showed statistically significant nonlinear associations between unsweetened tea consumption with mortality risks (Figure S1). We categorized tea drinkers into 4 groups by different intake amounts of tea (> 0 to 2, > 2 to 4, > 4 drinks/d). Compared with nonconsumers, consumers of different amounts of unsweetened tea had lower risks for all-cause mortality. The HRs (95% CIs) for drinkers who consumed 2 or fewer, 2 to 4, and 4 or more drinks per day were 0.79 (0.73–0.85), 0.77 (0.72–0.83), and 0.77 (0.65–0.91), respectively (Table2). Concerning sugar-sweetened tea drinkers, the respective HRs (95% CIs) were 0.87 (0.76–0.99), 0.86 (0.76–0.97), and 0.76 (0.65–0.89). There were no association between artificially sweetened tea and all-cause mortality risks. When exploring the associations of tea consumption with all-cause mortality by type of tea, our results showed that the consumption of unsweetened and sugar-sweetened black tea was significantly associated with lower all-cause mortality risk, and such associations were also detected in the consumption of a small amount of unsweetened green tea and herb tea (Table S2). Concerning cancer- and CVD-specific mortality, our results showed that the correlations of unsweetened tea with cancer- and CVD-specific mortality were also largely consistent with those with all-cause mortality. Moderate consumption of sugar-sweetened tea was also associated with cancer-specific mortality in some cases but not with CVD-specific mortality. The associations of artificially sweetened tea with cause-specific mortality risks were also less consistent and inconclusive (Figure S1, Table2).

Moreover, we explored the potential impact of the amount of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to tea on associations between tea consumption and mortality risks. Relative to non-tea consumers, sugar-sweetened tea drinkers adding 1 or fewer teaspoons of sugar demonstrated an apparent correlation with lower risks of all-cause mortality, with most adjusted model HR trends of 0.85 (0.73–0.98), 0.86 (0.76–0.98), and 0.76 (0.64–0.9) for drinking 2 or fewer, 2–4 and 4 or more drinks in one day, respectively, but the association did not persist in sugar-sweetened tea drinkers adding > 1 teaspoons of sugar regardless of how many drinks they consumed. There were no significant associations between artificially sweetened tea drinkers and all-cause mortality, regardless of the amounts of artificial sugar added. For cause-specific mortality, there was no significant relationship between sugar-sweetened and artificially sweetened tea consumption and cause-specific mortality risks (Fig.2; Table3). These findings indicated that adding larger amounts of sugar may impact the survival benefits of tea consumption, while alternative sweetener use did not show significant detrimental effects.

To verify the robustness of our findings, we conducted sensitivity analyses for all previous investigations. The results were consistent when excluding participants who reported an outcome event during the first 2 years of follow-up (Supplement Table S3), when we excluded a tea measurement if a participant reported having unusual tea consumption (Supplement Table S4), when participants with missing covariates were excluded (Supplement Table S5), when removing the sugar added to tea from total sugar and the energy produced by it from total energy (Supplement Table S6), when we excluded participants drinking tea the year prior but not drinking tea the day before (Supplement Table S7), and when accounting for environmental factors (Supplement Table S8). In addition, we investigated the associations between tea consumption and mortality among participants consuming both sugar- and artificially sweetened tea. The results showed that there were no significant associations between tea consumption and mortality risks (Supplement Table S9). Furthermore, we investigated changes in sugar/alternative sweetener quantity added to tea between the two surveys (2010 baseline and 2014 follow-up), and participants were classified into three groups based on changes in alternative sweetener quantities added to tea (Decrease, Not Change, Increase). The results showed no significant associations between tea consumption and mortality risks were observed across groups (Supplement Table S10).

To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest study investigating the associations of sugar-sweetened, artificially sweetened, and unsweetened tea consumption with mortality outcomes. In the present large-scale prospective study of 180,344 adults without prior CVD or cancer events, we illustrated that moderate consumption of unsweetened tea can effectively lower the risk for all-cause death and CVD- and cancer-related death. Moderate consumption of sugar-sweetened tea was associated with lower risks for all-cause and cancer-related death, and no significant associations of artificially sweetened tea intake with any mortality outcomes were detected in our study. Furthermore, the potential effects of the amount of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to tea were also explored. Our results suggested that larger amounts of sugar added to tea may impact the survival benefits of tea consumption. However, the findings for adding alternative sweeteners were inconsistent and non-significant. These findings were independent of measures of potential confounders, including sociodemographic factors, lifestyle behaviors, comorbid conditions, and environmental factors.

Previous studies have revealed that tea intake is significantly associated with a consistently decreased risk of all-cause and cause-specific mortality [6,9,34]. For instance, a multicenter study in China suggested that tea consumption was correlated with decreased risks of all-cause and atherosclerotic-cardiovascular-disease mortality [35]. A meta-analysis of prospective studies from the Asia cohort showed that green tea intake was connected with lower all-cause, CVD and other cause-specific mortality risks, but not cancer-specific mortality, while the relationship between black tea consumption and mortality was weak [36]. Notably, most prior studies investigating the health effects of tea consumption were conducted in Asian populations, such as China and Japan, where green tea is the most common choice and few people drink black tea. These studies have presented stronger relationships and more consistent results for green tea than for black tea. In the UK Biobank cohort, more participants reported that they drink black tea regularly with a wider range of intake than that in previous studies, so our present study is very suitable for investigating the relationship between black tea and mortality risk. Given the differences in tea types and controversial findings across cohorts, our findings not only added to the current investigation involving a UK Biobank cohort but also provided further evidence for the potential benefit of tea consumption. A recent study of the UK Biobank indicated that higher tea consumption is closely related to lower mortality risk among participants drinking 2 or more drinks/day, regardless of genetic variation in caffeine metabolism [9], which is consistent with our findings. Notably, multiple studies (including our research) investigating associations between high tea intake and mortality risks include both caffeinated and decaffeinated tea, and thus, caffeine alone may not explain all the effects of tea on human health. Tea comprises complex components, and multiple lines of evidence have revealed that these components exert functions on human health through biological mechanisms. For instance, many in vivo and in vitro experiments have confirmed that the polyphenolic components of tea can inhibit cancer progression through complex mechanisms [37]. Thearubigins are the dominant components in black tea, and many studies have investigated the biological functions and potential health benefits of thearubigins, such as antioxidant effects, anticancer effects, and effects on skeletal health [38,39].

Alternative sweeteners have been developed as sugar substitutes with the advantages of stronger sweetness and fewer calories [20]. Alternative sweeteners have been applied to prevent dental caries and obesity by reducing sugar consumption, and artificially sweetened drinks are recommended to replace sugar-sweetened drinks. However, replacing sugar-sweetened food and beverages with those containing alternative sweeteners may not be beneficial for health [18,19,22]. The long-term health effects of alternative sweeteners are subject to ongoing research and debate. Health authorities have previously concluded that consumption of low- and no-calorie sweeteners within established acceptable daily intakes poses no significant health risk [4,5]. However, recent epidemiological and experimental studies with conflicting findings have reignited debates about their safety. Multiple observational studies have suggested potential associations with increased risks of CVD, metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes, and specific cancers. Several health authorities, including the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), are currently re-evaluating the safety of alternative sweeteners [18,20,21,40,41]. To date, a great number of studies have focused on the effects of sugar-sweetened and artificially sweetened beverages on health. It has been reported that the intake of sugar-sweetened beverages is associated with the prevalence of various human diseases, including coronary heart disease, hypertension, stroke, and type 2 diabetes [42–44]. Previous studies have explored the potential connections between sugar-sweetened and artificially sweetened beverages with mortality risks. A recent cohort study based on 10 European countries indicated that both sugar-sweetened (1–2/day and>2/day) and artificially sweetened beverages (>2/day) were significantly correlated with high all-cause mortality risks [45]. Another investigation in an American cohort indicated that the consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages is positively associated with all-cause mortality and CVD-specific mortality, but the association between artificially sweetened beverages and mortality risk is undetermined and needs further verification [46]. Notably, very recent work has focused on the impact of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to other drinks, such as coffee, on health and disease risks, as well as their relation to mortality risks. A very recent prospective cohort investigation of the UK Biobank illustrated that moderate intake of unsweetened coffee and sugar-sweetened coffee was connected with similarly reduced all-cause and cause-specific mortality risks, while no obvious association between artificially sweetened coffee and mortality risks was detected [40]. Inoue-Choi et al. have reported that higher tea consumption was related to lower mortality risk, and among those who added sugar to their tea, the relationship was less clear [9]. However, few studies have comprehensively investigated the associations of the consumption of unsweetened tea, sugar-sweetened tea, and artificially sweetened tea with mortality risks. Most importantly, the effects of the amount of sugar or alternative sweetener added to drinks on health have not been well assessed before. The current findings suggest that adding sugar or alternative sweeteners may impact the associated mortality benefits, but since this study does not establish cause and effect, further clinical trials and mechanistic studies are needed to understand if there is indeed causality. Therefore, our study firstly distinguished between sugar-sweetened, artificially sweetened, and unsweetened tea and illustrated their specific association with all-cause, CVD-related, and cancer-related mortality. Notably, we further explored the combined effects of the amount of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to tea and tea consumption on health. Our findings indicate that more amounts of sugar added to tea may impact the association with mortality. Therefore, the habit of adding sugar or alternative sweeteners to tea should be adopted cautiously. Instead, moderate consumption of unsweetened tea is a suitable and healthy habit. Previous studies have indicated that the interaction between tea polyphenols and glucose complexes may impair the antioxidative effects of tea. For instance, sugar may alter the intestinal environment, reducing the efficient absorption of catechins and other polyphenols [47]. Experimental studies in model organisms have suggested that oral diets containing combinations of caffeine and sucrose may affect immunity and lifespan in specific controlled environments; however, the relevance of such mechanisms to the broader context of human biology remains unclear and requires further investigation [48].

Our study has several strengths, including the prospective study design with a large sample size, long follow-up time, high prevalence and a wide range of tea consumption information. The extensive measurement of covariates allowed us to perform several sensitivity analyses to strengthen the interpretation. Notably, detailed dietary data allowed us to distinguish the associations of different tea types, including sugar-sweetened, artificially sweetened, and unsweetened tea, with mortality risks, as well as the effects of the amount of sugar and alternative sweetener added to tea.

There are still several potential limitations in the present study. First, although we tried our best to set up exclusion criteria and various covariates to reduce the risks for reverse causality and confounding, the possibility of residual confounding cannot be excluded due to the observational features of the present study, which may also be a concern. In addition, our findings may not establish causation and may be influenced by reverse causality. Second, the tea consumption data were obtained from self-reported 24-hour recall questionnaires, and random measurement errors of tea consumption may contribute to biased results, thereby causing an underestimation of the true magnitude of the associations. Additionally, the dietary habits of participants and food consumption may change over time. However, evidence has shown that self-reported 24-h recall questionnaires are more accurate than food frequency questionnaires for commonly consumed foods [49]. In addition, among tea consumers who reported their tea consumption on 2 touchscreen questionnaires administered 4 years apart, the concordance of tea consumption was really high (weighted κ = 0.83) [50]. Third, the UK Biobank may not represent the sampling population, and the selection bias of healthy participants may also be a concern. However, the valid assessment of exposure–disease associations does not need a representative population at large [51]. Fourth, the follow-up time may not be long enough, and a few events of specific causes of death were detected in our investigation; thus, the associations between tea consumption and certain causes of mortality can be further verified in future studies. Fifth, drinkers of artificially sweetened tea were much lower than that of unsweetened and sugar-sweetened tea, thus diminishing the power to clarify any correlation. Sixth, the lack of clarity in categorizing sweeteners and the inconsistent units used to measure their quantities limit the interpretation of our findings. The effects of alternative sweeteners may vary significantly depending on the type and amount used. Last, baseline covariates may not capture changes that occur over the course of the study, potentially missing important developments that could affect the outcome being studied. The results associated with artificially sweetened tea are likely to be subject to confounding by indication and may not be as useful or valid.

In summary, this prospective study revealed that moderate consumption of unsweetened tea was significantly related to reductions in the risk for all-cause, cancer-related, and CVD-related mortality, and lower risks for all-cause mortality were detected in sugar-sweetened tea drinkers. Moreover, our findings showed that larger amounts of sugar or alternative sweeteners added to tea may impair the protective effects of tea on reducing the risk of all-cause and cause-specific mortality. These findings are of clinical and public health relevance.

Supplementary Material 1. Figure S1. Dose–response associations of tea consumption with all-cause (left), cancer (middle), and CVD (right) mortality. Multivariable Cox regression model with cubic splines adjusted for age, sex, ethnicity, Townsend deprivation index (TDI), and education level, smoking status, physical activity level, BMI, waist circumference, hypertension, diabetes, family history of CVD, family history of cancer, long-standing illness, cholesterol-lowering drug use, blood pressure drug use, insulin drug use, vitamin and mineral supplement use (yes or no [vitamin A, B, C, D, or E; folic acid; or multivitamins or minerals]), and intake of total energy, total sugar, fresh fruit, vegetables, red meat, processed meat, alcohol, coffee consumption, milk consumption, water, and water temperature.

All authors contributed to the conception and design of the study. ZJ L and M Z: writing – original draft, data curation, and formal analysis. YQ J and YL W: writing – original draft. YL W and LF W: formal analysis. TT Z: Revision, formal analysis, and funding acquisition. ZJ L and T L: writing – review and editing, supervision, and funding acquisition. All authors contributed to the writing and revision of the manuscript, knew the content of it, and approved its submission.

This study was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO. 82072441), the Hunan Outstanding Youth Fund (NO. 2022JJ10095), Central South University Research Programme of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies (Grant No. 2023QYJC026).