Colon cancer (CC) is one of the three most common cancers worldwide. In the treatment of CC, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is one of the main components of chemotherapeutic combinations, but severe chemical resistance still occurs. In addition, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) oxidoreductase-1α (ERO1α) has been shown to be highly expressed in CC, but its specific molecular mechanisms remain unclear.

Via western blot, real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT‒qPCR), colony formation, Transwell, CCK-8, immunofluorescence, and immunohistochemistry experiments,we evaluated the expression of related genes and the progression of CC.

In this study, we found that ERO1α was highly expressed in CC and that miR-451a expression was low. Knocking down ERO1α can restrain the proliferation and invasion of CC cells; facilitate the expression of the ER stress-related proteins inositol-requiring enzyme (IRE), phosphorylated IRE (Pho-IRE), glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), and activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and the proapoptotic proteins Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) and cleaved-caspase-3 in CC cells; and alleviate the progression of CC. The addition of the miR-451a inhibitor weakened the effect of sh-ERO1α. In terms of mechanism, we predicted that miR-451a targets ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1) through the StarBase website and confirmed the interaction between the two through a dual-luciferase gene reporter assay. Next, we verified that knocking down ERO1α promoted miR-451a and inhibited ARF1 expression, thus promoting ER stress and ultimately inhibiting the progression of CC. In addition, knocking down ERO1α promoted ER stress and weakened CC cell resistance to 5-FU.

Our studies revealed that ERO1α could mediate ER stress to regulate the progression of CC and 5-FU resistance through the miR-451a/ARF1 axis, which may provide new treatment directions and molecular targets for CC.

Colon cancer (CC) is the most invasive and lethal malignant tumor of the digestive system and has long been a serious threat to human health [1]. The invasive behavior of CC, its poor prognosis and the lack of targeted therapy are associated with a high incidence of CC [2]. According to a survey and statistical report, as of January 1, 2022, more than 1.4 million CC cases are expected to be diagnosed in the United States alone, and more than 151,030 CC cases are expected to be detected [3]. Currently, CC therapy is chiefly based on comprehensive remedies such as surgical resection, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy [4]. Among them, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-based chemotherapy plays an important role in CC treatment [5]. Nevertheless, the therapeutic effect is critically abated due to multidrug resistance caused by long-term administration of 5-FU [6]. Therefore, elucidating the pathogenesis of CC and identifying and screening key factors involved in the occurrence and development of CC are highly important for early diagnosis, targeted treatment and overcoming 5-FU resistance in CC patients.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) plays important roles in protein synthesis, folding and structural maturation in cells [7]. When pathophysiological conditions (such as inflammation) increase protein translation and the burden of misfolded proteins, ER stress is triggered to restore protein balance [8]. When the stress sustains or the stress lesion exceeds the protective capacity of the cells to survive, the ER-related cell apoptosis pathway is initiated, resulting in cell apoptosis [9]. Studies have shown that the ER stress-mediated adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) pathway can induce CC cell apoptosis [10]. Therefore, reasonable regulation of ER stress may be an effective strategy for inhibiting the occurrence and development of CC. Endoplasmic reticulum oxidoreductase-1α (ERO1α) is considered a key gene in the modulation of protein synthesis and folding in the ER lumen [11,12]. As a highly conserved gene, ERO1α has been shown to promote rectal cancer progression under hypoxic conditions [13]. Furthermore, studies have shown an association between ERO1α and ER stress in other cancers, such as breast cancer [14] and lung cancer [15]. ERO1α is related to ER stress in CC cells; therefore, further exploration of the potential molecular mechanism of ERO1α in CC may provide new therapeutic directions for CC.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding RNA molecules with lengths of 21–25 nucleotides that are widely involved in a variety of biological functions of cells, including cell proliferation, apoptosis and senescence. In a series of studies, miRNAs were shown to play increasingly critical roles in the fight against cancer. Among them, miR-451a has been confirmed to affect the development of a variety of cancers, such as non-small cell lung cancer [16] and prostate cancer [17]. In addition, in sequencing studies of CC, abnormal expression of miR-451a has been reported, and miR-451a is considered a potential marker of CC and has received increased attention [18,19]. Some studies have shown that miR-451a can facilitate the apoptosis of CC cells by facilitating ER stress in CC cells through the inhibition of BAP31 [20]. However, whether ERO1α affects miR-451a expression and CC progression remains unknown.

ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1) is a Ras-related small GTPase [21], and its GTPase activity is closely related to cancer metastasis [22]. Some studies have shown that miR-744-5p can restrain the proliferation and invasion of ovarian cancer cells by targeting ARF1 [23]. miR-320b promotes pancreatic cancer cell apoptosis via the suppression of ARF1 [24]. These results suggest that miRNAs may influence cancer progression through the regulation of ARF1. In addition, ARF1 can also enhance CC cell metastasis by interacting with IQ motif containing GTPase activating protein 1 (IQGAP1) [25]. However, there are no reports as to whether miR-451a regulates ARF1 to influence CC progression.

On the basis of the above studies, this study aimed to investigate the role of ERO1α in CC ER stress through the miR-451a/ARFI axis and to provide new ideas and methods for the treatment of CC.

HCT116 cells and SW620 cells were purchased from Wuhan Shangen Biotechnology Co., Ltd. HCT116 cells were cultured in McCoy's medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, 10100147, Gibco, USA) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S, G1146, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), and SW620 cells were cultured in L15 medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% P/S. The two types of cells were treated with the ER stress inducer thapsigargin (THG, HY-13433, MedChem Express, USA) at 30 nM to induce ER stress. 5-Fluorouracil resistance model (5-FU-R): HCT116 and SW620 cells were seeded into 6-well plates. When the cells reached 70%−80% confluence, they were incubated with culture medium containing 5-Fu (120 μmol/L, HY-90006, MedChem Express, USA). After drug treatment for 1 h, the cells were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), and the medium containing the drug was replaced with fresh medium (without 5-Fu). Drug-containing medium was added again when the cells were passaged a second time, and the treatment time was gradually extended (2, 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 h). The subsequent process was the same as that described previously. When the sensitivity of the cells to 5-Fu significantly decreased and stabilized, a CCK-8 assay was performed to confirm that the 5-Fu-R cells were successfully constructed.

Human colon cancer cell lines HCT116, SW620 and drug-resistant cells were cultured overnight in 24-well plates. When the cell density reached 60–70%, short hairpin RNA (sh)-negative control (sh-NC), Overexpression-NC plasmid (oe-NC), the NC mimic, the NC inhibitor, sh-ERO1α, the miR-451a inhibitor, the miR-451a mimic or oe-ARF1 were transfected into the cells using Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The transfection efficiency was measured after the cells were cultured in a 5% CO2incubator at 37 °C for 48 h.

All animal studies were approved by the Ethics Committee of Kunming Medical University authorized by the Animal Experiment Center of Kunming Medical University. Male BALB/c nude mice were purchased from the Laboratory Animal Center of Kunming Medical University. The nude mice were kept in an isothermal, pathogen-free room with regular light patterns, and adequate food and water were provided. The mice were randomly divided into four groups (n = 6): Model (CC) group, sh-ERO1α group, 5-FU-R group, 5-FU-R + sh-ERO1α group. HCT116 and HCT116 drug-resistant cells were injected subcutaneously into the right armpits of nude mice at a dose of 5 × 106. sh-ERO1α was injected into sh-ERO1α-treated or 5-FU-R + sh-ERO1α-treated mice through the tail vein. After 21 days, the mice were euthanized, and the tumors were removed for subsequent experiments.

Total RNA was extracted from HCT116 cells, SW620 cells, clinical CC tissues and xenograft mouse tumor tissues from each group via TRIzol reagent (R1100, Solarbio, China). The RNA concentration and quality were measured via a NanoDrop1000 spectrophotometer and agarose gel electrophoresis, respectively. Then, the RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA. RT‒qPCR was performed with SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (G3320-01, Servicebio, Wuhan, China). The reaction procedure was 95 °C, 30 s; 39 cycles of 95 °C, 5 s → 60 °C, 30 s; 95 °C, 10 s → 65 °C, 6 s → 95 °C, 5 s. The relative gene expression was calculated via the 2−∆∆Ctmethod, and U6 was used as an internal reference gene. The primer sequences are shown in Table1.

The total proteins of HCT116 and SW620 cells, clinical CC tissues and xenografted tumor tissues were extracted with radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (Sigma‒Aldrich, USA) containing 1% protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor. A bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay kit (PC0020, Solarbio, China) was used to determine the protein concentration. The total proteins were separated via 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS‒PAGE). After electrophoresis, the proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore, USA) and then blocked with 5% skim milk at room temperature for 2 h. Next, the membranes were incubated with diluted primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. The membrane was then washed three times with tris buffered saline tween (TBST) and incubated with horseradish peroxidase-labeled secondary antibodies at room temperature for 2 h. Color was developed via an enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) kit (Millipore, USA). Finally, the protein bands were analyzed with ImageJ software. The primary antibodies used in this study were as follows: ERO1α (1:1000, Abcam, UK), ARF1 (1:1000, Abcam, UK), B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2, 1:2000, Abcam, UK), Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax, 1:1000, Abcam, UK), cleaved-caspase-3 (C-caspase-3,1:500, Abcam, UK), inositol-requiring enzyme (IRE, 1:1000, Abcam, UK), phosphorylated IRE (Pho-IRE, 1:2000, Abcam, UK), glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78, 1:1000, Abcam, UK), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4, 1:1000, Abcam, UK), and β-actin (1:5000, Abcam, UK).

After the CC tissues were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, the tissues were embedded in paraffin wax, and then, 5 μm thick paraffin sections were cut with a microtome. Then, the sections were dewaxed and rehydrated, and antigenic repair was performed using sodium citrate antigenic repair solution. The sections were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 20 min and incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies against ERO1α (1:100), Ki-67 (1:200) and ATF4 (1:200). The sections were subsequently incubated with the corresponding secondary antibody at room temperature for 30 min, after which 3, 3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB) color development solution was added. The sections were re-stained with hematoxylin, washed, mounted and observed under a microscope.

The viability of HCT116 and SW620 cells was evaluated using the CCK-8 kit (CA1210, Solarbio, China). HCT116 and SW620 cells were seeded into 96-well plates (2 × 103/well) and cultured in an incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2) for 24 h and 48 h. Then, 10 mL of CCK-8 solution was added to each well and incubated with the cells for 4 h. The absorbance at 450 nm was then measured via a microplate reader.

The clone formation assay was used to evaluate the proliferation ability of HCT116 and SW620 cells. HCT116 and SW620 cells in each group were seeded into 6-well plates at a density of 1,000 cells/well and then cultured continuously for 2 weeks to form colonies. Five milliliters of 4% paraformaldehyde were added to each well and incubated for 15 min. Subsequently, staining was performed with a Giemsa staining kit for 15 min. After washing with tap water, cell clone counting was performed.

HCT116 and SW620 cell invasion experiments were performed in a Transwell chamber (Corning, USA). The concentration of cells in each group was adjusted to 1 × 105cells/mL in serum-free DMEM. Two hundred microliters of cell suspension were added to the upper chamber of a Matrigel-coated Transwell. Then, 600 μL of DMEM containing 10% fetal calf serum was added to the lower chamber of the 24-well plate. After culturing for 24 h, the cells in the lower chamber were stained with crystal violet (Solarbio, China) and observed via an inverted microscope (CKX53, OLYMPUS, Japan). After the images were taken, count analysis was performed via ImageJ software.

Apoptosis was detected in xenograft mouse tumor tissues via a TUNEL cell apoptosis detection kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). In brief, after dewaxing and hydration, the tumor tissue sections were treated with 1% Triton X-100 for 10 min. Next, the sections were incubated at 37 °C with protease K for 30 min. The sections were then incubated with TUNEL reaction mixture at 37 °C for 1 h in the dark. The nuclei were subsequently stained with 4–6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 2 min. Finally, the apoptotic cells were observed via fluorescence microscopy.

The ARF1 3'-UTR sequence containing the miR-451a binding site was cloned and inserted into the pGL3 vector (Promega, USA) to construct a wild-type ARF1 vector (ARF1-WT), and the mutant ARF1 vector (ARF1-MUT) was generated via a Strategene kit (Stratagene, USA). Next, ARF1-WT or ARF1-MUT vectors were cotransfected into 293 T cells with the miR-451a mimic or NC mimic. The cells were collected 24 h after transfection, and the luciferase activity was measured via a dual luciferase reporting assay system (Promega, USA) and expressed as the ratio of firefly luciferase activity to Renilla luciferase activity.

GraphPad Prism 7.0 was used to analyze the experimental data and generate a statistical graph. All the experiments were repeated at least three times. The results are expressed as the means ± standard deviations (means ± SDs). A t test and one-way analysis of variance were used to analyze differences between groups.P< 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

We used CC tissues and paracancerous tissues (Pca) from CC patients as specimens for experimental detection. The results showed that the levels of ERO1α and ARF1 in the CC group were prominently greater than those in the Pca group and that the level of miR-451a was significantly lower than that in the Pca group (Fig.1A-C). In addition, immunohistochemistry experiments revealed that Ki-67 expression in the CC group was significantly greater than that in the Pca group (Fig.1D). These results suggested that the levels of ERO1α, ARF1 and miR-451a are abnormal in CC patients.

To further verify that knocking down ERO1α can restrain CC cell growth, we first tested the transfection efficiency of sh-ERO1α in HCT116 and SW620 cells. The western blot results revealed that ERO1α expression was significantly lower in the sh-ERO1α group than in the sh-NC group (Fig.2A). In addition, the results of the CCK-8 assay revealed that, compared with the NC group, ERO1α knockdown significantly reduced cell viability (Fig.2B). Compared with those in the NC group, the levels of the apoptosis-related proteins in the ERO1α-knockdown group were notably increased, and the level of the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 was decreased (Fig.2C). Colony formation and Transwell assays revealed that, compared with those in the NC group, cell proliferation and invasion were attenuated after ERO1α was knocked down (Fig.2D-E). These results indicate that knocking down ERO1α can effectively restrain CC cell proliferation.

Furthermore, some studies have shown that ER stress can restrain the growth of CRC [26]. Therefore, we used the ER stress inducer THG to induce ER stress in CC cells to further explore the related mechanism by which ERO1α inhibits CC progression. Our previous experiments revealed that miR-451a is expressed at low levels in CC tissues. Therefore, we speculated that ERO1α suppresses CC progression through the modulation of miR-451a. First, the knockdown efficiency of miR-451a was detected, and the results revealed that the level of miR-451a in the miR-451a inhibitor group was significantly lower than that in the NC inhibitor group (Fig.3A). CCK-8 assays revealed that CC cell viability was significantly decreased after ERO1α knockdown and increased after the addition of the miR-451a inhibitor, whereas further treatment with THG weakened the effect of the miR-451a inhibitor (Fig.3B). Similarly, the western blot results revealed that, after the addition of THG to induce ER stress, the influence of the miR-451a inhibitor was weakened, the levels of Bax and C-caspase-3 in CC cells were markedly increased, and the level of Bcl-2 was markedly decreased (Fig.3C). In addition, colony formation and Transwell experiments revealed that, after ERO1α knockdown, cell proliferation and invasion capacity were decreased, and these effects were enhanced when the miR-451a inhibitor was added. Moreover, THG induction partially reversed the effects of the miR-451a inhibitor, which inhibited CC cell proliferation and invasion (Fig.3D-E). These results indicate that ER stress can affect the progression of CC. To this end, we further examined the expression of ER stress-related proteins (Pho-IRE, IRE, GRP78, and ATF4). ERO1α knockdown prominently increased the expression of the Pho-IRE, IRE, GRP78, and ATF4 proteins in the cells, whereas the miR-451a inhibitor inhibited their expression. Moreover, further treatment with THG weakened the effect of the miR-451a inhibitor (Fig.3F-G). These results indicate that knocking down ERO1α can affect miR-451a and thus mediate ER stress to restrain CC progression.

Researchers have shown that ARF1 is overexpressed in CC and can facilitate the development of CC tumors by interacting with IQ domain GTPase-activated protein 1 (IQGAP1) [27]. To further verify the function of ARF1 in the progression of CC, we used the Targetscan website (https://www.targetscan.org/vert_80/) to predict the targeted binding gene of miR-451a and determined that ARF1 was the downstream target of miR-451a (Fig.4A). The interaction between miR-451a and ARF1 was confirmed via a dual-luciferase gene reporter assay (Fig.4B). Next, RT‒qPCR and western blotting were used to detect the transfection efficiency of the miR-451a mimic and oe-ARF1. The results revealed that the levels of miR-451a and ARF1 were dramatically greater in the miR-451a mimic group and oe-ARF1 group than in the control group (Fig.4C-D). The results of the CCK-8 assay revealed that the viability of the cells in the miR-451a mimic group was dramatically lower than that in the NC group, while overexpression of ARF1 reversed the influence of the miR-451a mimic (Fig.4E). The western blot results demonstrated that the miR-451a mimic prominently increased the intracellular protein levels of Bax and C-caspase-3 and decreased the Bcl-2 levels. However, oe-ARF1 reversed the effect of the miR-451a mimic (Fig.4F). The results of the clonogenic and Transwell assays also demonstrated that oe-ARF1 weakened the influence of the miR-451a mimic and enhanced the proliferation and invasion ability of HCT116 and SW620 cells (Fig.4G-H). These results indicate that miR-451a can restrain ARF1 expression, thereby inhibiting CC progression.

This study demonstrated that the knockdown of ERO1α can regulate the expression of miR-451a and subsequently mediate ER stress to inhibit CC cell proliferation and migration. We further demonstrated in vivo that ERO1α can mediate CC progression via the miR-451a/ARF1 axis. First, the expression of miR-451a was detected. Compared with that in the CC group, the miR-451a level was dramatically increased in the sh-ERO1α group (Fig.5A). Compared with those in the CC group, ARF1 expression was dramatically lower, the levels of Bax and C-caspase-3 were markedly greater, and the Bcl-2 level was markedly lower in the sh-ERO1α group (Fig.5B-C). Similarly, TUNEL detection of cell apoptosis revealed that, compared with the CC group, sh-ERO1α markedly increased the number of apoptotic cells (Fig.5D). Immunohistochemical examination revealed that the levels of Ki-67 were lower and the level of ATF4 was greater in the sh-ERO1α group than in the CC group (Fig.5E-F). Further detection of the levels of ER stress proteins revealed that the protein expression of Pho-IRE, IRE, GRP78, and ATF4 was prominently increased after sh-ERO1α treatment (Fig.5G). These results suggest that ERO1α may inhibit the expression of miR-451a and promote the expression of ARF1, thereby inhibiting ER stress and promoting the progression of CC.

To explore in depth whether ERO1α affects CC cell resistance to 5-FU by mediating ER stress, we established a 5-FU-R cell model for experimental validation. First, we detected the drug resistance factor (RF) of drug-resistant cells. The results revealed that the drug resistance capacity of HCT116 drug-resistant cells was 2.42 times greater than that of nondrug-resistant cells, and similarly, the drug resistance ability of SW620 drug-resistant cells was 2.599 times greater than that of nondrug-resistant cells (Fig.6A). Next, the results of the colony formation and Transwell assays revealed that cell proliferation and invasion capacity were significantly greater in the 5-FU-R group than in the NC group and that knocking down ERO1α weakened the proliferation and invasion capacity of the cells (Fig.6B-C). The western blot results revealed that the protein levels of Pho-IRE, IRE, GRP78, and ATF4 were markedly lower in the 5-FU-R group than in the NC group and that knocking down ERO1α reversed the influence in the 5-FU-R group (Fig.6D). These results indicate that ERO1α affects CC cell resistance to 5-FU by mediating ER stress.

To verify the effect of ERO1α on the 5-FU resistance of CC cells in vivo, we established a 5-FU-R nude mouse model. Immunohistochemistry detection of Ki-67 and ATF4 expression levels revealed that, compared with the control group, the 5-FU-R group presented prominently increased Ki-67 expression levels and significantly decreased ATF4 expression levels. After ERO1α was knocked down, Ki-67 expression levels were noticeably lower, and ATF4 expression was increased (Fig.7A-B). In addition, the results of western blot analysis revealed that the levels of Pho-IRE, IRE, GRP78, and ATF4 were markedly lower in the 5-FU-R group than in the control group and that knocking down ERO1α increased the expression of these proteins (Fig.7C). These data indicate that knocking down ERO1α can increase the sensitivity of CC cells to 5-FU by facilitating ER stress.

CC is one of the most malignant cancers worldwide [28]. The current therapies for CC usually include surgical resection, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and the combined use of cytotoxic drugs. Nevertheless, the current therapies still have limitations and side effects [29]. Increasing evidence has demonstrated that monoclonal antibodies and small molecule inhibitors are used for targeted therapy and are considered viable therapeutic alternatives [30]. Therefore, finding molecular targets that effectively predict CC treatment efficacy is very important for improving CC treatment efficacy and reducing CC mortality.

The ER stress mechanism plays an important role in the occurrence and development of CC. Some studies have shown that ER stress can alleviate CC progression. One study demonstrated that ER stress can promote the apoptosis of CC cells [31]. Another study reported that ER stress enhances CC cell sensitivity to chemotherapy [32]. Therefore, intervening in the ER stress mechanism may provide new ideas for the treatment of CC. As an oxidase involved in ER stress, ERO1α has been found to be overexpressed in various tumor types [33], and many studies have demonstrated that it is interrelated with ER stress [34]. Interestingly, ERO1α has been shown to help CC cells adapt to ER stress via miR-101/EZH2 [35]. In our study, we found that ERO1α is highly expressed in CC, which is consistent with the findings of previous studies. In addition, after ERO1α was knocked down, CC cell viability, proliferation and invasion were significantly reduced, and apoptosis was increased. The levels of the ER stress-related proteins Pho-IRE, IRE, GRP78, and ATF4 were prominently increased. These results demonstrate that ERO1α can regulate ER stress and participate in CC progression.

Many studies have demonstrated that miRNAs are regulators of cancers, including CC. For example, miR-378 acts as a tumor suppressor in CC [36]. miR-15a-5p can target the suppression of CC cell proliferation and metastasis [37]. In addition, miR-451a expression in CC tissues is low and can interact with ER stress to attenuate CC cell proliferation [20]. In our study, miR-451a was found to be expressed at low levels in CC tissues, which is consistent with the findings of previous studies. These results show that ERO1α and miR-451a both mediate ER stress to affect CC progression. Is there a relationship between the two? In this context, our in-depth study revealed that knocking down ERO1α promoted the expression of miR-451a and that a miR-451a inhibitor weakened the effect of ERO1α knockdown, thereby promoting the proliferation and invasion of CC cells and inhibiting apoptosis and ER stress. However, the effect of the miR-451a inhibitor was weakened after treatment with the ER inducer THG. These findings indicate that knocking down ERO1α can promote the expression of miR-451a and thus facilitate ER stress to restrain CC progression.

To further explore the downstream molecular mechanisms of miR-451a, we used thehttps://www.targetscan.org/vert_80/website to predict the target binding gene of miR-451a and determined that ARF1 was the downstream target of miR-451a. The interaction relationship between miR-451a and ARF1 was confirmed via a dual-luciferase gene reporter assay. As an ADP-ribosylation factor, ARF1 is involved in tumor invasion and metastasis and is highly expressed in various tumors [38]. Previous studies have shown that targeting ARF1 can restrain CC progression [27]. In this study, we found that ARF1 overexpression reversed the influence of the miR-451a mimic, facilitated the proliferation and invasion of CC cells, and suppressed apoptosis. In addition, when ERO1α was knocked down, the expression of ARF1 also decreased, indicating that ERO1α and ARF1 are positively correlated. These results suggest that knocking down ERO1α can promote the ability of miR-451a to target the inhibition of ARF1 expression, thereby restraining CC progression.

Chemotherapy is one of the conventional treatments for CC. To date, 5-FU is one of the most effective drugs for treating CC [39], and 5-FU-based chemotherapy regimens can effectively improve the tumor-free survival rate of CC patients. However, CC patients exhibit different degrees of resistance to 5-FU, which affects the treatment efficacy [40]. In a previous study, ER stress was shown to increase the sensitivity of CC to 5-FU and induce apoptosis in cancer cells [41]. Another study revealed that resistance to 5-FU in breast cancer cells can be enhanced by mediating ER stress [42]. In addition, ERO1α was found to be associated with chemotherapy resistance in cancer. Knocking down ERO1α can increase the sensitivity of gastric cancer cells to 5-FU [43]. However, there are no reports on the influence of ERO1α on the resistance of CC to 5-FU. To further investigate this phenomenon, we constructed 5-FU-resistant cell models and animal xenograft tumor models and found that the cell proliferation and invasion ability of the 5-FU-R group were increased and that the expression of ER stress proteins was decreased. Knockdown of ERO1α weakened the effect of 5-FU drug resistance. These findings indicate that knocking down ERO1α can facilitate ER stress to increase the sensitivity of CC to 5-FU.

In summary, this study confirmed that ERO1α can regulate ER stress through the miR-451a/ARF1 axis at the animal and cellular levels, thereby affecting CC progression and 5-FU resistance, which provides a new therapeutic target for CC treatment.

Conceptualization: Kun Yu; Ping Liu; Jianhua Dong; methodology: Kun Yu; Xuan Zhang; software: Jianhua Dong; Quan Yang; validation: Xuan Zhang; Quan Yang; formal analysis: Kun Yu; Ke Lian; investigation: Jianhua Dong; Wenliang Li; resources: Ping Liu; Quan Yang; data curation: Ping Liu; Wenliang Li; writing—original draft preparation: Kun Yu; Ping Liu; Ke Lian; writing—review and editing: Kun Yu; Ping Liu; Yunfeng Li; visualization: Xuan Zhang; supervision: Yunfeng Li; All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

This research was supported by the Science and Technology Program of Yunnan Provincial Science and Technology Department (Project numbers: 202201AY070001-145 and 202201AY070001-149).