Anopheles gambiaedensovirus (AgDNV) is a highly species-specific parvovirus that reaches high titers in adultAnopheles gambiaemosquitoes with few transcriptomic effects and minimal significant fitness effects. Given these characteristics, AgDNV has been proposed as a viral vector for basic research and mosquito control. Previous work created an AgDNV co-expression system with a wild-type AgDNV helper plasmid and a transducing plasmid expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) that can be used to co-transfect cells to generate infectious recombinant transducing AgDNV virions. Generated virions infect theAn. gambiaemidgut, fat body, and ovaries, yet this viral vector system is limited in the size of transgenes that can be expressed due to capsid packaging limitations.

Considering these size constraints, we created an artificial intron within the EGFP gene of the transducing construct that can express small pieces of genetic material such as microRNAs (miRNAs), microRNA sponges, or other small sequences. Placement of this intron in EGFP created a fluorescent reporter such that incorrect splicing produces a frameshift mutation in EGFP and an early stop codon, whereas correct splicing results in normal EGFP expression and co-transcription of the intronic genetic cargo. A selection of miRNAs with predicted or demonstrated importance in mosquito immunity and reproduction with expression localized to the fat body or ovaries were chosen as intronic cargo. Construct expression and splicing was evaluated, and the impact of miRNA expression on putative miRNA targets was measuredin vitroandin vivo.

The created intron was correctly spliced in cells and mosquitoes; however, miRNA delivery resulted in inconsistent changes to miRNA and predicted target gene transcript levels—possibly due to organ-specific miRNA expression or inaccurate putative target predictions leading to miRNA–target gene sequence mismatch.

Although our results on target gene expression were inconsistent, with optimization this viral vector and developed intron have potential as an expression tool withinAn. gambiaemosquitoes or cell lines.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13071-025-06994-7.

Anopheles gambiaeis the major vector ofPlasmodium falciparumin Sub-Saharan Africa, where most malaria cases occur [1]. While current malaria control efforts rely heavily on bite prevention via bed nets and mosquito reduction through insecticides, insecticide resistance is increasing [2]. Similarly, the efficacy of antimalarials used to treat disease in humans is threatened by drug-resistant parasites. As such, there is an increasing need for novel tools to better investigateAn. gambiaebiology, as well as new methods for mosquito and pathogen control (such as the development of malaria-resistant mosquitoes capable of replacing susceptible populations) [3].

Although CRISPR-Cas9 editing has great promise, such experiments typically require specialized microinjection equipment, alterations to the mosquito genome, and the time-consuming establishment of mosquito lines. The introduction of genetic material without modifying the genome, such as through genetically modified microbes, offers an alternative approach that is useful for altering the expression of existing genes, introducing new genes, or, in the case of paratransgenesis, using a symbiont to express a transgene within the vector that acts against the pathogen. While the bacteriumWolbachiahas been proposed for paratransgenesis, and select strains have been successful at blocking pathogens inAedes aegypti,Wolbachiahas yet to be genetically modified, and generating stable infections inAn. gambiaehas proven difficult [4–6]. Although there have been reports ofWolbachiainfections in wild populations ofAn. gambiaein Africa, these findings need further verification, and the impact of these infections onP. falciparuminAn. gambiaeare currently unclear [5,7–10]. Viruses also have potential for use in paratransgenesis; however, a limited number infectAn. gambiaeand few are ideal for genetic manipulation or for the introduction of new genes owing to off-target effects, or the danger of transmission to humans and the resultant disease [11,12]. One of the only nonpathogenic insect-specific viruses known to infectAn. gambiaewas discovered in 2008 inAn. gambiaeSua5B cells: theAn. gambiaedensovirus (AgDNV) [13]. AgDNV is closely related to other mosquito densoviruses includingCulex pipiens pallensdensoviruses (CppDNV) andAedes aegyptidensovirus (AaeDNV), and consists of a 4139 nucleotide (nt) ssDNA genome with terminal hairpins at each end that allow for viral genome packaging [13]. AgDNV is highly specific toAn. gambiaeand has poor infectivity even within closely related mosquitoes [14]. While some densoviruses in other mosquito species do cause mortality, AgDNV is not pathogenic toAn. gambiaeand increases in titer over the course of the adult lifespan while having little impact onAn. gambiaefitness or gene expression [15–17]. These characteristics make AgDNV ideal for use as a late-life acting bioinsecticide or as a viral vector to express genes against the parasites themselves [16].

Previously a co-plasmid expression system was developed consisting of the unaltered AgDNV genome in a pBluescript cloning vector (pWTAgDNV) and a transducing pBluescript construct containing anActin5Cpromoter, anEGFPreporter sequence, and aSV40termination sequence (pAcEGFP) [18]. From here on, “p” designates the plasmid form of the construct, whereas “v” designates the viral form; constructs lacking a label denote the general sequence. As both plasmids in this co-expression system possess the AgDNV terminal hairpins that are crucial for genome packaging, both sequences get packaged into capsids produced by the wild-type construct. Virions produced by this co-expression system localize to mosquito tissues important for pathogen transmission and immunity such as the midgut, ovaries, and fat body when injected into adult mosquitoes [13,18]. Although AgDNV has potential as a viral vector, the small genome and capsid size limits the length of transgenes that densoviruses can express; for example, in AaeDNV, a size increase of 8% over that of the wild-type genome resulted in a 10% reduction in packaging efficacy [17,19]. While less deleterious, a shorter sequence can also negatively alter packaging efficacy [18]. These size constraints have led to the development of various expression strategies using AaeDNV, including the use of an artificial intron to express microRNAs or sponges [20]. These constraints and the success of various modification strategies in AaeDNV led us to modify the transducing construct of AgDNV to express microRNAs or miRNA sponges that would increase the size of AcEGFP from 3994 nt to closer to the 4139 nt size of WT AgDNV, but would not exceed the size of the WT genome [18].

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNAs that act as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression through the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway [21]. The RNAi pathway and miRNAs are highly conserved and, inAn. gambiae, over 163 miRNAs involved in a variety of processes including mosquito reproduction, immunity, and development have been identified to date [22–28]. Endogenous miRNAs are coded in introns or intergenic sections of DNA and form short, hairpin-shaped, secondary RNA structures following transcription [29]. After processing by Drosha, pre-miRNA hairpins are exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm where they are cut further by Dicer into ~22 nt duplexes [30]. One strand of each duplex is degraded, and the remaining, more stable strand forms the mature miRNA that is brought to target mRNA sequences by the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). The mature miRNA sequence binds to regions of mRNAs where there is sequence complementarity (often the 3′ UTR) and the degree of complementarity controls whether the mRNA transcript is cut and targeted for degradation or whether binding simply blocks translation [21,31]. EndogenousAn. gambiaemiRNAs orin silicodesigned miRNA sponges that are complementary to mature miRNA sequences and “soak” up endogenous miRNAs are ideal for expression via AgDNV owing to their small size [32,33]. Through the expression and endogenous processing of pre-miRNAs into mature miRNAs, levels of mature miRNAs can be enhanced, whereas expression of miRNA sponges will lead to depletion of endogenous mature miRNAs.

As miRNAs are often encoded in introns or intergenic regions, and we wanted to express small RNA cargo in a way that allowed for tracking of expression, we developed an artificial intron with a reporter phenotype within the EGFP gene of the transducing AgDNV construct (Fig.1A and B). To test this intron, we identified miRNAs for expression and manipulation that are putatively involved in mosquito functions such as immunity and egg development that are tied to organs that AgDNV is known to infect [34–37]. Selected miRNAs all had predicted or observed functions withinAn. gambiae, yet many have not been purposefully manipulated inAn. gambiae, and functional studies identifying specific mRNA transcript targets and downstream effects are lacking (Table1) [36,38,39].

The lack of validation of these selected miRNAs withinAn. gambiaeproved challenging when assessing changes in miRNA or mRNA target levels, yet transcript splicing patterns indicate that the developed intron delivery system functioned as expected. This intron represents a new AgDNV viral vector expression strategy and may be useful for the expression of sequences including endogenous miRNAs, miRNA sponges, synthetic short interfering RNAs, or guide RNAs within genetically modified Cas9 mosquito lines.

The first miRNA selected for this work,miR8, was highly upregulated in both theAe. aegyptiandAn. gambiaefat body following blood feeding and targets the 3′ UTR region of secreted wingless-interacting molecule (Swim), a molecule involved with the Wnt/Wingless signaling pathway (Table1) [40–43]. WhenmiR8was depleted inAe. aegypti,Swimlevels remained high following blood feeding and egg development was inhibited [41]. Another miRNA,miR34, showed differential expression in several different mosquito species during pathogen infection, including inAn. gambiaewhere midgut expression was decreased following an infectiousPlasmodium berghei(P. berghei) blood meal [22,34,44–46]. Specifically,miR34was predicted to bind toRelish-like transcription factor 1(Rel1) andCaspartranscripts, important factors in the Toll and IMD immune pathways, respectively [37,46]. AsCasparis a negative regulator of theRelish-like transcription factor 2(Rel2) andCactusis a negative regulator ofRel1,Rel1andRel2transcript levels were also assessed in target gene quantitative PCR (qPCR) reactions (Table1). These transcripts, as well asmating induced stimulator of oogenesis(MISO), were predicted target genes ofmiR34via the now defunct miRNA–mRNA binding prediction webtool Insectar (http://www.insectar.sanbi.ac.za/) [47]. Previously, knockdown ofMISOtranscripts using RNAi resulted in reduced egg production, indicating a potential role formiR34in reproduction [48]. The third selected miRNA,miR305, was elevated in the ovaries and midgut ofAn. gambiaefollowing blood feeding and was higher in midguts following an infectiousPlasmodium-containing blood meal [36,37]. Inhibition ofmiR305decreased the midgut microbiota and increased resistance toP. falciparum, whereas enhancement ofmiR305increasedP. falciparuminfection levels and led to higher levels of midgut microbiota [37]. This miRNA was predicted to target the 3′ UTR ofAPL1Cand as APL1 is part of a complex that stabilizes the immune factor thioester-containing protein 1 (TEP1), which binds to the surface ofPlasmodiumleading to parasite destruction, miR305 may impactPlasmodiuminfection [37]. Supporting this,miR305depletion inAn. gambiaeled to increased resistance to bothP. falciparumandPlasmodium bergheiinfection and altered the levels of many immunity or anti-Plasmodiumgenes in mosquito midguts [43]. The final miRNA,miR375, was only detected in blood fedAe. aegyptimosquitoes and was predicted to bind to the 5′ UTR of Toll pathway immune genesCactusandRel1[49]. Expression of amiR375mimic inAe. aegyptimosquitoes or cells led to binding of the 5′ UTRs ofCactusandRel1and the upregulation ofCactusand downregulation ofRel1[49]. Similar changes in target genes and an increase in Dengue virus type 2 titers were observed inAe. albopictusAag2 cell lines [49]. AlthoughmiR375has not been studied inAn. gambiae, this miRNA has an identical sequence tomiR375inAe. aegyptiand has also been predicted by Insectar to targetAn. gambiae CactusandRel1along with other gene transcripts includingCasparandRel2[47].

Sure 2 supercompetentE. colicells (Agilent Technologies, 200152) were transformed as per kit instructions (SOC media was substituted for NZY + media) with pAcEGFP and pWTAgDNV plasmids [18]. Transformed colonies were plated on Luria broth agar plates with 100 µg/mL ampicillin and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Colony PCR was used to verify transformations and selected colonies were grown in 5 mL of Luria broth in a 37 °C shaker overnight and then preserved as glycerol stocks. Purified plasmids were produced by growing glycerol stocks in liquid culture as before, extracted using an Omega Bio-tek E.Z.N.A. Plasmid DNA Kit (D6942-02), and quantified using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer.

A potential splice acceptor site in WT AgDNV was identified at position 463 of the gene encoding the viral protein using the neural-network-based NetGene2 predictive splicing server, which identifies transition sequences between introns and exons [50–52]. This sequence was converted from AG^ACGCAGACAG (with “^” indicating the predicted splicing site) into a splice donor site by replacing the intronic portion with the starting sequence of the second intron ofAn. gambiae RPS17such that the new sequence was AG^GTAGGCGCGC. This sequence was further modified by two base pairs to AG^GTAAGTGCGC to match theAn. gambiae U1small nuclear RNA conserved region (Fig.1A) [53]. This U1 sequence (GTAAGT) represents the binding site for theU1small nuclear ribonucleoprotein which helps to form the spliceosome [53]. A splice acceptor with the sequence TACTGACATCCACTTTGCCTTTCTCTCCACAG was created to accompany this splice donor at position 464 of the gene encoding the viral protein by adding in the branch point, polypyrimidine tract, and intronic portion from the 3′ end of a chimeric human intron (last 32 nucleotides) preceding an immunoglobulin gene heavy chain variable region that is commonly found in commercial vectors such as in the pRL-CMV plasmid from Promega (Fig.1A) [54–56]. This splice donor and splice acceptor site were initially chosen within AgDNV to attempt the creation of a nondefective recombinant AgDNV, as previously described for AaeDNV, but we later decided to use a co-transfection system with pWTAgDNV and a transducing plasmid with the artificial intron to create an EGFP reporter phenotype [20]. These developedsplice donorandsplice acceptorsites were placed within the EGFP gene of pAcEGFP at positions 334 and 337, respectively, to create a reporter phenotype such that improper intronic splicing or a lack of splicing would result in a stop codon within the EGFP gene and correct splicing would result in EGFP expression (Fig.1B). Predicted splicing was examined at all steps using NetGene2 and the createdsplice donorandsplice acceptorsequences both had a confidence scores of 1.0, indicating a high confidence in splicing [50].

For intronic miRNA expression, endogenous pre-miRNA sequences were inserted into the created intron so that upon splicing, the pre-miRNA hairpin would be co-transcriptionally processed alongside EGFP transcripts [22–24]. Selected pre-miRNA sequences forAn. gambiae miR8,miR34,miR305, andmiR375, as well as a miRNA sponge againstmiR8(miR8SP), were added to this developed intron to test the co-expression system and intronic splicing mechanism. A randomnonsense RNAsequence (NS) was added to the intron as a control. These miRNAs and the miRNA sponge were chosen, as described above, on the basis of known or predicted effects on genes involved with immunity, pathogen defense, or reproduction inAn. gambiae,Ae. aegypti, or relevant mosquito cell lines (Table1). To test intron functionality and demonstrate that splicing is sequence-dependent, alteredsplice donorandsplice acceptorsite sequences were developed using site-directed mutagenesis of the pAcEGFPmiR8 plasmid [50]. When thesplice donorsite was changed by a single nucleotide (in bold) from AGGTAAGTGCGC to AGATAAGTGCGC, NetGene2 no longer identified this as a splice donor site. Similarly, when thesplice acceptorsite was changed by one nucleotide (in bold) from TACTGACATCCACTTTGCCTTTCTCTCCACAGto TACTGACATCCACTTTGCCTTTCTCTCCACAT, this site was no longer predicted to be a splice acceptor.

MluI andBstBI sites were introduced into the EGFP-encoding gene of pAcEGFP using site-directed mutagenesis to create synonymous mutations. AMluI site was created by altering position 327 ofEGFPfrom C to G, and position 330 from C to T. ABstBI site was created inEGFPby switching position 348 from G to A. EndogenousAn. gambiaepre-miRNA sequences from miRbase (https://www.mirbase.org/) were converted to DNA and used to order g-blocks from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT) [22]. Themir8SPsequence contained ten repeated blocks of the reverse complement of matureAn. gambiae miR8. Each block was separated by four spacer nucleotides and the entire sponge sequence was placed within the intron as with pre-miRNA sequences. Anonsense RNA(NS) was created using a random sequence with no matches to theAn. gambiaegenome or transcriptome when searched using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST). Each pre-miRNA, miRNA sponge, or nonsense RNA was coded on IDT g-blocks synthesized with flankingMluI andBstBI sites,EGFPsegments to replace those removed during digestion, and thesplice donorandsplice acceptorsites (Table S1; Fig.1A). G-blocks were subcloned into pJet using a CloneJet PCR Cloning Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, K1231) and later digested usingMluI andBstBI. These inserts were ligated into pAcEGFP that had also been digested withMluI andBstBI, and the resulting plasmid sequences were verified.

Sua5B and Moss55An. gambiaecells were grown in 25 cc plug cap flasks at 28 °C and passaged once per week at a 1:5 dilution with Schneider’sDrosophilamedia with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)v/v. For transfections, cells were quantified using a hemocytometer and 6 × 106cells were added to each well of a 6-well plate along with 3 mL of complete media and incubated overnight. Cells were transfected at ~70–80% confluence with a 1:2 ratio of pWTAgDNV to transducing plasmid with 830 ng pWTAgDNV and 1660 ng transducing plasmid per well using a Lipofectamine LTX with Plus Reagent kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, 15338030). Briefly, plasmids were added to a mix of 500 µL OptiMem media with 3 µL Plus reagent and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. Then, 5 µL Lipofectamine was added and tubes were incubated at room temperature for 25 min before transfecting each well with 500 µL of this mixture. Transducing plasmids were pAcEGFPmiR8, pAcEGFPmiR8SP, pAcEGFPmiR34, pAcEGFPmiR305, pAcEGFPmiR375, pAcEGFPNS, pAcEGFPSA, and pAcEGFPSD. Cells were incubated and imaged at 3 d post-transfection. RNA for splicing validation was also gathered 3 d post-transfection. Preliminaryin vitromiRNA and target gene expression experiments harvested RNA at 5 d post transfection. For Sua5Bin vitromiRNA and target gene expression, cells transfected with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPNS served as controls, whereas in Moss55in vitromiRNA and target gene expression experiments, cells transfected with pWTAgDNV alone served as a control.

To produce virus particles for mosquito infections, Moss55 cells were transfected with selected transducing and helper viruses (as described) and virions were extracted 3 d post-transfection by removing the media, washing cells with 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and suspending cells in 1 mL 1× PBS. Cells were lysed using three cycles of freeze-thawing and centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5 min to pellet debris. The virus-containing supernatant was collected and plasmid DNA and free viral genomes were removed using an Ambion TURBO DNA-freekit (AM1907). DNA was extracted using an Omega Bio-tek E.Z.N.A Tissue DNA kit (D3396-02) and viral genome equivalents were determined using standard curves created using AgDNV-coding plasmids with a single copy of each gene-of-interest. Samples and standards were run using PerfeCTa SYBR Green FastMix (Quantabio, 95,072–012) on a Qiagen Rotor-Gene Q at 95 °C for 2 min followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s, 60 °C for 40 s, and 72 °C for 30 s. Runs were finished with a melt step using a ramp of 55–99 °C rising by 1 °C each step. WT AgDNV was quantified using primers againstAgDNV nonstructural gene 1(NS-RT-IIIF: CATTCGATCACGGAGACCAC, NS-RT-IIIR: GCGCTTGTCGCACTAAGAAAC) and a standard curve of pWTAgDNV. Selected transducing viruses (vAcEGFPmiR8, vAcEGFPmiR8SP, vAcEGFPmiR34, vAcEGFPmiR305, vAcEGFPmiR375, vAcEGFPNS, vAcEGFPSA, and vAcEGFPSD) were quantified using primers againstEGFP(GFP-RT-II-F497: TCAAGATCCGCCACAACATC, GFP-RT-II-R644: TTCTCGTTGGGGTCTTTGCT) and a standard curve of pAcEGFP. Each production of virus consisted of a mixture of vWTAcEGFP and a transducing virus.

FemaleAn. gambiaemosquitoes (Keele strain) that were 3 d post-emergence were injected intrathoracically with 200 nL densovirus mixture containing both wild-type vWTAgDNV and transducing virus (either vAcEGFPmiR8, vAcEGFPmiR8SP, vAcEGFPmiR34, vAcEGFPmiR305, vAcEGFPmiR375, vAcEGFPNS, vAcEGFPSA, or vAcEGFPSD) using a Drummond Scientific Nanoject III (3-000-207) and Drummond Scientific 10 µL microcapillary tubes (3-000-210-G) pulled using a Sutter Instrument Co. Model P-2000 (Heat 400, Fil 4, Vel 40, Del 140 Pul 140). Three biological replicates in mosquitoes were completed. For each replicate, mosquitoes were injected with ~106–107transducing virus particles and 106–108WT DNV particles (Table S2). Mosquito treatment groups were kept in separate cardboard cup cages with 10% sugar solutionw/vad libitumuntil RNA extraction or imaging. RNA was harvested and tested from three biological replicates.

For bothin vitroandin vivoexperiments, RNA was extracted using an Omega Bio-tek MicroElute Total RNA Kit (R6831-02). Forin vitroexperiments, RNA was extracted 3 d post-transfection for intronic splicing assessments or 5 d post-transfection for miRNA and target gene quantification. Forin vivoexperiments, mosquitoes were individually homogenized 10 d post-injection in lysis buffer using zinc-plated steel BB pellets (Daisy 0.177 cal or 4.5 mm) and a Qiagen TissueLyser II with a lysis program lasting 2 min with a frequency of 30 Hz. Following homogenization, RNA was extracted and DNase treated either on the column using an Omega Bio-tek RNase-free DNase Set I kit (E1091) or following RNA extraction using an Ambion DNA-freeDNA Removal Kit (AM1906). For target gene quantification or assessment of intronic splicing, cDNA was synthesized using a Quantabio qScript cDNA synthesis kit (95047–500); whereas for miRNA quantification, samples were converted to cDNA using the HighSpec option in the Qiagen miScript II RT kit (218161) and diluted 1:10.

In vitroandin vivointronic splicing was assessed using primers spanning the intronic region (GFP-COLPCRF: CTGACCTACGGCGTGCAGTGC, RGFP-COLPCRR: CGGCCATGATATAGACGTTGTGGC). PCR products were run on 2% agarose gels and imaged using a UVP GelDoc-It transilluminator. Spliced transcripts resulted in a product of 274 bp, whereas PCR reactions using DNA plasmid controls or unspliced transcripts produced variably sized amplicons depending on insert size with most being ~480 bp.

Target gene qPCR reactions were run on a Qiagen Rotor-Gene Q using PerfeCTa SYBR Green FastMix (Quantabio, 95072–012) or an Applied Biosystems 7900HTFast Real-Time PCR System with Applied Biosystems PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix (A25724), with conditions of 95 °C for 2 min, 40 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s, 60 °C for 40 s, and 72 °C for 30 s, and a melt curve with a ramp from 55 °C to 99 °C with 1 °C change per step. Primers forAn. gambiae SwimcDNA were developed during this study, whereas others came from published studies (Table S3) [48,57–60].

Reactions to quantify miRNAs used Qiagen miScript SYBR Green PCR kits (218075) and a Qiagen Rotor-Gene Q with a universal reverse primer and forward primers consisting of the sequences of each mature miRNA (Table S4) [40].An. gambiae U6levels served as a reference with which to compare miRNA levels. Conditions for miRNA qPCR reactions were 95 °C for 15 min followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C (for all miRNAs during cell culture replicates as well as forin vivomiR34) or 55 °C (allU6reactions andin vivomiR375) for 60 s, and 72 °C for 20 s. All reactions ended with a melt curve consisting of a ramp from 55 °C to 99 °C that increased 1 °C per step.

All qPCR data was analyzed using the delta-delta Ct method to calculate the fold change in expression relative to reference genes (S7for mRNA transcripts andU6for mature miRNA quantification unless otherwise noted). The fold change expression data was log2 transformed and a D’Agostino–Pearson omnibus K2 test was used to assess normality in Graphpad Prism 9. If both the control and experimental groups passed the normality test, a parametric unpaired two-tailedt-test assuming equal standard deviations was used to measure statistical significance. If either or both groups failed the D’Agostino–Pearson normality test, a nonparametric two-tailed Mann–Whitney test was used to compare ranks and to assess significance. SignificantPvalues (< 0.05) were reported on graphs. All graphs report fold change expression using a log2 scale. The mean and standard error of the mean was reported for groups analyzed using an unpairedt-test, whereas median and 95% confidence intervals were shown for groups compared using a nonparametric two-tailed Mann–Whitney test.

WhenAn. gambiaeSua5B or Moss55 cells were co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and the original transducing plasmid pAcEGFP that lacked the created intron, strong EGFP expression was observed (AcEGFP; Fig.2A, B). Sua5B and Moss55 cells that were co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and transducing plasmid pAcEGFPmiR8, pAcEGFPmiR8SP, pAcEGFPmiR34, pAcEGFPmiR305, or pAcEGFPmiR375 had visible EGFP expression indicative of intronic splicing 3 d post-transfection (miR8, miR8SP, miR34, miR305, and miR375; Fig.2A, B). EGFP expression was also present when cells were transfected with pWTAgDNV and thenonsense-RNA-encoding transducing plasmid pAcEGFPNS (NS RNA; Fig.2A, B). Whensplice donororsplice acceptorsites were mutated, EGFP expression was not detectable in Sua5B cells 3 d post-co-transfection with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPSA, while greatly reduced splicing was observed in cells co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPSD, indicating that splicing was largely dependent on splice site sequences (SAmutant andSDmutant; Fig.2A). InAn. gambiaeMoss55 cells, similar expression patterns were observed, with less EGFP expression occurring in Moss55 cells co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPSD than in Sua5B cells co-transfected with the same constructs (Fig.2B). EGFP signals were generally weaker in Moss55 compared with Sua5B cells; however, results were consistent from both cell lines and indicate that intronic splicing is induced in a sequence specific manner for a wide variety of pre-miRNAs, miRNA sponges, and small RNAs inAn. gambiaecell lines of varied lineage.

In vitrointronic splicing was further validated using primers spanning the intronic insert. A 274 bp PCR product consistent with splicing was observed in Sua5B cells 3 d post-co-transfection with pWTAgDNV and transducing constructs pAcEGFPmiR8, pAcEGFPmiR8SP, pAcEGFPmiR34, pAcEGFPmiR305, pAcEGFPmiR375, and pAcEGFPNS (cDNA samples 1–6; Fig.3A). Unspliced plasmid DNA samples had PCR product sizes dependent on intronic length. This was ~480 bp for most constructs, although themiR8SP-expressing plasmid had a larger insert and an amplicon of 572 bp (plasmid samples; Fig.3A). Sua5B cells co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and constructs containing mutatedsplice acceptororsplice donorsequences (pAcEGFPSA or pAcEGFPSD) exhibited some level of intron splicing despite absent or greatly reduced visible EGFP expression (cDNA samples 7 and 8, Fig.3A;SAmutant andSDmutant, Fig.2A). This indicates that some transcripts are spliced despite the lack of predicted splicing via NetGene2, but that this splicing may be incomplete or in a location that causes a disruption in EGFP expression due to a stop codon. Faint ~480 bp bands, indicating the presence of some unspliced transcript, were also observed in PCR reactions using cDNA from cells co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPNS (cDNA sample 6; Fig.3A). This points to some level of splicing disruption in these constructs, yet, given the visible EGFP expression in cells co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPNS, this may be explained by splicing intermediates (NS RNA; Fig.2A). Both cDNA and plasmid versions ofEGFPlack the intron sequence and have the same PCR product size of 274 bp (cDNA sample 9, plasmid sample 9; Fig.3A).

Similar splicing patterns were observed in Moss55 cells (Fig.3B). Cells co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and transducing plasmid pAcEGFPmiR8, pAcEGFPmiR8SP, pAcEGFPmiR34, pAcEGFPmiR305, pAcEGFPmiR375, or pAcEGFPNS all had 274 bp bands, indicative of splicing (cDNA samples 1–6; Fig.3B). Cells co-transfected with pWTDNV and pAcEGFPmiR8, pAcEGFPmiR34, or pAcEGFPNS also had larger ~480 bp bands, consistent with some level of unspliced transcript or splicing intermediates (cDNA samples 1,3, and 6; Fig.3B). In cells co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPNS, another intermediate-sized band was also present (cDNA sample 6; Fig.3B). When cells were co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and the splice acceptor mutant pAcEGFPSA, a ~480 bp band, representative of a lack of splicing, as well as a 274 bp band, consistent with splicing, was observed despite of a lack of EGFP expression in transfected cells (cDNA sample 7, Fig.3B;SAmutant, Fig.2B). Cells co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and the splice donor mutant pAcEGFPSD produced a single strong  ~480 bp band representative of a lack of splicing despite faint EGFP expression observed in transfected cells (cDNA sample 8, Fig.3B;SDmutant, Fig.2B). As before, PCRs of plasmid DNA resulted in larger ~480 bp bands for most constructs (plasmid samples 1 and 3–8, Fig.3B). A band of 572 bp, reflective of a larger intronic segment, was detected for pAcEGFPmiR8SP (plasmid sample 2; Fig.3B). Plasmid DNA from pAcEGFP, as well as cDNA from cells co-transfected with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFP, lacked the intron and produced bands of 274 bp (plasmid sample 9, cDNA sample 9; Fig.3B).

Isolations of vWTAgDNV and each transducing virus purified from Moss55 cells were injected into adult female mosquitoes that were 3 d old, with images of these mosquitoes taken 10 d later. Punctate EGFP expression indicative of splicing was observed in the thorax and abdomen of mosquitoes co-injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR8, vAcEGFPmiR8SP, vAcEGFPmiR34, vAcEGFPmiR305, vAcEGFPmiR375, or vAcEGFPNS (Fig.4A). Little to no EGFP expression was observed in mosquitoes co-injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPSA (SAmutant, Fig.4A). Mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPSD exhibited weak EGFP expression that remained localized to the mosquito thorax (SDmutant; Fig.4A).In vivointronic splicing was measured as before via PCR of cDNA made from 10 d post-injection mosquitoes. Spliced 274 bp bands were observed in cDNA samples taken from mosquitoes co-injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR8, vAcEGFPmiR8SP, vAcEGFPmiR34, vAcEGFPmiR305, vAcEGFPmiR375, or vAcEGFPNS (cDNA samples 1–6; Fig.4B). Faint unspliced bands were also observed in mosquitoes co-injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR34, vAcEGFPmiR375, or vAcEGFPNS (cDNA samples 3, 5 and 6; Fig.4B). Plasmid controls resulted in larger bands of ~480 bp for all constructs except for the largermiR8SPinsert, which produced a band of 572 bp (plasmid samples 1–6; Fig.4B).

Preliminary work in Sua5B cells showed that transfection with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPmiR8 or pAcEGFPmiR375 led to higher levels ofmiR8andmiR375, respectively, 5 d post-transfection (Fig. S1A and C).miR34levels were reduced rather than elevated when Sua5B cells were transfected with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPmiR34, perhaps indicating the processing of this transcript into an anti-miRNA rather than expression of the predicted mature miRNA (Fig. S1B). Transfection with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPmiR305 or miR8SP did not result in any significant changes in miRNA levels (data not shown). We also observed significant upregulation of the predicted target geneCactusin cells transfected with pWTAgDNV and pAcEGFPmiR375 (Fig. S2A). Given the lack of significant change in miRNA levels formiR8SPandmiR305, and difficulty in interpreting results frommiR8in light of themiR8SPresults, these miRNAs were not evaluated in later experiments. A preliminaryin vivoexperiment was also carried out where mosquitoes 10 d post-injection with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR34 showed significant elevation inmiR34target gene transcriptsMISO,Caspar, andRel2despite a lack of change in the levels ofmiR34,Cactus, andRel1A(Fig. S3A–F).

After down-select, larger-scalein vivoexperiments focused on mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and either vAcEGPFmiR34 or vAcEGFPmiR375. Mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGPFmiR34 were evaluated for changes inMISO,Caspar, andRel2transcript levels, whereas mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGPFmiR375 were tested for differences inCactusandRel1Atranscript levels.

Similar to preliminaryin vivoresults, levels ofmiR34were not significantly different between mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR34 and control mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPNS (Fig.5A). In addition, no differences were seen inCasparorMISOtranscript levels 10 d post-injection (Fig.5B and C). However,Rel2transcripts were more abundant 10 d post-infection in mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR34 compared with those injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPNS (Fig.5D). The direction of this change in target gene transcript abundance may indicate miRNA signaling through the lessor known RNA activation pathway rather than the RNAi pathway, or that this miRNA acts on an upstream inhibitor ofRel2[61–63].

When mosquitoes were injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR375,miR375levels were reduced 10 d post-infection (Fig.6A). This was unexpected given the strong increases seen in preliminaryin vitroexperiments and may indicate that the introduced miRNA is not processedin vivoas expected, and instead produces an anti-miRNA that binds to endogenousmiR375. BothCactusandRel1Atranscript levels were elevated in mosquitoes 10 d post-infection (Fig.6B and C). This contrasts with the predicted increase inCactusand decrease inRel1AfromAe. aegypti(Table1).

These experiments show that splicing of the developed AgDNV-delivered intron is robustin vitrowithin two differentAn. gambiaecell lines of varied lineages, as well asin vivofor a variety of endogenous pre-miRNA sequences, one developed miRNA sponge sequence, and one random RNA sequence. Occasionally, unexpected unspliced transcripts were observed in PCR assays. These likely represent splicing intermediates or pre-splicing transcripts, as the presence of these larger bands did not correlate with altered EGFP expressionin vitroorin vivo(Figs.2A and B,4A). This demonstrates that splicing is specific to the developed intronic sequence and not altered by the cargo sequence. Further supporting this, intronic splicing can be eliminated or reduced through alteration ofsplice donororsplice acceptorsequences. Although mutatedsplice donorandsplice acceptorconstructs within the two cell lines sometimes produced bands seemingly consistent with some level of splicing, reduced or absentin vitroEGFP expression observed for these constructs indicates that any splicing that occurs is greatly suppressed, modified, or results in a stop codon as predicted (cDNA samples 7 and 8, Fig.3A; cDNA samples 7 and 8, Fig.3B;SAandSDmutants, Fig.2A and B). Although splicing was not assessed by PCRin vivoforsplice donorandsplice acceptormutants, mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPSA had little to no EGFP expression, and mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPSD exhibited weak EGFP expression (SAandSDmutants, Fig.4A). Thus, this intron and expression strategy represents a promising new method for introducing small RNAs bothin vitroandin vivo.

Despite the success of this expression strategyin vitro, some differences between cell types were observed. Sua5B cells are larger in size and produced noticeably stronger EGFP expression than Moss55 cells (Fig.2A and B). While not investigated in this study, this difference in observed EGFP expression between cell lines may be due to chronic AgDNV infection already present in Sua5B cells that could enhance the viral replication and packaging efficiency of transducing constructs [13]. Moss55 cells lack natural AgDNV infection, and thus, rely solely on AgDNV constructs expressed from transfecting plasmids. Alternatively, Sua5B cells are considered to have hemocyte-like properties, whereas Moss55 cells have an epithelial origin, and differences in cell lifecycle or rate of transcription may explain the variation in EGFP intensity [64–66]. Despite these differences in AgDNV infection status and EGFP intensity, no differences were observed in the viral titers produced by the different cell lines for mosquito injections. To better control the genetic diversity of purified viruses, Moss55 cells were used to grow viral stocks used forin vivoexperiments.

In vivoexperiments largely focused on mosquitoes 10 d post-injection with vWTAgDNV and either vAcEGFPmiR34 or vAcEGFPmiR375. While experiments with mosquitoes injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR34 did not result in any differences inmiR34levels, similar to preliminary results,Rel2transcript levels were slightly elevated 10 d post-infection (Fig.5A and D). Although a directionality toRel2changes was not predicted prior to experiments, this increase inRel2transcript abundance indicates thatmiR34may act onRel2through the RNA activation pathway or thatmiR34acts on another transcript that in turn influencesRel2abundance, possibly via an upstream inhibitor ofRel2(Table1) [61–63]. Similarly, althoughmiR375was predicted to bind toCactusandRel1and cause an increase inCactusand a decrease inRel1, mosquitoes that were injected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR375 had slightly elevatedCactusandRel1Atranscript levels 10 d post-infection (Fig.6B and C). This was unexpected, asCactusis a negative regulator ofRel1, and if binding ofmiR375results in transcript depletion though RNAi, in theory, binding would decrease the transcript levels of both. As withmiR34, it is possible thatmiR375is acting through RNA activation or on transcripts upstream ofCactusorRel1. In addition, asmiR375levels were slightly decreased in mosquitoes infected with vWTAgDNV and vAcEGFPmiR375, it is also possible that this miRNA is being processed into an anti-miRNA and that this binds to maturemiR375or operates in a different way than maturemiR375(Fig.6A).

There are many possible reasons for differences between what we observed fromin vivoexpression experiments versus what was expected on the basis of prior predictions (Table1). Most importantly, although there have been some prior studies for certain miRNAs, the true direct targets of theseAn. gambiaemiRNAs have largely not been identified and most targets have only been bioinformatically predicted (Table1). Further, muted changes in miRNA or target gene transcripts could be due to organ-specific effects that are diluted when analyzing the whole mosquito body. Inconsistencies could also be due to a lack of effective miRNA expressionin vivoor indicate that infection levels of transducing viruses were lower than those needed to induce a significant alteration in endogenous miRNAs. Despite these inconsistencies between predicted and observed alterations, we did observe changes inmiR375levels and in somemiR34andmiR375target transcripts, indicating that the developed artificial intron has potential for use in miRNA expression and may be more successful if specific target genes are better characterized (Figs.5D,6A–C).

Future experiments should examine miRNA and target gene transcript levels within organs known to support AgDNV infection, such as the midgut, ovaries, and fat body. By examining specific organs rather than the whole mosquito, noise in the system may be reduced and changes in miRNAs or target genes may be more evident. The developed expression system can conceptually also be useful for expressing other effectors such as small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) developed against specific genes. By expressing siRNAs with specific targets, the true capabilities of this virus and intron expression system could be better tested and assessed for meaningful intervention in biological or field settings. Additional studies of AgDNV viral replication dynamics, dosing requirements for injections, and organ specificity would greatly aid future work and the further development of this symbiont and expression system as a tool for paratransgenesis. Further, it may be that a nondefective recombinant approach, such as that described in AaeDNV by Liu et. al., 2016, may provide an advantage in expression consistency that could be explored in future AgDNV studies [20].

We thank Amelia Roma and Francine McCullough for their supportive services pertaining to mosquito rearing and administrative tasks. We also thank Dr. Gang Ning and Missy Hazen from the Pennsylvania State University Microscopy Core Facility for their imaging assistance.