The anterior portion of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) is one of the first regions targeted by pathology in sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD) and limbic‐predominant age‐related TDP‐43 encephalopathy (LATE) indicating a potential for metrics from this region to serve as imaging biomarkers. Leveraging a unique post‐mortem dataset of histology and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, we aimed to (1) develop an anatomically valid segmentation protocol for anterior entorhinal cortex (ERC), Brodmann area (BA) 35, and BA36 for in vivo 3 T MRI and (2) incorporate this protocol in an automated approach. We included 20 cases (61–97 years old, 50% females) with and without neurodegenerative diseases (11 vs. 9 cases) to ensure generalizability of the developed protocol. Digitized MTL Nissl‐stained coronal histology sections from these cases were annotated and registered to same‐subject post‐mortem MRI. The protocol was developed by determining the location of histological borders of the MTL cortices in relation to anatomical landmarks. Subsequently, the protocol was applied to 15 cases twice, with a 2‐week interval, to assess intra‐rater reliability with the Dice Similarity Index (DSI). Thereafter, it was implemented in our in‐house Automatic Segmentation of Hippocampal Subfields (ASHS)‐T1 approach and evaluated with DSIs. The anterior histological border distances of ERC, BA35 and BA36 were evaluated with respect to various anatomical landmarks, and the distance relative to the beginning of the hippocampus was chosen. To formulate segmentation rules, we examined the histological sections for the location of borders in relationship to anatomical landmarks in the coronal sections. The DSI for the anterior MTL cortices for the intra‐rater reliability was 0.85–0.88, and for the ASHS‐T1 against the manual segmentation, it was 0.62–0.65. We developed a reliable segmentation protocol and incorporated it in an automated approach. Given the vulnerability of the anterior MTL cortices to tau deposition in AD and LATE, the updated approach is expected to improve imaging biomarkers for these diseases.

The medial temporal lobe (MTL) is a multifaceted and complex brain structure involved in memory function (Roüast and Schönauer2023; Wixted and Squire2011). It is characterized by its heterogeneity and comprises several cytoarchitectonically, connectomically, and functionally distinct subregions (Catani2022; Insausti and Amaral2004). MTL subregions, including the entorhinal cortex (ERC), perirhinal cortex (PRC) and hippocampus, are differentially involved in different memory processes, such as recall and recognition (Yonelinas et al.2024,2007; Haskins et al.2008), and are therefore highly relevant for memory decline in the context of neurodegenerative diseases. Not surprisingly, the MTL is a vulnerable region of pathology in various neurodegenerative diseases, including sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD) and limbic‐predominant age‐related TDP‐43 encephalopathy (LATE). These diseases are known to be associated with prominent deposition of pathology within this region (Nelson et al.2019; Braak and Braak1991) leading to neurodegeneration and cognitive decline. Notably, in the early phases of both AD and LATE, the involvement of the MTL is not uniform (Wisse et al.2025). Rather, it exhibits changes in selective subregions, suggesting a potential for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)‐based morphometry in this region to be used as a valuable imaging biomarker.

Evidence suggests that in AD, tau deposition initially targets anterior portions of the MTL cortex, prominently affecting the PRC, particularly Brodmann area 35 (BA35) (Nelson et al.2019; Braak and Braak1991), also referred to as transentorhinal cortex (Braak and Braak1985), as well as the ERC. With disease progression, the pathology accumulates in the medial ERC and involves the cornu ammonis 1 (CA1) subfield of the hippocampus (Braak and Braak1991). In LATE, the amygdala is first targeted by TDP‐43 pathology, followed by the ERC and hippocampus (Nelson et al.2019,2023).

MTL imaging biomarkers, and especially hippocampal volume measured on MRI, have proven valuable as a diagnostic tool in memory clinics (Scheltens et al.1992) and as an endpoint in clinical trials (Sims et al.2023; Hernandez et al.2022). However, with the increasing focus on identifying and treating early stages of dementia (Sperling et al.2014), there is a need for more precise MRI measures that can detect earliest changes, beyond total hippocampal volume, especially since the hippocampus is not the first affected region in either AD or LATE (Nelson et al.2019; Braak and Braak1991). MTL cortical measures, such as ERC and BA35 and especially metrics from the anterior regions, could be valuable biomarkers for this purpose. However, these regions are challenging to measure because of the anatomical variability they exhibit (Ding and Van Hoesen2010). Manual segmentation protocols that include these MTL cortices and even the anterior portions are available (Adams et al.2022; Olsen et al.2013; Yushkevich, Amaral, et al.2015). Nonetheless, manual segmentation is labor intensive, time consuming, and requires specialized expertise—factors that are prohibitive when dealing with larger datasets. Hence, automated segmentation methods were introduced. Several automated segmentation methods exist that include MTL cortices (Xie et al.2019; Yushkevich et al.2010; Fischl2012; Amunts et al.2020; Alemán‐Gómez et al.2022). However, these methods either do not include the most anterior portions, lack fine‐grained labels such as BA35, or fail to account for the anatomical variability of this region, either in the segmentation protocol or because of the use of a single‐atlas approach. One of the automated approaches is the Automatic Segmentation of Hippocampal Subfields (ASHS) pipeline, which was first generated using high‐resolution oblique coronal T2‐weighted MRI images of the MTL (Yushkevich et al.2010). This pipeline includes fine‐grained labels in the hippocampus and MTL cortex and, owing to the design of the protocol and the multi‐atlas segmentation approach, accounts for anatomical variability in the MTL. More recently, Xie et al. (2019) extended ASHS to more widely available 1 × 1 × 1 mm3resolution T1‐weighted MRI images. This ASHS‐T1 approach labels MTL cortical subregions similarly to the original ASHS but does not label distinct hippocampal subfields, which are hard to distinguish in T1‐weighted MRI at this resolution (Wisse et al.2021). Neither ASHS nor ASHS‐T1 include the anterior portion of MTL, which can be particularly vulnerable to tau tangles and TDP‐43 pathology (Nelson et al.2019; Costoya‐Sánchez et al.2023).

To address the limitations of available MTL segmentation tools and protocols with respect to the anterior MTL, our first objective was to develop an anatomically grounded and detailed manual segmentation protocol for the anterior ERC, BA35, and BA36 to be applied to in vivo T1‐weighted 3 T (T) MRI. The rules for this protocol are based on the analysis of the location of subregion boundaries in a unique dataset of ultra‐high‐resolution post‐mortem MRI and matched serial Nissl histology from 20 cases, annotated by expert neuroanatomists. Our second objective was to employ this new protocol to expand the existing ASHS‐T1 atlas into the anterior MTL after assessing the intra‐rater reliability of a manual rater. We then evaluated the cross‐validation accuracy of ASHS‐T1 for these newly added anterior MTL subregions.

See Figure1for a flowchart of the different parts of protocol development and validation and the data used for each part.

Flowchart of methods and datasets used in protocol development. This flowchart provides an overview of the key steps and datasets utilized in developing the segmentation protocol for anterior BA35, BA36, and ERC. Abbreviations: BA, Brodmann area; CNDR, the Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research; ERC, entorhinal cortex; HNL/UCLM, the Human Neuroanatomy Lab at the University of Castilla‐La Mancha.

We obtained brain hemisphere specimens from two centers: the Human Neuroanatomy Lab at the University of Castilla‐La Mancha (HNL/UCLM), Spain, and the Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research (CNDR) at the University of Pennsylvania, USA. Human brain specimens were obtained in accordance with local laws and regulations at the University of Pennsylvania and the Ethical Committee of UCLM. When possible, pre‐consent was secured during the subjects' lifetime. In all cases, consent from the next‐of‐kin was obtained after the subjects' passing. Donors from CNDR included patients from the Penn Frontotemporal Degeneration Center and the Penn Alzheimer's Disease Research Center participating in in vivo aging and dementia research. HNL/UCLM donors were mostly older adults with no known neurological diseases from the surrounding geographical area (Ravikumar et al.2021; Yushkevich et al.2021).

We selected 20 cases for the development of the manual segmentation protocol. To ensure generalizability of the protocol within older populations, the final dataset included cases with and without neurodegenerative diseases (11 vs. 9 cases, respectively), a relatively broad age range, and an equal representation of men and women. Table1provides a summary of the demographic and diagnostic information for the cases we included, with additional details in TableS1.

Demographic and diagnostic summary of the brain donors included in this study.

Abbreviations: ADNC, Alzheimer's disease neuropathologic change; FTLD‐TDP, frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP‐43 inclusions; LATE, limbic age‐related TDP‐43 encephalopathy.

Patients with no pathology, low ADNC, and pathological aging with mild tau pathology.

For each of the brains donated, one hemisphere was used for imaging and serial histology preparation, whereas the opposite hemisphere was sampled for diagnostic pathology according to the National Institute on Aging–Alzheimer's Association protocol (Hyman et al.2012; Toledo et al.2014). CNDR hemispheres were fixed in 10% formalin solution for at least 30 days. HNL/UCLM hemispheres were fixed in situ with 8 L of 4% paraformaldehyde perfused through both carotid arteries and then stored submerged in 4% paraformaldehyde for 6 weeks before being processed (Insausti et al.2023).

Following fixation, the temporal lobe was extracted from every hemisphere. The excised specimen was imaged overnight on a Varian 9.4 T animal scanner at 0.20 × 0.20 × 0.20 mm3resolution using a multi‐slice spin echo sequence. Sequence parameters vary slightly between specimens, with typical values being a repetition time (TR) of 9330 ms and an echo time of 23 ms. Further details of the MRI acquisition and processing protocol can be found in Ravikumar et al. (2021).

After MRI scanning, serial histological processing was performed on each MTL specimen (Insausti et al.2023). First, custom molds were 3D printed to fit each temporal lobe specimen. The specimens were then cut into four blocks of 2 cm perpendicular to the long axis of the hippocampus using the molds. Next, the blocks were cryoprotected and sectioned coronally at 50 μm intervals using a sliding microtome coupled to a freezing unit (Microm, Heidelberg). As a result, each block generated ~40 sections, with every 10th section undergoing staining for Nissl using a 0.25% Thionin stain.

Stained sections were then mounted on 75 mm × 50 mm glass slides, digitally scanned at a pixel size of 0.4 μm at 20× magnification, and uploaded to an open‐source cloud‐based digital histology archive (https://github.com/pyushkevich/histoannot) that supports web‐based visualization, anatomical labeling, and machine learning classifier training. The MTL cortex was annotated in the histology sections by expert neuroanatomists, led by RI. For more details on the annotation protocol, please see theSupporting Information: Methods section.

Since the goal of this work is to extend the existing segmentation protocol used in ASHS‐T1 to more anterior cortical MTL regions, the MRI plane in which the tracing of these regions is performed needed to match that of the existing protocol. In the ASHS‐T1 protocol, this plane is approximately perpendicular to the main axis of the hippocampus. For brevity, we will refer to this plane as the “coronal” plane. The plane of histological sectioning was also chosen to be approximately perpendicular to the hippocampus main axis. By maintaining the same anatomical orientation for the MRI and serial histology, we were able to use distances in the coordinate system of serial histology slices to inform rules for placing landmarks in the extended ASHS‐T1 protocol.

An examination of the cytoarchitectonic borders against external landmarks was needed to develop the in vivo T1‐weighted MRI protocol as the cytoarchitectonic borders of these cortical subregions are not visible on MRI. To develop rules for determining the anterior‐most plane at which to begin labeling ERC, BA35, and BA36, for each of these regions we quantified the distance from the anterior‐most histology slide that included the region of interest to various anatomical landmarks observable on MRI. These landmarks included the temporal pole, collateral sulcus (CS), limen insulae (frontotemporal junction), amygdala, and the hippocampus. FigureS1shows an example of each of the anatomical landmarks we assessed. These landmarks were assessed on histology sections except for the CS, which was challenging to track on histology and was exclusively assessed on post‐mortem MRI. Additionally, we used the post‐mortem MRI to help identify the sulcal pattern for each case, as this is often more difficult to deduce based on histology slices.

To develop rules for the placement of ERC, BA35, and BA36 boundaries in the coronal plane, the distance from the border of interest to different landmarks observable on MRI was quantified in each histology slide using the Adobe Illustrator 2022 curvature tool (FigureS2). The depth of the CS was also measured to assess whether borders differed depending on the depth of the CS. Cases were designated as having a shallow CS if the depth of the CS measured on the slice at the level of the anterior tip of the hippocampus was below 7 mm (Berron et al.2017). Ten cases had a deep CS, and 10 cases had a shallow CS. The selection of landmarks to quantify their distances from each border was based on an initial qualitative assessment of the rough location of the border of interest on histology sections. For example, it is observed that a specific border is in most cases on the crown of the parahippocampal gyrus (the crown of a gyrus is the most superficial part located between two sulci). FigureS3shows landmarks we considered on histology and MRI.

The ASHS pipeline uses the combination of multi‐atlas label fusion and corrective machine learning techniques (Yushkevich et al.2010; Wang et al.2013) to map expert‐generated segmentations from a set of example MRI scans, called atlases, to new, unlabeled MRI scans. The original ASHS pipeline requires high‐resolution oblique coronal T2‐weighted MRI scans, in which hippocampal layers are typically visible (Yushkevich et al.2010). However, since the segmentation of MTL cortical subregions such as ERC, BA35, and BA36 does not require hippocampal layer visibility, and since dedicated imaging of hippocampal subfields using T2‐weighted MRI is not acquired in most studies, Xie et al. (2019) adapted ASHS to 1 × 1 × 1 mm3T1‐weighted MRI by transferring anatomical labels from the T2‐weighted MRI to the same‐subjects T1‐weighted MRI in the ASHS atlas set (Xie et al.2019). The ASHS‐T1 pipeline segments the extrahippocampal MTL regions, but does not segment separate hippocampal subfields due to a lack of contrast between hippocampal layers on most T1‐weighted MRI scans (Xie et al.2019). The ASHS atlas set consists of 15 cognitively normal older controls (NC) and 14 amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) patients, diagnosed according to established criteria (Petersen2004; Petersen et al.2009; Winblad et al.2004). Demographic data for the aMCI and NC groups are shown in TableS2.

The current ASHS segmentation protocol includes parahippocampal cortex, ERC, and PRC (subdivided into BA35 and BA36) segmentations; however, these are limited to 1.3 mm anterior to the hippocampal head. The ASHS‐T1 atlas also includes the anterior and posterior hippocampus (Xie et al.2019) and has recently been extended to the amygdala (Wuestefeld, Binette, et al.2024). Our developed protocol will be applied to the ASHS‐T1 atlas set to further expand the MTL cortex labels anteriorly.

MRI scans in the atlas set were obtained on a 3 T MRI scanner (Siemens Trio, Erlangen, Germany) at the University of Pennsylvania with an eight‐channel array coil. A whole brain T1‐weighted (magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo) MRI scan was obtained with repetition time (TR)/time to echo (TE)/inversion time (TI) = 1600/3.87/950 ms, 15° flip angle, 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.0 mm3isotropic resolution, and 5:13 min acquisition time. Additionally, a T2‐weighted (turbo spin echo) MRI scan with partial brain coverage and oblique coronal slice positioned orthogonally to the main axis of the hippocampus (De Vita et al.2003; Thomas et al.2004) was obtained withTR/TE= 5310/68 ms, 18.3 ms echo spacing, 15 echo train length, 150° flip angle, 0% phase oversampling, 0.4 × 0.4 mm2in‐plane resolution, 2.0 mm slice thickness with 0.6 mm gap, 30 interleaved slices, and 7:12 min acquisition time.

To reduce discrepancies in image resolution, the T1‐MRI was upsampled to 0.5 × 0.5 in‐plane resolution in the coronal plane using a patch‐based super‐resolution technique (Manjón et al.2010), and the T2‐MRI was upsampled to 1.3 mm slice thickness. Affine registration between the upsampled T1‐MRI and T2‐MRI was performed separately in the left and right MTL regions to best account for head motion between scans. The T1‐MRI was then resliced into the space of the upsampled T2‐MRI (0.4 × 0.4 × 1.3 mm3resolution). Subsequently, anatomical labels of the original protocol (not including anterior labels for ERC, BA35 and BA36) from the T2‐based ASHS atlas were transferred into the resliced T1‐MRI, and manual corrections were made to account for remaining registration errors. A label for dura mater was added in the T1‐MRI since dura mater and gray matter have similar appearance in T1‐MRI (Xie et al.2019).

After the development of the protocol, rater S.A.L. was trained on MR images that were similar to the atlas set, that is, including both the high‐resolution T2‐weighted and the super‐resolution T1‐weighted images. Segmentations were performed on the super‐resolution T1‐weighted images, but the T2‐weighted images were used to help infer gray/white matter boundaries in anterior regions where there are greater partial volume effects due to greater cortical curvature. The segmentations were performed using the ITK‐SNAP image segmentation tool, version 4.0 (Yushkevich et al.2006). Following the training period, anterior ERC, BA35, and BA36 regions were segmented on 15 randomly selected cases of the ASHS atlas set by the rater, blinded to diagnosis. After a 2‐week interval, the protocol was applied to the same 15 cases but in a different order. The Dice Similarity Index (DSI) was calculated for each region. Then the remaining 14 cases of the atlas set were segmented.

ASHS‐T1 standard 5‐fold cross‐validation was performed, as in prior ASHS papers (Yushkevich, Pluta, et al.2015). The set of subjects with manual segmentations (n= 29) was divided into five groups at random. Five experiments were performed. In each experiment, one group was held out for testing, and the remaining groups were used for training an ASHS model. DSC between automatic segmentations obtained using this trained model and the manual segmentations was computed for each subject in the held‐out group. DSC values were averaged across all subjects in the held‐out group and across the five experiments.

The distances between anterior histological borders of ERC, BA35, and BA36 and various anatomical landmarks, observable on MRI, were measured, including the temporal pole, CS, limen insulae, amygdala, and the hippocampus. FigureS1provides information on the detection of these landmarks on histology. Note that external landmarks are needed as the cytoarchitectonic anterior borders of these cortical subregions are not visible on MRI.

Next, we compared the distances between the anterior borders of the MTL cortical subregions and various landmarks to determine the most suitable anchor point of these borders on MRI. Measured distances between MTL subregions and two of the landmarks, the anterior tip of the hippocampus and the anterior tip of the amygdala, had consistently lower standard deviations across the histology dataset than the distances to the remaining three landmarks (Table2). Although the amygdala had a slightly lower between‐subject variability compared to the hippocampus, the anterior tip of the amygdala is more challenging to identify on MRI images than the anterior limit of the hippocampus. Accordingly, we picked the anterior tip of the hippocampus as the most suitable anchor point.

The distance (mm) of the MTL cortical regions to different landmarks observable on MRI.

Note:Bolded values are of the landmarks with the lowest standard deviations for the distances, suggestive of lowest between‐subject variability.

Abbreviations: BA, Brodmann area; ERC, entorhinal cortex; SD, standard deviation.

Distances were measured on histology except for the collateral sulcus which was measured on MRI as it could not be identified reliably on the histology sections.

Based on median values of measured distances, the ERC starts 4.75 mm, BA35 9.25 mm, and BA36 10.25 mm anterior to the hippocampus, marking the anteriormost point to start segmenting the MTL cortical subregions. As our resampled in vivo T1‐weighted MRI images have a slice thickness of 1.3 mm, we will develop a protocol for ERC starting 5.2 mm anterior to the hippocampus, for BA35 9.1 mm, and for BA36 10.4 mm anterior to the hippocampus. These distances can easily be adapted when the protocol is applied to images with a more typical 1 mm slice thickness. As the posterior part of these regions is already included in the ASHS atlas, the posterior border did not need to be determined based on histology. The segmentation of these regions in the last version of the atlas starts at 1.3 mm anterior to the hippocampal head.

Due to the impracticality of performing the measurements on all histology slides available for each participant, we chose a set of six slices spaced throughout the length of the MTL cortex for development of segmentation rules, between 1 and 10 mm anterior to the hippocampus.

Figure2shows the sections selected relative to the amygdala and the hippocampus.

Histology sections selected for the development of rules defining the ERC, BA35, and BA36 boundaries in the coronal plane. Dashed lines mark the locations of the six histology slices selected for inspection. *The black line indicates the anterior border of the current protocol of the segmentations included in ASHS‐T1 and is shown for reference only. Abbreviations: BA, Brodmann area; ERC, entorhinal cortex.

In our initial qualitative assessment of the general location of ERC borders, we observed a consistent pattern. The medial border emerged roughly at the midpoint of the crown of the PHG in the anteriormost slice, then promptly shifted to the superior edge of the PHG (see FigureS3). As it progressed posteriorly, the medial ERC border consistently maintained this position at the superior edge of the PHG. The lateral border was consistently located around the vicinity of the medial edge of the CS (FigureS3). Note that while the medial borders are located more superiorly and the lateral borders are more inferiorly positioned, we will refer to all borders with “medial” and “lateral” throughout this manuscript to ensure consistency between the different sections. We used median values to compare the distances and determine segmentation rules for the borders.

Our measurements confirmed our initial assessments (Table3and FigureS4). We showed that irrespective of the depth of the CS, the medial border corresponded to the superior edge of the PHG, whereas the lateral border of the ERC consistently aligned with the medial edge of the CS. Our findings for the medial border were consistent among all of the sections we inspected, except the most anterior slice. The most anterior section on which we investigated ERC borders was located 5 mm anterior to the hippocampus. However, in eight of the cases, the ERC was not yet present at that location, while in the remaining 12 cases, the SD for the medial border of the ERC in that section was relatively high (=5.06). This prompted us to instead examine the anterior‐most slice where the ERC is present in all of our cases (as noted, this slice does not correspond to 5 mm anterior to the head of the hippocampus in all of the cases). We measured the distance from the medial border to both the superior edge of the PHG and to the halfway point of the crown of the PHG. Comparing the medians and SDs of the two measurements validated our initial qualitative assessment that the segmentation rule for the medial border of the ERC on the anterior‐most slice was more appropriately placed at the midpoint of the crown of the PHG (Figure3and Table6).

Measured distances from the cytoarchitectonic borders of ERC to the chosen landmarks.

Note:Cells highlighted in gray were not used to formulate rules. For all borders, a negative value reflects the situation where the actual border is located medial of the chosen landmark, and a positive value reflects the situation where the actual border is located lateral to the chosen landmark.

Abbreviations: CS, collateral sulcus; ERC, entorhinal cortex; H, hippocampus; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; SD, standard deviation.

5 mm anterior to hippocampal head, ERC had not appeared in eight of the cases yet. Going more posterior to 4 mm anterior to the hippocampus, the ERC had not appeared in only one case.

Application of the protocol on histology slides 10 mm to 2.5 mm anterior to the hippocampal head. Abbreviations: BA35, Brodmann area 35; BA36, Brodmann area 36; CS, collateral sulcus; ERC, entorhinal cortex; HH, hippocampal head.

Overview of the rules for border placement for the entorhinal cortex, Brodmann area 35 (BA35), and BA36 in anterior medial temporal lobe.

Note:The colors in the table match the colors used in the figures to label the different MTL cortical regions: green for ERC, light blue for BA35 and dark blue for BA36.

Abbreviations: BA35, Brodmann area 35; BA36, Brodmann area 36; CS, collateral sulcus; ERC, entorhinal cortex; FG, fusiform gyrus; H, the hippocampus; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus.

Our initial inspection of the cytoarchitectonic borders of BA35 revealed that the medial border was approximately at the superior edge of the PHG. However, we noticed a specific pattern for the more anterior sections in which ERC first becomes visible as well. In these sections, the ERC was embedded between two segments of BA35. On average, this pattern was present for the first two histology sections of ERC, with a 0.5 mm distance (approximately 1 mm). This was, on average, 5 mm anterior to the hippocampal head.

Based on our measurements (Table4and FigureS5), for the anterior‐most slice of BA35, located 9 mm anterior to the hippocampus, the medial border of BA35 was located 7 mm medial to the superior PHG edge. However, when determining the borders for the most anterior slice of BA35, we observed that in six cases BA35 had not yet appeared 9 mm anterior to the hippocampal head. As a result, we decided to also measure the borders on the most anterior slice where BA35 becomes visible in each case. The same border location was found when considering the measurements on the first slide of BA35.

Measured distances from the cytoarchitectonic borders of BA35 to the chosen landmarks.

Note:For all borders, a negative value reflects the situation where the actual border is located medial to the chosen landmark, and a positive value reflects the situation where the actual border is located lateral to the chosen landmark.

Abbreviations: BA35, Brodmann area 35; CS, collateral sulcus; H, hippocampus; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; SD, standard deviation.

The missing cases were due to either the region of interest not being present yet or deviant anatomy in that section that prevented us from doing the measurements.

Going one slice posterior (7 mm anterior to the hippocampus), the border shifts to be located 10 mm medial to the superior PHG edge. When ERC becomes visible 5 mm anterior to the hippocampal head, there are two segments of BA35 surrounding ERC. The most medial border of BA35 here is located 5 mm medial to the superior PHG edge. For the rest of the slides located more posteriorly (1–5 mm anterior to the hippocampus) the lateral border of ERC serves as the medial border of BA35. The lateral border of BA35 is at the CS fundus for the full length of BA35 (Figure3and Table6).

The qualitative evaluation of BA36 borders for the full length of this region revealed that the medial border was approximately located around the medial bank of the CS anteriorly and gradually moved to the fundus of the CS towards the posterior end. The lateral border was anteriorly detected close to the fundus of the CS. Moving posteriorly, the lateral border moved gradually towards the crown of the fusiform gyrus (FG).

Based on our measurements (Table5and FigureS6), the medial border of BA36, 10 mm anterior to the hippocampal head, is located at the halfway point of the medial bank of the CS. However, when determining the borders for the most anterior portion of BA36, we noticed that in five of the cases BA36 had not emerged yet 10 mm anterior to the hippocampal head, and the standard deviation for the measurements was quite high at this level. Therefore, we decided to measure the borders on the most anterior slide where BA36 becomes visible in each case. The same border location was found when performing the measurements on the first slide of BA36. For all remaining slices from 1 to 9 mm anterior to the hippocampus, the lateral border of BA35 serves as the medial border of BA36.

Measured distances from the cytoarchitectonic borders of BA36 to the chosen landmarks.

Note:Cells highlighted in gray were not used to formulate rules. For all borders, a negative value reflects the situation where the actual border is located to the medial of the chosen landmark and a positive value reflects the situation where the actual border is located lateral to the chosen landmark.

Abbreviations: BA36, Brodmann area 36; CS, collateral sulcus; H, hippocampus; SD, standard deviation.

The missing cases were due to either the region of interest not being present yet or the deviant anatomy in that section that prevented us from doing the measurements.

In the most anterior BA36 slide, the best location for the lateral border was the fundus based on our measurements. However, when looking at this border 10 mm anterior to the head of the hippocampus, the best place to put the medial border was determined to be the halfway point of the lateral bank of the CS. To take this variability into account, we decided to place this border at 1/4th of the lateral bank of the CS—closest to the fundus of the CS. In more posterior slices (1–9 mm anterior to the hippocampal head) the border shifts to be placed at the midpoint of the crown of the FG (Figure3and Table6). However, to keep the transition of the lateral border smooth, we determined this border to be at the midpoint between the fundus of the CS and midpoint of the crown of the FG for the second slice of BA36 (9 mm anterior to the hippocampus). FigureS7depicts this modification in border placement.

TablesS3–S5shows the comparison of the borders' locations when cases are divided based on the depth of the CS (deep vs. shallow) and between cases with neurodegenerative diseases versus cases without neurodegenerative diseases. While some small differences were observed between the diagnostic groups, there was no consistent difference that warranted creating additional rules for the protocol.

Moreover, differences in the SD can be observed between cases with a deep versus a shallow CS for some of the borders for BA35 and BA36, where a higher SD indicates larger variability in the border location between cases of that group. However, as the opposite pattern is observed for BA35 (SD lateral border 7 mm anterior to the hippocampus: deep > shallow) and BA36 (SD lateral and medial border 10 mm anterior to the hippocampus: shallow > deep), it is unclear how this should be interpreted.

Table7shows intra‐rater reliability of the rater (S.A.L.) for 15 cases of the.

Intra‐rater reliability of a single rater (S.A.L.) and ASHS‐T1 cross‐validation for anterior MTL, whole MTL, and MTL without the new anterior region cross‐validation was performed separately for anterior slices of the MTL and for the whole MTL, including the more posterior slices which already existed in the original ASHS‐T1.

Abbreviations: BA35, Brodmann area 35; BA36, Brodmann area 36; ERC, entorhinal cortex; MTL, medial temporal lobe; SD, standard deviation.

ASHS atlas set. All DSI values were above 0.8 and indicated high reliability.

To compare the segmentation accuracy of ASHS‐T1 for the newly added anterior MTL cortices, cross‐validation evaluation was performed. Table7shows the ASHS 5‐fold cross‐validation results. The cross‐validation results showed lower variability with DSIs in the range from 0.62 to 0.65 for the anterior MTL structures. The cross‐validation DSI values were higher (0.67–0.78, indicating moderate reliability) when combining the anterior and posterior portions of the ERC, BA35, and BA36 labels. Indeed, DSI for the combined anterior/posterior labels was on par with previously reported cross‐validation DSI for ERC, BA35, and BA36 without the new anterior extension (Xie et al.2019). Figure4compares a manual and an automated segmentation on one of the cases of our atlas set.

Comparison of manual and automatic segmentation (ASHS‐T1) on one of the cases from the in vivo dataset. The MRI slices shown approximately correspond to the six slices in the anterior MTL indicated in Figure2. Some differences between the two approaches can be observed, for example for BA36. Note that the differences observed here may not be the same for all cases. Abbreviations: BA, Brodmann area; ERC, entorhinal cortex.

FigureS8shows 3D rendering of the new anterior regions for two cases from the ASHS atlas set, including one control subject and one individual with MCI. These 3D renderings show consistency of the borders between anterior MTL cortices between consecutive slices. Additionally, FigureS9shows 3D rendering of the automatic segmentation of the anterior regions of the MTL for four cases from the ASHS atlas set, including two control subjects and two individuals with MCI.

Finally, we compared MTL cortex volumes between cases with a shallow versus a deep sulcus (TableS6) to investigate whether sulcal depth has a significant effect on MTL cortex volumes. We found no evidence for this hypothesis.

To the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first to present a manual segmentation protocol for anterior regions of the MTL grounded in a large set of cases with annotated histological sections. Moreover, the implementation on in vivo MRI showed high reliability for a manual rater and moderate reliability for an automated approach when the whole MTL was taken into account. Both through the inclusion of 20 cases with varying anatomy and through the multi‐atlas approach, we ensured that our approach is generalizable to a wide range of anatomical variability and to cases with and without neurodegenerative diseases. Although atlases exist that are based on either postmortem MRI or histological annotations (Amunts et al.2020; Iglesias and Sabuncu2015), these atlases do not provide labels for anterior MTL cortical regions, including BA35, nor do they utilize a multi‐atlas approach that can be applied to individual MRI scans, thereby taking anatomical variability into account.

We included 20 cases to develop this protocol and to translate two‐dimensional histologically recognized regions to neuroanatomically valid borders applicable to MRI scans. Having the corresponding post‐mortem MRI scans of our cases enabled us to track CS patterns and check for deviant anatomy for each case. Gross assessment of the evolution of individual borders across our histology dataset enabled us to choose a number of potential landmarks for each of the borders. We systematically measured border distances to those potential landmarks in slides selected at varying distances to the hippocampal head to ensure capture of changing patterns for each border. Ultimately, we selected landmarks that showed the least between‐subject variation in border‐landmark distances and are easily identifiable on MRI.

Besides anatomical validity, our protocol also showed high intra‐rater reliability for a manual rater, with DSI values that fell within the range of previous manual segmentation protocols for MTL cortices (Olsen et al.2013; Berron et al.2017; Yushkevich, Pluta, et al.2015). The DSI values comparing automated segmentations with manual segmentations for the current protocol ranged between 0.62 and 0.65, which is relatively low, compared to previous studies (Xie et al.2019; Wisse et al.2016; Shah et al.2018). However, the reliability was higher when considering the combined (anterior and posterior) labels of the MTL cortices and more consistent with the reliability of these structures without the new anterior extension reported previously on the same atlas set (Xie et al.2019), as well as within the range of DSI scores for MTL cortices reported in other datasets (Xie et al.2019,2023; Wisse et al.2016; Shah et al.2018). The reason for the relatively lower DSI scores for the anterior segment can likely be attributed at least in part to the smaller size of these regions, which is known to be penalized by the DSI scores (Pipitone et al.2014), and the increasingly complicated anatomy in the anterior MTL. The DSI scores of the combined anterior/posterior MTL cortex labels are more important, though, as the MTL cortices will likely be analyzed as one region rather than separated based on a relatively arbitrary border, such as 1 mm anterior to the hippocampus. Moreover, instead of volumes, it is also possible to analyze the median thickness obtained from these labels, which is likely also less affected by errors in the automated segmentation.

Although we developed an anatomically valid and reliable protocol for the anterior MTL, it should be noted that a limitation of this study is that the annotations of the histological sections were only performed by a single neuroanatomist. Recent work from the Hippocampal Subfields Group showed an in‐depth characterization on border definitions and placement of MTL cortical regions of different neuroanatomy laboratories (Wuestefeld, Baumeister, et al.2024), where most disagreement was observed in transition zones between different regions, including the anterior‐most point of the MTL. Our work is therefore limited by being based on the anatomical definitions of only one neuroanatomy laboratory. However, as the harmonized protocol for MTL cortical regions for T2‐MRI of the Hippocampal Subfields Group is still some time away (Olsen et al.2019), and especially a potential adaptation to T1‐MRI, we believe that the current expansion of ASHS will be a useful tool for the neuroimaging community in the meantime. Moreover, in our work we were able to analyze the anterior MTL in a relatively large set of histological annotations of 20 cases, which was not possible for the work of the Hippocampal Subfields Group because of the labor intensiveness of annotating such a large sample of cases. A second limitation is that we did not assess the reliability of a second rater, or inter‐rater reliability. This is mitigated somewhat by the fact that the rater for the intra‐rater reliability analyses was not involved in protocol development but was still able to interpret and implement the protocol in a reliable manner. Another limitation is that we were not able to assess the effect of intracranial volume on the border locations because of the relatively small sample size and the fact that this information is not available in a portion of our postmortem dataset. While this is a limitation of all current segmentation protocols to the best of our knowledge, it will be interesting to explore the effect of intracranial volume on border locations and perhaps anatomical landmarks. Another limitation is that the protocol is based on histological sections from older individuals (61–97 years) and is implemented on MRI scans of an in vivo population consisting of older adults. This may limit the utility of our manual segmentation protocol and the application of our automated approach in younger or otherwise different populations. A final limitation is that we observed considerable between‐subject variability in the location of anatomical borders which could not be incorporated in a meaningful way in our protocol. We investigated two potential sources of this anatomical variability, that is, diagnostic status and CS depth, but neither could explain it. While the protocol is thus a simplified set of rules of the more complex underlying anatomy, our approach using quantitative statistics from 20 specimens to develop the protocol is more comprehensive than extant segmentation protocols that were generally based on a single or a few specimens. Moreover, it should be noted that currently existing other protocols that segment MTL cortical regions are subject to the same limitations but still have allowed for meaningful interrogation of MTL cortical regions and the identification of biologically plausible neuroimaging substrates of cognitive and neurodegenerative disease processes (Wuestefeld et al.2023; Maass et al.2015; Sanchez et al.2021).

There is increasing evidence suggesting that different diseases affect extrahippocampal cortices in the MTL, such as the ERC, BA35, and BA36, especially in anterior regions (Nelson et al.2019; Costoya‐Sánchez et al.2023; Yushkevich et al.2021; Wuestefeld et al.2023). We present a reliable and anatomically valid protocol for anterior MTL labels, which was also implemented in our automated ASHS‐T1 pipeline tailored to widely available T1‐MRI. The availability of both a manual and automated protocol will allow researchers to apply this method in large datasets where an automated approach might be more time‐efficient, and in smaller datasets with rarer patient populations or cases with deviant anatomy where adaptability and the potential higher reliability of a human rater may be an advantage. Moreover, this new protocol will enable the investigation of these sensitive MTL cortical regions in AD and LATE and hopefully lead to more sensitive biomarkers for early disease detection, monitoring, and clinical trials. This extension of ASHS‐T1 has been made publicly available with this publication.