Availability of a dependable electricity source is essential for improving living standards. When designing a micro-grid system, two key factors must be considered: cost-effectiveness and service quality. A major challenge in hybrid system design is balancing cost and reliability. To address this, a Renewable Energy System (RES) is optimized using a hybrid PV/Wind system with a diesel generator and battery storage. A novel hybrid harbor seal jellyfish searching (HHSJS) method is introduced for system configuration and component sizing. HHSJS seeks to address the problem with the investigation of the current harbor seal whiskers optimization algorithm (HSWOA). A temporal control technique is used to switch between JS and HSWOA operators throughout the search operation. The effectiveness of HHSJS is tested using 50 benchmark functions. Recent hourly wind speed data from two meteorological stations in Egypt: the Northwest Coast area and the New Valley Governorate. Despite the complexity of RES design, the optimal component sizing has been effectively determined for each location using HHSJS. This suggests that RES can be a viable solution for electrification projects, improving energy access in remote Egyptian regions and other developing areas with similar climates.

In rural areas and on islands with significant renewable energy sources, electricity scarcity remains a significant problem despite the significant global improvements in renewable energy technologies. The utilization of renewable energy systems (RES) as a cost-effective electric energy source for a variety of applications has been made easier in recent years by advancements in power electronics. The two main challenges to the widespread implementation of renewable energy systems are the elevated specific costs of the units produced from these systems compared to those from conventional power plants, as well as the accessibility of renewable energy sources, as noted in1.

Furthermore, by taking into account an energy mix of various renewable resource types and the use of energy storage systems, the viability of high RES sharing may be strengthened due to the intermittent nature of almost renewable sources. The aforementioned obstacles prompt policymakers to consider integrating RES with conventional energy sources to create a hybrid RES, hence augmenting the proportion of RES in the energy blend2. RES, which combine solar, wind, and hybrid energy with diesel generators, are being researched as a viable and economically viable energy source.

In developing nations, isolated populations with poor access to electricity are frequently found on islands, in rural regions, and in some metropolitan areas. Due to the high levels of environmental pollution and fuel costs, diesel generators are typically used to provide the demand for energy in these areas, which creates a great deal of unpredictability3–5.

As a result, hybrid RES may be a very good option for remote communities; yet, further investigation, feasibility testing, and technology advancements are still needed in this field. Considering the national energy sector’s goal, which calls for increasing the use of renewable resources to 20% by 20276. In Egypt, photovoltaics and wind turbines are the two most promising energy sources. As a result, several feasibility studies and research projects pertaining to the evaluation of energy potentials and the best distribution of these sources in various places around the nation have been presented6–8.

Currently, much of the research focusses on optimizing standalone electrification systems rather than RES design9. Software tools are commonly used to simulate, optimize, and scale systems of this type. The software tools used included HOMER, HYBRID2, HYBRIDS, HOGA, PVSYST, SOMES, RAPSIM, SOLSIM, INSEL, PV-DESIGN PRO10, RSHAP, and ORIENTE. HOMER (hybrid optimization model for electric renewables) is the most widely used tool for cost calculation, sensitivity analysis, and validation of hybrid stand-alone system designs. These programs, however, have some downsides, such as black box utilization11.

In recent years, there has also been a considerable advancement in computational optimization techniques utilizing bio-inspired technology. By determining the ideal configuration to maximize the technical and financial requirements, they may significantly raise the efficiency of hybrid systems. In complicated systems where many characteristics need to be taken into account, genetic algorithms (GAs) are an effective way to optimize hybrid system sizing. Although the GA is difficult to write, particularly for RES optimization, it offers a range of hybrid systems with various component sizes to meet the load requirement in a given area and assesses them in accordance with the stated fitness function11–13.

Another approach that stands out for its straightforward concept, ease of coding implementation, robustness to control parameters, and computational efficiency is particle swarm optimization (PSO), which produces high-quality solutions with stable convergence characteristics and shorter calculation times11–14. PSO performance is similar to that of genetic algorithms, but it is less complex and quicker, and it has been effectively used to solve a wide range of issues15. In16, Improved grey wolf optimizer (IGWO), grey wolf optimizer (GWO) and Salp Swarm Algorithms (SSA) have been put to use, put to the test, and examined in order to optimize and build a hybrid energy system.

A hybrid renewable energy system comprising wind turbines (WT), photovoltaic (PV) panels, and backup diesel generators (DGs) was developed in conjunction with a battery storage system. In16, the ideal size of a PV/wind/diesel hybrid RES with battery bank storage is demonstrated by a thorough comparative analysis of Whale Optimization Algorithm (WOA), Moth-Flame Optimizer (MFO), Water Cycle Algorithm (WCA) and Hybrid particle swarm-gravitational search algorithm (PSOGSA).

The aim of this research is to determine which RES components are necessary to create a dependable and affordable system that can serve several families. In order to do this, a new Hybrid Harbor Seal Jellyfish Search (HHSJS) optimization method is evaluated by fifty benchmark functions and the results are compared to those of many other meta-heuristic techniques, including JS GWO, PSO, Hybrid grey wolf optimizer and Cuckoo Search (HGWOCS), Whale-Bat Optimization algorithm (WOABAT), hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization-Grey Wolf Optimization (PSOGWO), HSWOA, and Hybrid Jellyfish Searching Particle Swarm Optimizer (HJSPSO) to verify the superiority of HHSJS over the comparative techniques. The importance of introducing HHSJS is that solving insufficient ability to explore in some HSWOA applications. HHSJS is used to select the best promising place from two promising areas in Egypt; The New Valley Governorate and The Northwest coast region by identify the lowest Cost of Electricity (COE) and the lowest Loss of Power Supply Probability (LPSP) by satisfying specific requirements.

Validation the reliability of HHSJS using 50 benchmark functions.

Applying HHSJS for identifying the best optimal location and the optimal sizing for RES between two promising areas in Egypt; Northwest Coast area and the New Valley Governorate.

The structure of the paper is as follows. A description of RES is included in Section “System description”. In Section “The hybrid RES optimal sizing”, the ideal RES size is suggested. In Section “Identification of the areas of interest”, the regions of interest in Egypt are described in order to determine the best place for RES. Section “Optimization techniques” outlines the HHSJS’s inspiration and fundamental procedures. In Section “Analysis and results”, the efficacy of HHSJS is illustrated by comparing its performance with that of eight existing optimization strategies using 55 benchmark functions. Section “Proposed system results and discussion” shows the findings of using HHSJS to determine which of two attractive locations in Egypt; the New Valley Governorate and the Northwest Coast area would be the best for RES construction. In sectionConclusion, conclusions are drawn.

A RES is typically composed of three subsystems: the production, distribution, and demand subsystems. These subsystems might differ significantly based on a number of factors, including the accessibility of sustainable resources, the intended services to offer, and subsystem of demand17. These factors significantly affect decision-making, which in turn affects the system’s dependability and cost. This section looks at the design of three specific stations’ wind, solar, diesel, and battery production subsystems. It also studies the load profile, which makes up the majority of the demand subsystem. Figure1shows how the RES is configured as the distribution subsystem. The network is intended to provide low-voltage, single-phase 220 V AC energy at 50 Hz.

whereTTestandTambientstand for the temperature recorded during the module testing and the surrounding air temperature, respectively.

wherePRWTis the wind turbine rated power,nWTis the number of wind turbines,ηWTis the efficiency of the wind system, andPWTis the actual power generated by the wind turbine. The wind speed at time t is represented byu(t), the wind speed at rated power is represented byurated, the wind speed at cut-off wind speed is represented byucut_off, and for safety concerns, the wind speed at which the wind turbine needs to be turned off is expressed byucut-in, the cut-in wind speed.

where the state of charge of the battery system at timet;(t−1), self-discharge rate, charging energy, discharging energy, load demand for energy at time t, converter efficiency, the battery’s charging efficiency, and the battery storage system’s discharge efficiency are, respectively,SOC(t),SOC(t−1),σ,ECH(t),EDIS(t),Pload(t),ηconv,ηCH, andηDIS.

wherePDG(t),PDG_R, andαDG&βDGrepresent the fuel consumption curve coefficients, rated power, and hourly average power output of the DG. ForαDGandβDG, the values of these coefficients in this study are set to 0.246 and 0.08145, respectively23.

Sizing the system components should be the first focus in order to create a low-cost and highly efficient RES. The lifespan of the system is significantly impacted by the mix of high-quality components and generation sources, which can also lower the cost of electricity for end users in remote locations.

where N is the system life period (also known as the amortization term) and R is the real interest rate. Because PV panels have a longer lifespan than other components, their life is typically equivalent to that of the panel26.

Thus, the optimization parameters (number of PV modules,nPV, number of wind turbines,nWT, number of battery storage banks, nBatt, and number of diesel generators,nDG) comprisex, a four-dimensional vector. The optimal outcomes are obtained by utilizing a trial-and-error procedure to determineλ1,λ2, andλ3. The values ofλ1,λ2, andλ3in this study are set to 0.4, 0.599, and 0.001, in that order. In hybrid generation systems, balancing COE and LPSP is crucial for developing an optimal system that guarantees a reliable, uninterrupted energy supply at a cost competitive with traditional fossil fuel power and grid extensions.

The power system’s components are working under restrictions in off-grid hybrid systems. The system should operate optimally in order to satisfy the constraint function given by Eq. (17), which states that power is balanced at all times. The optimization technique applied to guarantee that the DG rated power, as determined by Eq. (18), is either equal to or less than the hourly power supplied by DG at any given time. The SOC of the battery bank is limited and compared with the defined limitations at any hour throughout the operation period in order to prevent overcharging and undercharging issues. As a result, the battery storage system’s SOC ought to meet the design requirements listed in Eqs. (19) and (20). The battery bank’s maximum state of charge, orSOCmax, is its full capacity, whereas the minimum state of charge, orSOCmin, is mostly determined by the depth of drain. Furthermore, the LPSP ought to be lower than the system’s predetermined dependability index (βL), which is represented in Eq. (21). For the purposes of this investigation,βLis deemed to be less than 0.04.

When Egypt began electrifying the country, the remote coastal and desert cities were the last to be included in the Ministry of Electricity’s plan in this regard. The city of El-Kharga, the capital of New Valley Governorate for example, was ranked last among Egyptian cities in terms of the date of the introduction of electricity; construction convoys began there in October 1959, while the introduction of electricity to the city of Cairo began in 1892 (General Authority for Rural Electrification, 1973).

Accordingly, the study areas were selected within the border governorates and coastal areas, which were late to receive electricity; they also suffer from relative isolation, disparity in development levels between rural and urban areas, and imbalance between the inhabited and the uninhabited.

The New Valley Governorate or El Wadi El Gedid Governorate is one of the governorates of Egypt, lies on the geographical coordinates of (The upper lift point: 25°3′1.201″E 27°36′18.507″N, and the Lower right point: 32°36′5.623″E 22°N), and located on the southwestern part of the country in Egypt’s Western Desert (part of the Sahara Desert), and shares the international borders of southeastern Libya to the west and northern Sudan to the south. As for its internal boundaries, it shares the borders with the governorates of El Menia, Giza and Marsa Matrooh on the north and Assiut, Suhag, Qena and Aswan on the east.

The New Valley Governorate is considered the biggest governorate in the country in terms of area, which amounts to approximately 440,098 km2, representing approximately 43.6% of the total area of the country. Even though most of Egypt lies within the hot desert climate (BWh) according to Köppen climate classification with little precipitation, the climate of this governorate described as: Rainfall is almost scarce throughout the year, not exceeding 4 mm/year; Average annual temperature is 23 °C; Average relative annual humidity is 35.5%; Average annual wind speed is 6 km/h. Figures2,3and4show the New Valley Monthly Temperature, Monthly Irradiance and Monthly Wind Speed, for a year respectively. Figure2shows that the highest temperature is in July. The highest irradiance is in July as appeared in Fig.3. In Fig.4, it is clear that the highest wind speed is in December.

This area is one of the three spatial ranges concerned with urban development of the Mediterranean coastal front, which is represented by the northwestern coast, extending about 550 km from the borders of Elbouhyra Governorate to the borders of Matrouh Governorate, with its coastal hinterland, which represents the area directly affected by all coastal natural factors; such as erosion and sedimentation, coastal winds and rains, groundwater, and sand dunes, and its depth reaches about 30 km from the coastal strip (GOPP, 2017), lies on the geographical coordinates of (The upper lift point: 24°51′17.557″E 31°41′15.322″N, and the Lower right point: 30°22′8.436″E 30°17′30.568″N), and this area is concerned with integrated coastal management plans, and it is also targeted within the state’s urban plans according to Vision 2030.

With its various resources, is Egypt’s hope to accommodate the population increase over the next 40 years, estimated at about 34 million people. The projects planned to be implemented in the plan will also generate about 11 million job opportunities until the target year 2052 (Ministry of Planning and Economic Development, 2016).

In and around the wettest places, like Alexandria, the climate is hot semi-desert (BSh), with summers being moderately hot and humid due to the Mediterranean Sea’s dominating winds, and winters being mild and moderately wet, with sleet and hail commonly occurring. Winter temperatures average 9.5 °C (49.1°F) and summer temperatures average 23 °C (73°F), while winter temperatures average 17 °C (63°F) and summer temperatures average 31 °C (88°F). The Monthly Temperature, Monthly Irradiance and Monthly Wind Speed of the Northwest Coast region are illustrated in Figs.5,6and7, for a year respectively. Figure5shows that the highest temperature is in July. The highest irradiance is in July as appeared in Fig.6. In Fig.7, it is clear that the highest wind speed is in December. The data were processed and modeled using spatial analysis applications via the Arc-GIS software toolbox. The used data for the two locations for a year 2023.

whereLis the ellipse diameter,r1,r2andr3are random numbers,ais the length of the major axis of the ellipse,bis the length of the minor axis of the ellipse,Qis the flowing water attack angle, specifically, the ellipse main axis’s angle with the flow velocity direction, and n is the number of cross sections of one whisker.

where the updated and current positions of the i-th jellyfish are represented byand, respectively. The random vectors generated between 0 and 1 are denoted byrand1andrand2.X*denotes the best location in the swarm as of right now.

whereγ, which is typically at 0.1, is the motion coefficient related to the length of motion around the jellyfish locations.

The variable r is a random number with a uniform distribution within the interval [0, 1], and T represents the total number of iterations. WhenTcis greater thanco, the chosen movement is to follow the ocean current; if not, it is to move inside the swarm. The swarm’s active and passive movements are alternated at the same time via the time control function. A function of 1−Tcis compared to a random variable in the interval [0, 1]. If 1−Tcis greater than the random variable, (type A) passive motion is performed; if not, (type B) active motion is performed. From 0 to 1, the value of 1−Tcrises gradually. Stated differently, initially, there is a greater likelihood of passive motion (type A) than active motion (type B); however, over time, there is a greater likelihood that type B will be chosen33. In JS, travelling through a swarm of jellyfish symbolizes the exploitation (local search), while following the ocean current represents the exploration (global search).

In JS, the motion of tracking the ocean current is substituted with the HSWOA velocity and position-updating mechanism (also known as the HSWOA phase).

In order to enhance the exploration capability, JS modifies the passive motion by introducing a new formulation concerning the global solution (called the JS phase).

The technique is able to break free from the local optimum by adding nonlinear time-varying inertia weight.

To transition between JS and HSWOA, utilize the time control mechanism of JS.

In optimization techniques, an inertia weight is typically employed to modify the treatment between exploration and exploitation. Low exploration and high exploitation are associated with a low inertia weight. Conversely, a high inertia weight results in both high and low exploitation. In the original HSWAO32, the transition from exploration to exploitation was linear and could not be changed. A nonlinear decreasing inertia weight, on the other hand, allows for adjustment to prioritize exploration or exploitation.

The nonlinear decreasing inertia weight is introduced to help improve the exploration, which is lacking in JS, and balance it with the current strong exploitation. In addition, HSWOA uses social and cognitive coefficients to manage the impact of exploitation and exploration, respectively. Time-varying cognitive and social coefficients, like inertia weight, contribute to high diversity for early global exploration and later global solution exploitation.

Figure8shows the HHSJS flowchart. To prevent early convergence as in Eq. (29), each member’s velocity is set to 0 at the beginning, and their positions within the population are initialized at random using a chaotic logistic map. Next, the position is updated either by the HSWOA or JS phase depending on the time control mechanism as in Eq. (34).

Regarding the time control functionTc, the HHSJS search procedure alternates between the HSWOA and JS phases. The JS phase is carried out ifTcis not equal to or greater thanco. In that case, the HSWOA phase is chosen. When the search reaches half of the entire iteration, only the JS phase is involved, according to the time control function. Thus, HHSJS can take advantage of the advantages of JS early on to explore the search space and HSWOA later on to take advantage of the global optimum solution. The pseudo code and the flowchart of HHSJS are shown in Table1and Fig.8, respectively.

whereGi*is the best optimum solution get in theithindependent run,nris independent runs number andGoptis the optimal value of each benchmark function. It is clear that the more reliable and stable outcomes, the algorithm can be more efficient and confident. The parameters values of each optimizer are described in Table2. The parameters of HHSJS are chosen based on the need to balance exploration and exploitation. For HSWOA, which focuses on the exploration process, trial-and-error testing indicates that the optimal value of Q falls between 70° and 80° to enhance convergence speed toward the prey. Additionally, the number of cross-sections in a single whisker (n) significantly influences the prey-sensing process. A higher value of n enables the seal to reach its prey more quickly; however, experimental results suggest that increasing n beyond 20 reduces sensing velocity. For JS, which emphasizes exploitation, trial-and-error experiments have determined that the optimal values forωmaxandωminare 0.9 and 0.4, respectively, ensuring effective exploitation for finding the best optimal solution.

Input parameters for each optimization algorithm34–37.

This test runs 50 benchmark functions, details of these functions can be found in33. This test covers four types of functions: separable, non-separable, multimodal, and unimodal. Algorithms can easily discover the local optimum for multimodal functions because they contain multiple local extrema, whereas unimodal functions only have one. The non-separable characteristic prevents the division of the function’s variables into a product of each variable of functions, which typically makes it challenging to determine the global optimum. In contrast, the separable property shows that the function’s variables may be divided into a product of every variable of functions. There are seventeen unimodal, thirty-three multimodal, fourteen separable, and thirty-six non-separable functions. The outcomes of eight distinct swarm-based optimizers—JS GWO, PSO, HGWOCS, WOABAT, PSOGWO, HSWOA, and HJSPSO—are contrasted with those of HHSJS. For every technique under consideration, the population size and iterations are set at 50 and 1000, respectively, and each function is executed 50 times.

Tables3,4,5,6and7provide the evaluation results of the best solutions for each function. HHSJS performs competitively on other functions and provides the best results over 25 benchmark functions, while HSWOA, WOABAT, HJSPSO and JS provides the best solutions over 22, 19, 18 and 16 benchmark functions, respectively. Among all competitor techniques on F18, F33, F37, F49, and F50, HHSJS has the best AM, SD, MAE, and RMSE. HJSPSO and HHSJS perform closely on F19, F24, F28, F39, and F40. Figures9,10,11,12and13show the HSWOA convergence curves in comparison to the other comparative optimizers. For the majority of benchmark functions, the curves display the best HHSJS convergence. The figures of F18, F33, F37, F49 and F50 in Figs.10,11,12and13, respectively show the superiority of HHSJS over the comparative techniques. In other twenty figures HHSJS proves its efficiency. The rest figures show the convergent performance of HHSJS with comparative techniques.

Comparisons of optimizers’ results for 50 benchmark functions (F1–F11).

Comparisons of optimizers’ results for 50 benchmark functions (F12–F22).

Comparisons of optimizers’ results for 50 benchmark functions (F23–F33).

Comparisons of optimizers’ results for 50 benchmark functions (F34–F44).

Comparisons of optimizers’ results for 50 benchmark functions (F45–F50).

The HHSJS convergence curves in comparison to the comparative methods.

The number of greatest hits for HHSJS compared to alternative approaches is seen in Fig.14. The chart shows that HHSJS obtains the best answer for the greatest number of benchmark functions when compared to the comparative approach.

Number of HHSJS’s greatest hits in comparison to other methods.

To more precisely compare and evalu0ate the overall performance of HHSJS, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test38is utilized. Using the outcomes of 50 functions across 50 runs of each algorithm, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test may be used to assess if HHSJS is better than the other rivals at a significance threshold of a = 0.05. A statistical overview of the significant difference results from the Wilcoxon signed-rank test is shown in Table8. In Table8, the symbols “ = ” indicates that there is no statistical difference between the HSWOA and the comparative technique, “ + ” indicates that HHSJS outperforms a superior result and the null hypothesis is rejected, while “ − ” indicates the reverse. HHSJS is superior to HJSPSO, HGWOCS, HSWOA, JS, GWO, PSO, WOABAT and PSOGWO by 26, 41, 26, 24, 43, 34, 28 and 49 benchmark functions, respectively.

Wilcoxon signed-rank test statistics for HHSJS in comparison to other optimizers.

In this case study, the Friedman test is used to rank each algorithm’s performance39,40. This test scores each algorithm’s values from lowest to highest in addition to evaluating how relevant the differences between HHSJS and the comparison procedures are. The higher an algorithm’s rank, the better it is regarded. The test findings, which are based on the average responses from HHSJS along with extra meta-heuristics, are shown in Table9. This table makes it evident that the HHSJS is the best option among the comparisons, with a Friedman test mean rank of 3.22. Using a radar chart, Fig.15shows the ranks for each function across HHSJS and all comparative techniques. HHSJS has the 1st rank for 25 benchmark functions, while the closest comparative technique “HSWOA” has the 1st rank for 22 benchmark functions.

Friedman test for each of the 50 functions’ comparative optimizers.

Rankings of all compared algorithms on a radar chart.

This study looks into the optimization of a hybrid RES in two areas in Egypt: the New Valley, and the Northwest Coast. A hybrid micro-grid system’s power management technique is used to keep the load demand powered continuously across a range of operating modes. Table10lists the technical and financial specifications of the diesel generator, battery bank, wind turbine, and photovoltaic system employed in this investigation.

Features of the system’s components, both economically and technically.

The RES’s power management strategy is designed to ensure an uninterrupted power supply to meet load demands under various operating conditions. The HHSJS method is used to determine the optimal system configuration and component sizing, while Eq. (16) defines the objective functions: the Cost of Electricity (COE) and the Loss of Power Supply Probability (LPSP). HHSJS offers the best wind, solar, and battery ratings, according to the results.

The results indicate that HHSJS delivers optimal ratings for wind, solar, and battery systems, with the best solution presented in Table11. As demonstrated, the HHSJS optimization model effectively sizes the systems for each location. In New Valley, which has fewer renewable resources compared to the other stations, the use of diesel generators becomes necessary to meet the demand load. This dependency is reflected in both the higher electricity costs and the lower renewable energy contribution. Conversely, the North Coast, located in northern Egypt, benefits from high wind speeds and moderate solar radiation. The HHSJS optimization results reveal that this site achieves the highest reliability at the lowest cost while maximizing the contribution of renewable energy.

The output of New Valley area and North Coast area in March are illustrated in Figs.16and17, respectively. The figures show the preference of the North Coast area compared to the New Valley. Figure17a shows that the average of PV power daily in March is 73.43 kW of North Coast area compared to that of New Valley which is 46.21 kW as shown in Fig.16a. The average of WT power for North Coast is 37.72 kW as shown in Fig. 17b and 18.1 kW for New Valley as in Fig.16b.

New Valley Output in March: (a) PV Output Power, (b) WT Output Power, (c) Load Power, (d) Battery Energy, (e) Diesel Power, (f) Energy of Dummy Load.

North Coast Output in March: (a) PV Output Power, (b) WT Output Power, (c) Load Power, (d) Battery Energy, (e) Diesel Power, (f) Energy of Dummy Load.

The average of load power for North Coast is 18.31 Kw as illustrated in Fig. 17c and 22.38 Kw for New Valley as in Fig.16c. Figure17d represents that the average of battery energy for North Coast is 0.31 kWh and 1.53 kWh for New Valley as shown in Fig.16d. The average of diesel power for North Coast is 0.0012 kW as shown in Fig. 17e and 0.0018 kW for New Valley as in Fig.16e. Figure17f illustrates that the average of dummy load energy for North Coast is 18.79 kWh and 1.25 kWh for New Valley as in Fig.16f.

The best option for electricity in remote and rural areas may be to implement a hybrid renewable energy system (RES). A simulation model based on PV/wind/diesel and battery storage has been examined to explain how a hybrid RES operates while taking into consideration the site’s meteorological data. This study proposes a novel Hybrid Harbor Seal Whisker Jellyfish (HHSJS) optimization approach to determine the best place for RES between two prospective places: Egypt’s North Coast and New Valley region. The introduction of HHSJS is crucial since it addresses the lack of exploration capability in certain HSWOA applications. The suggested algorithm HHSJS, which combines JS and HSWOA, finds a good balance between the processes of exploration and exploitation. To evaluate the efficiency and superiority of HHSJS, it is compares with eight well-known and modern optimization algorithms using 50 benchmark functions. The results obtain the superiority of HHSJS over the comparative techniques. The outcomes of the HHSJS demonstrate that the Northwest Coast area achieves the maximum reliability at the lowest cost and with a significant contribution from renewable energy, and there is a great chance that a hybrid RES will be used at this place in order to confirm the superiority of the suggested method. The objective of this study is to provide high power supply dependability and a high renewable factor to meet the load demand at the proposed location while minimizing energy costs. In reality, this study will help North Coast, Egypt’s decision-makers consider the installation of such hybrid systems as a practical electrification alternative to lessen reliance on fossil fuels.