Ethical concerns have been raised by both current and historically controversial neurosurgical interventions for treatment-refractory schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder (TR-SZ). Considering advances in next-generation deep brain stimulation (DBS), initial success in treating a few cases of TR-SZ, and how challenging trial enrollment is, transparency and disseminating knowledge about DBS is important, as is input from involved groups. Here information was presented about DBS as an experimental treatment option for TR-SZ to stakeholders to gauge enthusiasm after consideration of potential risks and benefits.

Stakeholders were presented with information about DBS (totaln= 629). Opinions about whether DBS should be an option for people with TR-SZ and acceptable response rates considering DBS risks were collected from research participants with SZ, treatment-refractory Parkinson’s disease (TR-PD) approved for DBS, caregivers for either SZ or TR-PD participants, and attendees at medical school presentations. In addition, the attendees were asked to decide whether DBS is appropriate for 4 cases who want DBS, one with PD, 2 with OCD and 1 with SZ. Chi-square, pairwise comparisons, and Duncan Multiple Range Test were performed with significance atp< 0.05.

Most (83%) research participants and presentation audience members agreed that DBS should be an option for TR-SZ and 40% thought the potential benefits outweigh the risks of DBS with at least a 41–60% response rate. Audience approval of DBS was similar for the PD (30%), SZ (52%) and the OCD case with psychosis (56%), but there was a higher rate of approval (77%) for the OCD case whose compulsions involved self-harm. The majority (73–86%) of the audience thought that they would want to try DBS if they had TR-PD, TR-OCD, or TR-SZ.

Despite difficulty in recruiting patients for DBS clinical trials for TR-SZ, the consensus among 83% of stakeholders was that DBS should be an option for people with severe TR-SZ. Our approach to disseminate general knowledge then gather opinions among diverse stakeholders was to ensure the development of DBS clinical trials for the new indication TR-SZ is a relevant option despite the known difficulties in enrollment. These findings may help prevent disparities in access to advanced DBS therapeutics.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12888-025-07128-0.

Excitement about deep brain stimulation (DBS) has grown from widespread safe and effective treatment of over 100,000 patients worldwide, primarily as a standard-of-care procedure for alleviating symptoms of treatment-refractory Parkinson’s disease (TR-PD), epilepsy, essential tremor, and dystonia [54]. Further optimism for DBS as a treatment of psychiatric conditions has been fueled by FDA Humanitarian Device Exemption (HDE) approval in 2009 for treatment-refractory obsessive–compulsive disorder (TR-OCD). DBS produced a 47% reduction in symptoms in 66% of patients with TR OCD with 47% of patients having full remission and over 80% of patients with TR-PD with a 47–50% improvement in Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), including significant improvement in tremor (74%), rigidity (57%), and bradykinesia (49%) [14,30,31,60]. Initial results of experimental DBS for treatment-refractory major depressive disorder (TR-MDD) and schizophrenia (TR-SZ) have been promising [10,47,50]. DBS targeting the nucleus accumbens has resulted in a 65–70% improvement in positive symptoms and 24–100% in negative symptoms of psychosis in 4 cases [11]. Targeting substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) resulted in acute and sustained resolution of auditory hallucinations, 83% reduction in unusual thought content and 33–75% in negative symptoms in the first case [7]. Furthermore, experimental DBS for TR psychiatric conditions are opportune given the development of advanced DBS technology that allows current steering with segmented leads and detection of symptom-causing aberrancies in neuronal signaling [1]. This new electrophysiological monitoring capacity, applied to DBS therapies for the first time, is expected to act as an impetus to rapid evolution of novel DBS applications for many disorders [42].

Despite substantial improvement in safety and efficacy, appropriate DBS candidates for psychiatric conditions like TR-OCD are challenging to find [12,15,53]. Accessibility is restricted due to the limited number of sites where DBS is performed and resistance by insurers to covering the device and the procedure for psychiatric conditions. In addition, enrollment into early feasibility DBS clinical trials for TR-SZ has been challenging. The DBS clinical trial in Toronto, Canada targeting the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens was withdrawn due to lack of enrollment (NCT01725334) and the clinical trial at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland USA, targeting the substantia nigra pars reticulata was approved in 2011 (Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) #G120131) with the first of now four cases enrolled in 2020 after having two subjects agree to DBS then bow out before the surgery [7,17]. One critical barrier to DBS clinical trials in TR-SZ is the enduring impact of past neurosurgical interventions for psychiatric conditions stemming from historically crude prefrontal lobotomies [44]. After initial success in 20 subjects with OCD, recognized with a Nobel Prize awarded to Egas Moniz, MD in 1949, prefrontal lobotomies were subsequently expanded to almost every psychiatric condition by Walter Freeman, MD, without rigorous outcome data to support their use [43]. Likewise, early experimental electrical brain stimulation techniques that largely predated stereotaxis (introduced in 1947), pioneered by psychiatrist Robert Heath, MD, and tested in patients with schizophrenia targeting the septal area through the ventricles, were associated with limited, questionable success (25–33%) without demonstrated long-term benefits (stimulation was 1–28 times, 0.5–40 mA, 1–36 V, for 4–40 min), with significant morbidity (10–33%) and mortality rates (10–15%) [41]. Bishop, 1963 #670} This checkered history, combined with the vulnerability of a patient population with severe psychiatric symptoms, must be recognized in the context of the critical need to advance therapeutic options for these same categories of patients.

In the present day, DBS for psychiatric indications should always be overseen by a multidisciplinary team that includes a psychiatrist, a cognitive neuropsychologist, a stereotactic and functional neurosurgeon, and an ethics board to carefully select appropriate patients [40]. Neurologists may also be included if the patient has neurological comorbidities or stimulation of the DBS target is associated with neurological side-effects during programming of the settings. In this image-based, stereotactic neurosurgical intervention, leads implanted precisely in the brain, often bilaterally, deliver small pulses of electricity to therapeutically modulate relevant circuitry and alleviate symptoms. An advantage to DBS is that it has the potential to modulate a circuit more potently and through a different mechanism than pharmacological interventions that rely on changing brain activity as agonists or antagonists at receptors or ion channels. High-frequency DBS may work by depleting neurotransmitters at synapses to acutely suppress aberrant symptom-causing oscillatory frequencies within a circuit, mimicking the therapeutic aspect of an ablative procedure [37]. However, unlike ablative procedures, the DBS device can be turned off, stimulation parameters can be changed, or the device can be repositioned or removed with additional surgery should it be ineffective or cause intolerable side-effects. There are risks associated with DBS, and a recent surgical complication rate at an academic center that performs DBS routinely for TR-PD is 2.5% in 122 cases with all 3 complications resolving over time [14]. Some of the more serious risks are device-related infection (0.8–10.6%), skin erosion (1–1.9%), lead migration (0.52–3.3%), hemorrhage (1.6–7.5%), seizures (0–1.2%), and death due to perioperative myocardial infarction or hemorrhage (< 1%) [6,14,29,38]. Considering the risks and the commitment required to having a device implanted, candidates for DBS are rigorously screened for capacity to consent, potential benefits and risks, disorder severity, chronicity, disability, and treatment refractoriness.

Here, the goal was to disseminate knowledge about potential benefits and risks of DBS, the ethical considerations, and DBS as an experimental option for patients with TR-SZ in clinical trials. Then stakeholders were surveyed to gauge (1) whether they considered DBS to be a reasonable option for some with TR-SZ in general and (2) what the lowest acceptable response rate would be considering the risk. The stakeholders included enrolled patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, patients with TR-PD before undergoing DBS surgery, caregivers to both patient groups, and audiences attending three medical school presentations on the ethics of DBS. In addition, the audiences were asked how suitable each of four specific cases (including a person with TR-SZ who expressed interest in DBS) were for DBS and whether they would likely want DBS if they had TR-PD, OCD, or SZ. Stakeholders’ opinions are an important part of informing policies influencing access to advanced therapeutics.

Study design. This study was approved by the Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board (#18–2885). Participant opinions were collected in two settings after learning about DBS: 1) enrolling individuals with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder (SZ/SAD), TR-PD approved for DBS, and the caregivers either SZ/SAD or TR-PD participants enrolled at three medical centers in an ethics study; and 2) polling the audiences during DBS ethics presentations at medical schools that included four DBS case presentations for TR-PD, TR-OCD, TR-OCD with psychosis, and a patient with TR-SZ who wanted to have DBS. In the first setting, diagnoses of SZ/SAD were made based on Structured Clinical Interview for the Diagnostic (SCID) and Statistical Manual, 5th ed. (DSM-5) overseen by psychiatrists. Opinions of the enrolled participants and their caregivers were collected from three sites: the University of Colorado (CU), Baylor College of Medicine (BCM), and Johns Hopkins University (JHU). Enrolled participants with SZ/SAD and TR-PD were told generally about the DBS procedure, how it works, and potential risks with a structured interview customized for DBS following the MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool for Clinical Research (MacCAT-CR) guidelines [2]. Two paragraphs, one about DBS and one about a hypothetical medication with identical risks to DBS, were read to participants separately (supplemental materials) before they were asked to answer questions about whether the treatment described in the paragraph should be an option for people with TR-SZ and the lowest acceptable response rates (in percents) for each treatment.

Additional poll data were collected from attendees at three similar ethics of DBS presentations via Zoom (one presentation was a hybrid). The audience was polled about whether each of the four cases presented, TR-PD, TR-OCD, TR-OCD with psychosis, and TR-SZ, were appropriate for DBS. The TR-PD and TR-SZ cases were among those enrolled in an ethics study. Three anonymized cases, TR-PD and TR-OCD with and without psychosis, were based on CU patients treated with DBS with suitable capacity to consent determined by their medical providers.

Attendees at the first presentation, at the University of Colorado Psychiatry Grand Rounds, included psychiatrists (28%), psychologists (19%), nurses (9%), counselors (3%), staff (16%), trainees (16%), and researchers (9%) (n= 63). The second presentation was The Twentieth Annual Naomi and Bernard Fisher Distinguished Lectureship at Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine (PCOM) for medical students (80%), other clinicians (5%), staff (5%) psychiatrists (3%), other physicians (3%), and researchers (6%) (n= 53). The third presentation at the University of Colorado Department of Neurosurgery research group (n= 12) included a clinician (8%), 6 researchers (50%), staff (8%) and postdoctoral fellows (25%). In addition to reviewing estimates of DBS surgical risk generated primarily from treating TR-PD case, surgical risks for each case were estimated from the American College of Surgeons’ universal risk calculator using procedure code 61,860-Craniectomy or craniotomy for implantation of neurostimulator electrodes, cerebral, cortical [4]. The audience was asked: 1) whether each of four cases presented would be suitable for DBS; 2) whether DBS should be an option for people with treatment-refractory schizophrenia; 3) what the lowest acceptable response rate was at which respondents would consider recommending DBS, given a 0.6–1% risk of death and a 6% risk of permanent side-effects; 4) whether if they had PD and their medication was not working well enough, they would want to try DBS, a standard-of-care procedure for treatment refractory PD; 5) whether if they had treatment-refractory OCD they would want to try DBS; and 6) whether if they had treatment refractory schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, they would want to try DBS in a clinical trial. Response rates from the Zoom® poll varied from 54–65%. Differences across groups were tested with chi-square, Fisher’s Exact test or pairwise comparisons, adjusting for multiple comparison using Duncan’s multiple range test, with significance atp< 0.05.

Overall, 83% agreed that DBS should be an option for people with TR-SZ, with similar responses across stakeholders (participants with SZ/SAD, TR-PD and their caregivers, and medical school audiences) (Fig.1A). There was similar agreement among 84% of enrolled patients and their caregivers (enrolled participants) for having a hypothetical antipsychotic, Clarity, as a treatment option for people with TR-SZ. Clarity was presented as a non-surgical intervention with similar mechanism, efficacy and risks as DBS (Fig.1A). Overall, 7% of stakeholders thought DBS should not be a treatment option for TR-SZ. The lowest acceptable DBS response rate was similar across enrolled patients and their caregivers at 41–60% but varied significantly at 21–80% with the audience polled (p= 0.04; Fig.1B and C). Of the four DBS cases, the patient with TR = OCD with self-harm was deemed the most suitable for DBS by 77% of the audience and all three other cases had approval ratings (30–56%) (Fig.1D and E). Response to the question about whether they would want DBS if they had a TR condition was similar for TR-PD, OCD and SZ, where 74–86% thought they would want DBS, 1–6% thought they would not want DBS, and 13–20% were uncertain (Fig.1G and H). Additional feedback from the presentations were: 1) the importance of considering Psychiatric Advance Directives and supported decision making; 2) the reservation that there was also great enthusiasm historically for neurosurgical interventions that turned out to be harmful to patients; 3) the concern that the brain is the one of the most important assets and thus DBS should not be tried unless absolutely necessary; and 4) that a collaborative effort should develop ethical recommendations specifically for DBS for TR-SZ. A question was raised about whether patients become tolerant of DBS over time, which has been reported in essential tremor and known to occur in OCD.

Novel, more efficacious treatment options are desperately needed, and an opportunity exists for experimental DBS to be studied in clinical trials [8,9,17]. Multiple factors contribute to the high disease burden associated with SZ/SAD [23,25]. As with many mental illnesses, severe symptoms present in young adults often rob them of their potential. Anosognosia delays or prevents treatment, attempts to self-medicate may lead to comorbid substance use disorder, and there is a significant social and socioeconomic toll that contributes to isolation and homelessness [22,33,35]. Antipsychotics can resolve symptoms of psychosis in some patients and reduce symptoms in most cases [48]. Nonetheless, unmet needs remain significant due to chronic or relapsing symptoms even in those who are adherent to antipsychotics [32,46]. Over 160,000 patients have received DBS worldwide and risks have been characterized extensively. Surgical risks for DBS in TR-SZ are largely unknown but expected to be similar to other conditions despite one person experiencing a hemorrhage and infection requiring DBS lead removal in the first trial. They made a full recovery and this event prompted an investigation to estimate disorder-specific risk from all surgeries combined were reasonable between patients with SZ and PD [18,34]. Stimulation-related side effects such as tingling, cramping, hypomania, ocular deviation and habituation are expected to be target specific and reversible with changes to stimulation parameters and electrode configuration.

Here, informed opinions of our stakeholder groups were all similar, with each group supporting DBS as a treatment option. This study offers a unique perspective by including those approved for DBS for TR-PD who carefully weighed the impact of TR symptoms with the risks and commitment of having a device implanted. Though many of the TR-PD patients had limited or indirect personal experiences with SZ/SAD, most thought DBS should be a treatment option for patients with TR-SZ. Opinions from participants with TR-PD were particularly relevant for having experienced a disabling treatment-refractory condition and being aware of the challenges of receiving DBS. However, the TR-PD participants and their caregivers may have biases related to the fact that they had already decided DBS was the best option for them and PD is a progressive neurodegenerative condition, but TR-SZ is not primarily a neurodegenerative disorder, [16,51,51]. In addition, their assumptions would be unrealistic if they thought that DBS for TR-SZ and TR-PD would have comparable effectiveness. The motor symptoms of PD often respond to DBS within seconds to hours whereas psychiatric symptom response often takes months and only a few, as with auditory hallucinations with SNr targeting, resolve in seconds [7,19,26,28,36]. However, the impact of DBS in reducing disease burden can be just as significant for treatment-refractory psychiatric conditions like TR-OCD compared to TR-PD even with a relatively lower DBS effectiveness due to the opportunity to treat an extended duration of illness that often starts in young adults and is not neurodegenerative [21,57]. All participants were made aware that DBS for TR-SZ was still experimental and it was not clear if it would work, even if some of the pilot studies seemed promising. Experimental TR-SZ DBS is expected to be less effective, with most symptom responses generally taking longer than DBS for TR-PD until targets are verified and optimized with objective measures including identifying aberrant oscillatory frequencies using advanced DBS technology [20,39,42].

The opinions of patients and their families were comparable to clinical providers and medical students in the audiences. The stance that DBS should not be a treatment option for TR-SZ may reflect DBS-associated risk and the need for a significant commitment to the intervention, fear that the procedure could be misused as neurosurgical procedures for psychiatric disorders were misused historically, and/or lack of knowledge regarding the limitations of antipsychotic treatment in patients who would potentially be suitable for DBS. For those who were uncertain about DBS for TR-SZ being an option, their stance was consistent with the fact that DBS would only be appropriate for some cases and that a decision about whether to consent to DBS involves extensive considerations beyond those presented in a relatively brief format. Patient selection is critical for DBS, requiring evaluation by a multidisciplinary team. Patient selection for DBS as a standard-of-care treatment for TR-PD includes those with tremors that respond to dopamine-replacement therapy. People with significant dementia are excluded because symptoms may get worse with surgery and/or stimulation, and swallowing, speech, or freezing gait symptoms may not respond to DBS. Similarly, for contemporary clinical trials, subjects with TR-SZ must want DBS and have: 1) capacity to consent; 2) at least two moderate to severe positive symptoms with one severe symptom for at least 12 weeks that cause functional impairment; and 3) tried two standard antipsychotics at therapeutic doses (500 mg chlorpromazine equivalents for at least 12 weeks) and clozapine at a dosage of at least 400 mg for at least 12 weeks or with therapeutic plasma levels of at least 350 ng/mL, or have an intolerance to clozapine; and 4) stable housing and support; and 5) women must have an acceptable method of birth control or be incapable of childbearing [17]. They cannot have: 1) a medical condition that would pose a risk to the patient or confound study results; 2) current imminent risk of suicide or violence; 3) delusions, hallucinations, or unusual thoughts related to anything being implanted in their brain; 4) comorbid drug addiction; or 5) other implanted devices like a pacemaker. Individuals in DBS trials cannot be pregnant or a prisoner. DBS would only be considered as a last resort if it were the only remaining option for a therapeutic response. Patients with TR-SZ too severely affected to provide competent informed consent represent a true ethical dilemma [52]. DBS will not be appropriate for the majority of subjects with TR-SZ, making enrollment for clinical trials particularly challenging [15]. Dissemination of knowledge about DBS clinical trials for TR-SZ to improve transparency and gauge interest is essential for identifying appropriate patients, which has been particularly challenging [17].

The majority of participants’ opinions about the lowest acceptable DBS response rate were in line with estimated response rates for TR-PD, OCD, and SZ. In a study of 120 DBS cases with TR-PD targeting the subthalamic nucleus (STN) or globus pallidus, 71% had significant improvement in movement disorder symptoms compared to 32% improvement in the 134 controls with TR-PD who continued with best medical treatment [56]. Review of 34 studies, including 255 patients with TR-OCD treated with DBS targets, showed 66% of patients were responders with ≥ 35% symptom reduction (47% average reduction) [13]. Gadot et al. reviewed combinations of six DBS targets for TR-OCD including nucleus accumbens (NAc), ventral capsule/ventral striatum (VC/VS), anterior limb of the internal capsule (ALIC), bed nucleus of stria terminalis (BNST), STN and the medial dorsal/ventral anterior region of thalamus even though each target is expected to have specific efficacy and risk. Despite expectations that the circuitry would be unique to specific brain disorders, several DBS targets for TR-SZ are commonly used for OCD or major depressive disorder including the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex, the superolateral branch of the medial forebrain bundle (slMFB), and VC/VS [10]. While over ten limbic/associative DBS targets have been considered for DBS for TR-SZ, the most compelling DBS targets are consistent with modulation of the same circuitry implicated by antipsychotic action, including the VC/VS and the substantia nigra pars reticulata, the respective input and output of the striatum [7,11,55]. Strong convergent pharmacological, genetic, and neuroimaging evidence implicates modulating the striatum as a primary antipsychotic therapeutic mechanism [17,27]. Since the 1950’s all antipsychotics blocked dopamine D2 receptors that are concentrated in the striatum [49,58]. Even the new antipsychotic, Cobenfy, indirectly regulates dopamine in the striatum [59]. Enough information exists to justify DBS clinical trials in TR-SZ. Five initial pilot clinical trials of DBS in TR-SZ have tested four distinct targets: NAc (n= 7), subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (SACC;n= 4), substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr;n= 1), and habenula (HN;n= 2) [5,7,10,11,55]. Combined, the ten patients with TR-SZ showed a 60% response rate to DBS, with 37–100% resolution of some positive psychotic symptoms among responders. Large rigorous clinical trials are essential for accurate analysis of the risks and benefits of each DBS target for TR-SZ and for consideration by regulatory agencies about the lowest acceptable response rate [3,24,45].

The majority of stakeholders (83%) appeared to favor DBS as an experimental treatment option for TR-SZ, while 7% found DBS too controversial to even be an option for those with TR-SZ. Our approach focused on disseminating general knowledge including ethical considerations to facilitate constructive discourse, transparency, and gauge acceptability and relevance of DBS for TR-SZ among stakeholders. These findings may help overcome barriers to carrying out clinical trials.

We acknowledge the essential contribution of the participants and audiences in this study.

Data is presented in Fig.1and is available upon request. To request data email Judith Gault at judith.gault@cuanschutz.edu.

All authors reviewed the manuscript JG is responsible for the experimental design, data collection, data analysis and wrote the manuscript and prepared the figures NC is responsible for the experimental design, data collection, and edited the manuscript and the figures NM is responsible for the experimental design, data collection, and edited the manuscript and the figures SL is responsible for the experimental design, data collection, and edited the manuscript and the figures PH is responsible for the experimental design, data analysis, and writing of the manuscript and editing the figures NC is responsible for the experimental design, data collection, and edited the manuscript and the figures PSA is responsible for the experimental design, data collection, and edited the manuscript and the figures AS is responsible for the experimental design, and edited the manuscript JLB is responsible for the experimental design, data collection and editing the manuscript SAS is responsible for the experimental design, data collection, and edited the manuscript WSA is responsible for the experimental design, data collection WG is responsible for the experimental design, data collection DK is responsible for the experimental design, data collection ESK is responsible for the experimental design, data collection, and editing the manuscript RAD is responsible for the experimental design, data collection, data analysis and edited the manuscript and the figures.