Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Low-flow vascular malformations include venous and lymphatic malformations, combinations thereof, and syndromes that include these lesions such as Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, CLOVES syndrome, and other PIK3CA-related overgrowth syndromes (PROS).1The treatment of complex low-flow vascular malformations has advanced considerably in recent years owing to major breakthroughs in somatic mutation profiling and DNA sequencing strategies. Particularly, the identification of somatic activating mutations in the PI3K/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling axis has redefined the pathogenesis of these congenital lesions and introduced a new frontier of molecularly targeted therapy.2Oral sirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, initially emerged as a systemic option for patients with unresectable or refractory low-flow vascular malformations, reducing lesion burden and improving symptoms.3Given its demonstrated clinical efficacy, it now has worked its way into the regular armamentarium of therapy for less complex disease and—at some centers—has become a mainstay of treatment for most low-flow lesions as demonstrated in the current article.4A recently emerged alternative is the PIK3CA-specific inhibitor alpelisib, which has become another go-to pharmacotherapeutic option for patients with low-flow lesions.5Nevertheless, systemic pharmacotherapy has important limitations that demand a critical assessment of these emerging therapies within the broader context of a multifaceted and multimodal therapeutic portfolio.

Although oral medications have demonstrated partial efficacy, their use is frequently limited by adverse effects, including but not limited to cytopenias, mucositis, hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia, pneumonitis, skin reactions, immunosuppression, and opportunistic infections.5,6More critically, the pharmacokinetics of oral therapy yield inconsistent lesional drug concentrations—particularly in the growing pediatric population—limiting therapeutic response and requiring long-term administration with periodic dose adjustments based on frequent blood draws and regular office visits. Cessation of therapy for those intolerant of regular systemic exposure leads to rebound recurrence of lesion and re-exacerbation of symptoms. This factor becomes all the more critical, because many of these patients are diagnosed in childhood and infancy, and the risk of life-long daily exposure to such medications remains uninvestigated. These considerations raise an urgent need for delivery models that improve lesional bioavailability of molecularly active agents while minimizing systemic toxicity.

In our recent publication, we reported the very first, in-human clinical experience with catheter-directed targeted therapy via direct stick embolization of low-flow vascular malformations using a patented formulation of an mTOR inhibitor with promising technical and clinical results and a highly favorable complication profile.6Over the course of the last year, I have transitioned these procedures to a completely ambulatory basis that allow for a more favorable and convenient patient experience, minimizing the inefficiencies and unnecessary costs of overnight hospital stays. These findings highlight a major shift in both therapeutic philosophy and procedural delivery.

Targeted therapy meets targeted delivery: Local catheter-based administration of molecularly active agents enables targeted intralesional drug delivery with minimal systemic spillover.

Minimally invasive and ambulatory: Procedures are well-tolerated under moderate sedation with minimal morbidity and without the need for costly hospitalization.

Resource efficient and accessible: Performing these interventions on an ambulatory basis aligns with health care's larger movement toward decentralization and patient-centered, cost-effective treatment.

By merging molecular specificity with precise, image-guided intralesional delivery, we are now offering an innovative and practical alternative for patients poorly suited to long-term systemic therapy. This approach also sets the foundation for developing new delivery platforms, including drug-eluting beads, nanocarriers, drug delivery matrices, and next-generation drug-eluting embolics.

The paradigm is shifting rapidly—from systemic to site-specific therapy, from inpatient to ambulatory care, and from bland to molecularly active intervention. As our understanding of the mutational etiologic basis of vascular malformations deepens, our procedural strategies must evolve as well. The success of targeted intralesional drug therapy reinforces the principle that precision therapy must be matched by precision delivery.

The opinions or views expressed in this commentary are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions or recommendations of the Journal of Vascular Surgery: Venous and Lymphatic Disorders or the Society for Vascular Surgery.

N.N. is the Founder and Chief Medical Officer for Targeted Therapeutix, LLC; and the Founding Director of The Vascular Care Group's (TVCG) Center for Anomalies and Rare Entities (CARES), international.