The drying treatment of dissolved organic matter (DOM)
eluate was
often used to prepare DOM solutions for chemodiversity analysis using
Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry. However,
the effects of drying treatment on the chemodiversity of DOM have
not been thoroughly investigated. In this study, vacuum freeze-drying
and vacuum centrifuge drying resulted in approximately half and 10%
loss of DOM mass loss, respectively. Although the overall values of
molecular functional diversity indices and main DOM fractions were
insignificantly affected by both drying treatments, the Cl-containing
molecules (Cl-OM) and saturated compounds were significantly affected
by the drying treatments, particularly for vacuum centrifuge drying.
Therefore, the DOM eluate was strongly recommended for the measurement
of Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry only
after dilution by desired folds when the minor DOM fractions, such
as Cl-OM and saturated compounds, were of interest. The findings of
this study have provided valuable evidence of sample preparation
for the accurate elucidation of DOM chemodiversity from various sources.

Although some
SPE procedures have been proposed to extract DOM,,these
proposed procedures have often been modified because of various
DOM sources and different experimental purposes. Numerous studies
have been performed to investigate the effects of sorbents of SPE
cartridges, elution conditions, and solvent composition on the chemodiversity
of DOM eluate.−The SPE-extracted DOM is generally eluted by organic solvents (e.g. methanol and acetonitrile), diluted to desired concentrations
(50–500 mg-C/L), and then directly injected into an FT-ICR
MS instrument for molecular cauterization.−
,−However, in addition to bulk property measurement,,the DOM eluate was further subjected to additional drying and redissolving
for FT-ICR MS measurement in some specific scenarios.−For example, the DOM chromatographically fractionated with organic
solvents was dried at 30 °C overnight or under a nitrogen stream
to achieve desired analyte concentrations for FT-ICR MS measurement.,The elevating analyte concentration during the eluate drying treatment
was expected to facilitate the concentration effect of DOM compounds
on the product formation of DOM molecules with solvents. However, the effects of eluate drying on the
chemodiversity of DOM with various sources are still poorly revealed
by ultrahigh-resolution mass spectrometry, including FT-ICR MS.

The main objective of this study was to compare the chemodiversity
of DOM eluate with different sources (i.e., tap water,
surface water, groundwater, and soil) before and after drying using
a vacuum freeze-dryer and vacuum centrifuge dryer at room temperature.
The results of this study are expected to provide critical insights
into the sample preparation of DOM for FT-ICR MS analysis.

The
tap water was collected in April 2025 from the laboratory of the School
of Environmental Studies at China University of Geosciences, Wuhan.
Two freshwater samples were collected in April 2025 from a typical
urban lake in China (East Lake, 30°19′23.5″N, 114°14′35.6″
E) and the Yangtze River (30°33′41.86″ N, 114°18′13.46″E).
The groundwater DOM eluate provided by Ziqi Zhou was collected in
March 2024 from Sydney, Australia. A typical forestry soil (5–20
cm) collected from Wuhan Botanical Garden in Hubei Province (30°32′43″N;
114°25′14″E) was used to extract soil DOM with
the following procedures: soil mixtures with 10 g of soil and 500
mL of ultrapure water in the glass bottle were shaken at 150 rpm for
12 h and then left to stand for 24 h in the dark at room temperature
(25 °C). The soil supernatant and all water samples were filtered
through a 0.45 μm membrane and acidified with concentrated HCl
(GR grade) to ∼ pH 2. All acidified solutions (∼ 500
to 1500 mL) were gravity-fed through the Oasis HLB cartridges (500
mg/6 cc, Waters, US) preactivated with 120 mL methanol (LC-MS grade),
50 mL ultrapure water, and 20 mL diluted HCl (∼ pH 2). Then,
the cartridges were desalted with 20 mL diluted HCl (∼ pH 2)
and 20 mL ultrapure water before completely drying with high-purity
nitrogen gas (>99.999%). Subsequently, DOM molecules were eluted
with
10 mL methanol, which was designated raw DOM in this study. For each
DOM sample, an aliquot (2.0 mL) of raw DOM was diluted with an identical
volume of ultrapure water, solidified at −80 °C for 3
days (MD-86L456 K, Midea, China), and vacuum freeze-dried at −100
°C under vacuum for 2 days (VirTis Benchtop Pro, USA). The freeze-dried
DOM (FD-DOM) was then redissolved into 5.0 mL ultrapure water. Another
aliquot (2.0 mL) of each raw DOM was directly dried by vacuum centrifuging
at 1300 rpm and 25 °C under vacuum for 180 min using the centrifugal
concentrator (CV200, Beijing JM Instrument Co., Ltd., China). The
centrifugally dried DOM (CD-DOM) was also redissolved into 5.0 mL
ultrapure water. The raw DOM and reconstituted DOM were diluted with
ultrapure water for ultraviolet–visible spectrometer measurement.
All treatments were performed in triplicate in this study.

The raw and
reconstituted DOM eluate of each triplicate was further diluted to
∼ 10 mg of C/L with 50% methanol before FT-ICR MS analysis
with a SolariX 2xR FT-ICR MS instrument equipped with a 7-T superconducting
magnet (Bruker, Germany), electrospray ionization operated under the
negation ion mode, and quadrupole (2ω) detector at the China
University of Geosciences. The mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) values were externally calibrated with ion peak clusters of
20 mg/L sodium formate before measurement. The FT-ICR MS spectra were
acquired with the instrumental conditions as follows: 120 μL/h
direct infusion rate, 100–1,100m/zrange, 600 scans, 4 Megaword data acquisition size, −3.3
V front and back trap plate voltage, −4.2 kV capillary voltage,
and 0.50 s ion accumulation time.

To improve the reliability
of FT-ICR MS results, only peaks that occurred no less than twice
among triplicates for each treatment were used in this study.,The FT-ICR MS spectra were internally calibrated with known formula
homologous series of freshwater DOM and then proceeded to the molecular
formulas assignment using our FTMSDeu algorithm under the computation
conditions as follows: (1) ion charge sate = −2 to −1;
(2) absolute mass error ≤ 0.60 ppm; (3) signal-to-noise ratio
(S/N) ≥ 6 and ≥ 10
for nonhalogenated and halogenated monoisotopic molecular formulas,
respectively; (4) 0.3 ≤ (H + Cl + Br)/C ≤ 2.25 and 0<
O/C ≤ 1.2 with C ≥ 5; (5) (H + Cl + Br)/C ≤ 4
and 0 ≤ O/C ≤ 1.2 with C ≤ 4; (6) integer double
bond equivalent (DBE) ≥ 0; (7) 1≤12C ≤
50,13C ≤ 2,18O ≤ 1,14N ≤ 5,15N ≤ 1,32S ≤
3,33S ≤ 1,34S ≤ 1, P ≤
1,35Cl ≤ 5,37Cl ≤ 5,79Br ≤ 5,81Br ≤ 5, and (8) 10 ≤ DBE
value minus the number of oxygen atom (DBE-O) ≤ 10, and (9)
doubly charged formulas were restricted to C, H, O, and N.,The molecular parameters, including DBE, modified aromaticity index
(AImod), and nominal oxidation state of carbon (NOSC),
were calculated with equations reported elsewhere,and further weighted based on the intensities of assigned formula
in each FT-ICR MS spectrum. The Bray–Curtis
dissimilarity was employed to quantify dissimilarities using the peak
intensities of assigned formulas across different FT-ICR MS spectra. The molecular functional diversity (DF) was quantified using the equations described inText S1.−TheDFreflects
the theoretically expected difference value of a given selected property
parameter (m/zvalue, H/C, AImod, DBE, and NOSC) between any two molecular formulas in a
given spectrum. TheDF­(m/z),DF­(H/C),DF­(AImod),DF­(DBE), andDF­(NOSC)indicate
theDFvalue based on the molecular parameters ofm/zvalue, H/C, AImod, DBE,
and NOSC, respectively. For each FT-ICR MS spectrum, peak intensities
of all peaks were normalized by their maximum value to calculate the
Bray–Curtis dissimilarity and molecular functional diversity.

The one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied
to statistically determine differences of compared groups with parameters
following a normal distribution at a significance level ofp< 0.05. Otherwise, the nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis
one-way ANOVA was used to examine the difference between compared
groups. Statistical analysis was performed using Origin software (version
2024, OriginLab, USA).

Expanded FT-ICR MS spectra
of soil DOM at a nominal mass of 283.

The absorbance values at 254 nm in the
reconstituted DOM eluate dried by the lyophilization were 40.73% ±
10.24% of these in the raw DOM eluate (Figure S6), suggesting that approximately half of the eluted DOM molecules
were lost during the vacuum freeze-drying treatment. By contrast,
the vacuum centrifugal concentrator resulted in 10.58% ± 5.86%
of DOM molecules lost during the drying treatment in this study. The
significant difference (Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA test,p= 0.0018) in the DOM recovery between FD-DOM and CD-DOM
could be mainly attributed to additional improvement by the centrifugal
function in the vacuum centrifugal concentrator used in this study.
Therefore, the vacuum centrifugal concentrator is recommended to dry
the methanol-based DOM eluate from the viewpoint of DOM recovery.

The higher value of the molecular functional diversity index represents
the larger statistically expected difference in the chosen molecular
index (e.g., H/C, O/C, AImod, DBE, and NOSC), suggesting
higher molecular functional diversity in the examined FT-ICR MS spectrum.
Generally, the values of molecular functional diversity indices (e.g.,m/z, DBE, and NOSC) were comparable to
these for natural samples reported elsewhere,,,suggesting the similar molecular functional
diversity between raw DOM eluate in this study and previous studies.
Differing from the significant difference (p= 0.0018)
in the concentrations of DOM eluate, an insignificant difference was
observed in the values of molecular functional diversity indices for
each DOM among three treatments (Figure, F value = 0.083–1.26, degree of
freedom = 29,p= 0.16–0.92), suggesting that
the FD-DOM and CD-DOM exhibited only minor influences on the overall
molecular functional diversity. However, compared to vacuum freeze-drying,
vacuum centrifugal drying resulted in lower mean values in theDF­(m/z)but higher mean values ofDF­(DBE)andDF­(AImod), indicating the different structural effects of eluate
drying methods on DOM molecules.

Molecular functional diversity affected
by two eluate drying methods.
Note,the identical letter indicates the insignificant difference
between the compared groups atp> 0.05.

The low-intensity peaks, including doubly charged
peaks and peaks
with lowS/Nvalues (S/N≤ 15), were selected to evaluate the influences
of the drying treatment on their occurrence because of the poor reproducibility
of low-intensity peaks in the FT-ICR MS spectra.,Compared with the raw DOM eluate, the number of assigned formulas
with low intensities was insignificantly affected by both drying methods
used in this study (ANOVA test: F value = 0.51p=
0.32–0.68, Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA testp= 0.73,Figure S7), suggesting that these
two methods exhibited negligible influence on the occurrence of low-intensity
peaks for DOM eluate with different sources. Similarly, in addition
to the labile compounds with H/C ≤ 1.5, both drying methods had insignificant influence on the
assigned formula number of lignin-like compounds, which were the predominant
fraction of DOM (Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA testp= 0.99,Figure S8). However, the formula
numbers of tannin-like compounds and saturated compounds were significantly
suppressed by vacuum centrifuge drying (Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA
testp= 0.014,Figure S8). Meanwhile, vacuum freeze-drying significantly reduced the formula
number of saturated compounds. These results suggested that one should
be cautious to employ the drying methods used in this study when the
saturated compounds were the analytes of interest.

The number
of assigned formulas for different elemental compositions
affected by drying treatments was illustrated inFigure S9. As tabulated inTable, both vacuum freeze-drying and vacuum centrifuge
drying methods insignificantly decreased the average number of formulas
assigned to CHO and CHON compounds that were dominant in the DOM eluate
(Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA testp= 0.89 and 0.15,
respectively,Figures S2 and S9), which
was consistent with the ignorable change in the formula number of
lignin-like compounds. Moreover, the DOM drying treatment exhibited
a minor influence on the minor fraction of DOM eluate, namely, CHOS
and Cl-containing organic molecules (Cl-OM), in this study (Figure S9). For example, the CHOS formula numbers
in the FD-DOM and CD-DOM were 96.03% ± 21.05% and 96.50% ±
12.65% of that for the raw DOM eluate (Table), respectively. The number of Cl-OM was
insignificantly decreased but significantly increased by the vacuum
freeze-drying and vacuum centrifuge drying, respectively (Kruskal–Wallis
ANOVA testp= 0.37 and 0.04, respectively,Figure S9). However, in addition to the contrasting
effects, the coefficient of variation (CV) for the formula number
ratios of Cl-OM in the raw DOM eluate relative to FD-DOM and CD-DOM
was up to 90.03% and 163.97%, respectively, suggesting that the effects
of DOM drying on the Cl-OM detection were dependent on their DOM sources.

Not assigned; values are expressed
as the mean ± SD.

The intensity-weighted values of typical molecular parameters in
the raw DOM eluate, FD-DOM, and CD-DOM from different sources were
tabulated inTable S3. Results of two-way
ANOVA analysis revealed that no consistent influence of drying methods
was observed on the molecular parameters of the DOM eluate from each
source. For example, the intensity-weightedm/zvalues were insignificantly (F value = 0.68, degree of
freedom = 8,p= 0.68) affected by the drying treatments
in the soil DOM but significantly (F value = 8.91–84.53, degree
of freedom = 5 or 8,p= < 0.0001–0.04)
decreased in DOM from the East Lake, Yangtze River, and groundwater.
However, the intensity-weighted NOSC (NOSCiw) values were insignificantly (F value = 0.35–6.94,
degree of freedom = 5,p= 0.058–0.58) decreased
by the vacuum freeze-drying for the DOM from the soil, Yangtze River,
and groundwater but significantly (F value = 27.77 and 201.78, degree
of freedom = 5,p= 0.0062 and 1.43 × 10–40.05) decreased for DOM eluate from the tap water
and East Lake. Furthermore, the vacuum centrifuge drying significantly
(F value = 18.20 and 46.50, degree of freedom = 5,p= 0.0024 and 0.013) decreased the NOSCiwvalues for DOM eluate from the tap water and groundwater. Despite
the insignificant effects on the values of bulk molecular parameters
(e.g., molecular functional diversity indices and
formula number of different elemental compositions and molecular classes),
the drying treatments used in this study exhibited different influences
on DOM eluate from various sources and different molecular parameters
for a given DOM source.

An insignificant difference was observed
for the formula number of CHO and CHON molecules in most compared
groups among different samples and treatments (p>
0.05,Figure). Similarly
to the minor changes in the formula number of CHOS, the formula number
ratios of DOM eluate treated by drying were 96.96% ± 4.85% to
100.04% ± 3.78% and 92.67% ± 5.01% to 101.46% ± 5.98%
for CHO and CHON molecules, respectively. However, substantial changes
caused by drying treatment were observed in the formula number of
Cl-OM (e.g., chlorinated DBPs) for different DOM
samples (Figure).
For example, the vacuum centrifuge drying increased 48.33%, 450.82%,
3912.50%, and 197.25% number of Cl-OM formulas in the DOM eluate from
tap water, East Lake, soil, and Yangtze River, respectively, as compared
with the raw DOM eluate, which was visually supported by the exclusively
identified [C11H17O637Cl1]−, [C11H20O6Cl1]−, and [C12H24O5Cl1]−in
the centrifugally dried soil DOM (Figure). The vacuum freeze-drying profoundly decreased
the formula number of Cl-OM molecules in the groundwater and Yangtze
River DOM (F value = 14.94 and 303.83, degree of freedom = 5,p= < 0.0001 and 0.018), which could be attributed to
significant DOM loss during the drying treatment, but increased (F
value = 24.22, degree of freedom = 5,p< 0.0079)
Cl-OM formula number in the East Lake DOM. Moreover, this drying treatment
insignificantly increased Cl-OM molecules in the tap water DOM but
decreased in the soil DOM (F value = 0.93, degree of freedom = 5,p= 0.091). Therefore, we should be discrete to dry DOM
eluate if Cl-OM compounds are of critical interest in our research.

Effects
of drying treatments on the chemical formula number of
elemental compositions for DOM from different sources. Note,different red letters indicate the significant difference between
compared groups atp<
0.05.

In this study,
the molecular functional diversity indexes at the
bulk level were not sensitive to drying treatments using both a vacuum
freeze-dryer and a vacuum centrifuge dryer. Moreover, the dominant
DOM fractions, including lignin-like compounds and CHO and CHON molecules,
were insignificantly affected by drying treatments. These results
suggest that the two drying treatments employed can be used to concentrate
DOM eluate only if functional diversity indexes are used as molecular
proxies for DOM or these DOM fractions are exclusively considered
for research purposes. However, these scenarios are rare in ecological
and environmental research. In addition to DOM fractions (CHOS molecules
and saturated compounds) susceptive to drying treatments, the profoundly
affected results of Cl-OM suggest that phosphorus-containing molecules
will also be affected by the drying treatment due to the close mass
doublet of12C135Cl1versus16O131P1(Δmass = 0.18
mDa). These results have highlighted
the critical effects of the drying treatment for DOM eluates from
disinfected waters,,wastewater, and sediments, which contain
considerable chlorine- and sulfur-containing organic molecules. The
vacuum centrifuge drying under low temperatures (e.g., ∼ 0 °C) may be suitable for these minor factions of
DOM molecules, such as the chlorinated DBPs, which should be further
investigated. However, only DOM from five different sources was used
in this study. Given the diverse sources of DOM and its substantial
differences in molecular classes and elemental compositions among
various sources, the different influences of drying treatments on
five DOM samples examined in this study have highlighted the necessity
of FT-ICR MS-based preinvestigation for the drying treatment of unknown
DOM samples. Therefore, the raw DOM eluate diluted with methanol and
ultrapure water is strongly recommended for FT-ICR MS measurement
without drying treatment, and vacuum centrifuge drying is recommended
for DOC measurement to evaluate DOM recovery for the SPE extraction.

In this study, the effects
of typical DOM eluate drying methods
on the chemodiversity of DOM from different sources were investigated
using FT-ICR MS with all treatments conducted in triplicate. Contrasting
with the approximate half loss of DOM by vacuum freeze-drying, vacuum
centrifuge drying only resulted in about 10% DOM mass loss. The occurrence
and magnitude of FT-ICR MS peaks were more profoundly governed by
their sources rather than by the eluate drying methods. The lignin-like
compounds mainly assigned to CHO and CHON molecules were the predominant
components in DOM from five different sources, with fewer contributions
from saturated compounds and CHOS and Cl-OM molecules. Although the
overall values of molecular functional diversity indices and the formula
number of doubly charged ions and peaks withS/N≤ 15 were insignificantly affected by both drying
treatments for each DOM among three treatments, the Cl-OM and saturated
compounds were significantly affected by drying treatments, particularly
for the vacuum centrifuge drying. Therefore, DOM eluate is strongly
recommended to be measured by FT-ICR MS only after desired dilution
with methanol and/or ultrapure water to minimize the effects of drying
treatment on the chemodiversity of DOM from different sources, particularly
for the minor DOM fractions such as Cl-DOM and saturated compounds.
The results of this study provided valuable evidence for the sample
preparation of DOM from various sources for the accurate elucidation
of DOM chemodiversity.

This study was financially supported by
the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Nos. U2244230, 42477006, and W2521020).

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.5c00055.

CRediT:Xinyi Chendata curation, formal analysis, writing - original
draft, writing - review & editing;Qing-Long Fuconceptualization,
data curation, formal analysis, funding acquisition, investigation,
methodology, project administration, software, supervision, writing
- original draft, writing - review & editing;Ziyong Sunfunding acquisition, resources, validation, writing - original draft,
writing - review & editing.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Published
as part ofACS Measurement Science Auspecial issue“2025 Rising Stars in Measurement
Science”.