This mixed‐methods study used a participatory action approach to develop and test a culturally grounded measure of hope among adolescents. Eighteen adult community leaders participated in interviews, and a youth advisory board provided their perspectives on hope in the southeastern U.S. This information was used to develop the Adolescent Hope Scale. Psychometric testing was conducted using data from an online panel of 311 youth participants (66.2% male;Mage= 12.62; 62.1% White American, 32.8% Black or African American) and their parents or legal guardians in the U.S. The newly developed Adolescent Hope Scale functioned equally well across gender and ethnicity. It was uniquely predictive of physical and relational aggression, conduct problems, anger management, peer relational problems, and prosocial behavior. Promoting hope is a potential intervention target to reduce problem behaviors.

Hope typically has been described as a desire for an uncertain outcome or future state, combined with a motivation or resolution to pursue the desired outcome (Jeffrey & Mehari,2023; Bloser & Stahl,2022; Milona & Stockdale,2018). Hope may be an important construct for understanding both positive youth development and the prevention of problem behaviors among adolescents, but there is currently no best‐practice approach to measure hope among Black youth. Current measures were developed among White children and may reflect Eurocentric values (e.g., hope as individual agency in the present). The purpose of this study was to develop a culturally grounded conceptualization and measure of hope among Black adolescents through participatory action and qualitative research and to test the measure's psychometric properties and nomological network. Importantly, the phrase “culturally grounded” describes a process in which conceptualization (in this case) originates in the values, experiences, and worldviews of the participating community, rather than in existing philosophy, theory, or empirical work (Okamoto et al.,2014). Therefore, existing empirical and theoretical work on hope is described to provide context, but they did not drive the conceptualization and measurement of this culturally grounded hope construct.

The classic psychological construct of hope was defined by Snyder (2002) as a cognitive‐motivational skill that includes two related cognitive processes: pathways and agency thinking. Pathways thinking is a person's sense of their ability to generate or identify strategies to move toward their desired goal, and agency thinking is a person's motivation to initiate and persist in strategies to achieve their desired goal. Trait hope in adolescence, as measured by the Snyder hope scales, is associated with fewer problems in psychological functioning, including lower negative affect (Ciarrochi et al.,2007), perceived stress, depressive symptoms, and anxiety (Berry et al.,2022; Bryce et al.,2020; Chai et al.,2018; Wong & Lim,2009). Moreover, it is also associated with greater psychological health, such as more positive affect (Burrow et al.,2010; Edwards et al.,2007), increased life satisfaction (Bronk et al.,2009; Vacek et al.,2010; Valle et al.,2006), and increased well‐being in adolescents (Yarcheski et al.,2001). Adolescents' hope may predict better physical health as well (Esteves et al.,2013). Among these positive outcomes, the relationship between hope and life satisfaction among adolescents seems to be best documented, with longitudinal studies indicating that adolescents with higher hope are likely to have higher life satisfaction in the future (Marques et al.,2013; Valle et al.,2006).

Currently, little is known about the relation between hope and behavior beyond psychological functioning. Most research linking hope to behavior among adolescents has focused on the cross‐sectional relation between hope and health behaviors, such as more balanced nutritional intake, more exercise, and lower substance use (Canty‐Mitchell,2001; Mahat et al.,2002; Mahon et al.,2004). In addition to health behaviors, hope is associated with academic functioning among youth; it longitudinally predicts greater cognitive engagement at school as well as academic achievement (Bryce et al.,2024). However, less research has examined the relation between hope and prosocial and externalizing behaviors. In one cross‐sectional study of children, hope was associated with lower externalizing behaviors, using a composite measure of aggression and delinquent behaviors (Valle et al.,2004). Constructs similar to hope, such as positive future orientation and optimism, are also associated with lower rates of aggression among adolescents (e.g., Stoddard et al.,2011). However, less is known about the relation between hope and prosociality (e.g., Schornick et al.,2023), with existing research focused on emerging adults (e.g., Ferrari et al.,2014). Therefore, there is a current gap in understanding the relation between hope and a range of behaviors among adolescents, including aggression and conduct problems, as well as prosocial behaviors.

Hope may be particularly relevant to behavior during the developmental stage of adolescence (Jeffrey & Mehari,2023). Adolescence is a time of rapid physical, cognitive, social, and emotional change. It also includes major structural changes, such as, in the U.S., moving from smaller, more homogeneous primary schools with one teacher and classroom for the majority of the day to larger, heterogeneous secondary schools, with a different teacher for every subject. In the midst of these changes, identity development in relationships, occupation, and ideology comprises a key task of adolescence (e.g., Erikson,1968), including identity development around meaning and purpose (Damon et al.,2003). Functionally, adolescents make decisions that have major repercussions for the rest of their lives, much more so than the decisions that they made in middle and late childhood. For example, they choose how much to invest in school, how they want their lives to look after secondary school, and the extent to which they will engage in risky behaviors, such as aggression, delinquency, substance use, and risky sex. Adolescents' degree of hope may be an important factor that impacts behavior, including risky behavior, with higher hope for a desired future potentially motivating wise decisions in the present. More research is needed to explore the relation between hope and prosocial as well as problem behaviors.

The Children's Hope Scale (1997) is probably the most widely used measure of hope in youth and adolescents: one review identified over 200 studies that used the Children's Hope Scale (Hellman et al.,2018). It was first developed based on Snyder's theory of hope, and the item pool was created by researchers in an investigator‐driven approach, with no documented input from youth or communities, such as through qualitative research. The Children's Hope Scale was then validated among a predominantly White sample of youth in middle‐ and high‐income families (Snyder et al.,1997). As then, it has been translated into a range of languages and used in many different countries (c.f., Hellman et al.,2018), but very little measurement equivalence testing has been conducted. To our knowledge, no measurement invariance testing involving samples of Black youth has been conducted on the Children's Hope Scale. The little cross‐ethnic research that has been conducted suggests that there are statistically significant differences in rates across ethnic groups within (e.g., McDermott et al.,1997) and across countries (e.g., Yang et al.,2021). Furthermore, there are different patterns of hope across developmental stages and gender based on ethnicity1(Callahan,1999; Fraser et al.,2024; McDermott et al.,1997). Ethnic differences in responding on the Children's Hope Scale are concerning because it suggests that one ethnic group has higher hope than others or that the scale does not measure the same construct across ethnic groups. These findings suggest limitations on its cross‐cultural and cross‐contextual generalizability of the scale.

One fundamental but problematic assumption in existing work on hope in youth is that hope can be operationalized isometrically across cultures. According to Snyder, hope comprises pathways and agency, which is consistent with a Western European emphasis on personal mastery and individual coping. Further limiting generalizability, most research on hope has been conducted among predominantly White, middle‐class samples, and ignores the impact of context (c.f., Bryce & Fraser,2023). In fact, Snyder (1995) postulated that Black individuals would havelesshope due to an assumed disparity in goal availability, although he acknowledged that lower hope among individuals of color was not supported empirically. This deficit orientation—that Black individuals' hope is a product of oppression—reflects the linear, deterministic, overly narrow approach that often occurs when White researchers focus on youth of color (Spencer,2006). In this case, it also reduces all potential cultural differences to experiences of racism. To address this source of bias, participatory and qualitative research is needed to develop a culturally grounded conceptualization of hope that includes Black communities and Black youth.

There is evidence that hope is conceptualized differently across cultures. In more communal or collectivistic cultures, hope derives not just from individual capacity and effort but from the social context as well (Thomas et al.,2023). In those cultures, hope includes external pathways and agency (conjoint agency), not just the internal agency (or disjoint agency) as proposed by a Western tradition (Bernardo,2010). For example, in a series of studies across several Asian cultures, Bernardo and colleagues demonstrated that adult and youth hope includes an external locus of hope, in which individuals believe that the efforts, agency, and influence of close others (e.g., family, friends) and the divine are important for goal attainment (e.g., Bernardo,2010). Across both collectivistic cultures and cultures that have been marginalized, oppressed, and disempowered, hope may be conceptualized as envisioning a good but distant future for future generations, and not just beliefs about achieving an individual's goals in their lifetime (e.g., Gross,2014). Other cultures or traditions treat hope as a disposition to persevere in doing what is good for the community independently of what the future may bring. For example, Engaged Buddhism and activists in Chinese Buddhism characterize hope as an acceptance of uncertainty and expectation of a future that will not be escaped (May,2015; Ritzinger,2013). Given how hope is conceptualized variably between countries and ethnic groups, it would follow that a measure developed in the context of one ethnic group may not be generalizable across contexts.

The purpose of the present study was to use participatory action research in the Southeastern U.S. to (1) create a culturally grounded conceptualization of hope based on qualitative interviews among adults who worked with youth and a youth advisory board in a predominantly Black, highly burdened community; (2) use that conceptualization to inform the development of a measure of hope among adolescents; and (3) examine the structure and validity of the measure in a sample of Black and White adolescents in the U.S. To our knowledge, only one other study developed a measure of hope for use among Black youth, the Urban Adolescent Hope Scale (Canfield et al.,2018). It was developed based on qualitative research with Black youth (Harley,2015), and scales were identified based on what youth indicated they thought about when they thought about hope. Although empirically guided, the scale is limited in the extent to which it was guided by a cohesive operational definition of hope. The scale has five factors, and it measures hope through sources of hope (e.g., spirituality, caring connections), necessary conditions for hope (e.g., basic needs being met), personal agency, and education as a pathway to goal achievement (Canfield et al.,2018). None of these scales are unique to a conceptual understanding of hope itself, and it may be problematic to measure a construct by its predictors rather than directly measuring its essential constituents. Furthermore, this scale was validated in a predominantly White sample, with no measurement invariance testing by ethnicity (Canfield et al.,2018). There continues to be a need for the development of a measure of hope that is based in a culturally grounded conceptualization of hope from qualitative research and that has been empirically validated among a sample of Black youth. The current study moves toward addressing this gap. Given the minimal existing research on hope in Black communities in the U.S., our aims were exploratory. We did not have specific a priori hypotheses about what themes would emerge in the conceptualization of hope, and the subsequent quantitative phase was driven by the results of the qualitative research.

We took a participatory action research approach to this mixed methods study. The team co‐leaders included the director of a community center that provided afterschool and summer programming, two psychologists, and a philosopher. All project activities were guided by quarterly community leader advisory board meetings and monthly youth advisory board meetings. Parent and caregiver input was obtained through two focus group meetings, but the parents and caregivers at the participating sites indicated that they had too many demands and stressors to participate more frequently than that. This study occurred in three phases. In the qualitative study (Phase 1), we conducted interviews with community leaders to develop a culturally grounded conceptualization of hope and how it appears in youth. In Phase 2, Measure Development, we used that information, combined with community and researcher input, to develop the Adolescent Hope Scale. In the quantitative study (Phase 3), we piloted the scale in a national sample of youth and tested its psychometric properties, including invariance testing.

One author is a Black woman, three are White women, and one is a White man. Three authors grew up in the Southern U.S., which created some cultural similarities between the participants and the researchers. All authors had food security, housing stability, and stable access to healthcare, electricity, running water, and the Internet. This may have resulted in a devaluation or minimization of responses that identified the satisfaction of basic needs as a necessary precondition for hope. Prior to the qualitative coding process, coders met with the project leader to discuss potential biases that could emerge. For example, like the participants, the majority of the authors identified as Christian or had a Christian background, which may have resulted in an overemphasis on responses that were congruent with Christian conceptualizations of hope.

Participants were 18 community leaders who participated in individual interviews. Participants were recruited based on their leadership roles and volunteer or formal work with youth in one localized community in a city in the Southeastern U.S. The neighborhood was predominantly Black (greater than 95%) and low income, with the heavy majority of youth participating in afterschool programming living in Federally subsidized housing. In participatory work in the neighborhood, members described the community as having a proud history of participation in the Civil Rights movement, a strong faith tradition, and a rich history of Black‐owned businesses. The sense of community declined through a series of actions conducted by the city, including pulling all subsidized housing complexes from across the city into that one neighborhood and disinvesting in a stadium that was an important part of residents' incomes. Residents reported being significantly concerned about poverty (e.g., trouble keeping the lights on and food on the table) and gun‐related violence. Within this setting, interview participants included leaders of community centers, faith leaders working with youth (predominantly Christian, one Nation of Islam leader), business owners in the neighborhood (e.g., barbershop owner‐operator), active and retired teachers, and others (e.g., a police leader who grew up in the neighborhood). The interviewees included seven Black women, one White woman, nine Black men, and one White man.

The youth advisory board also provided feedback on the questions. Youth advisory board members were not participants but provided context and reactions that helped the researchers put the information received from the adult participants into context. Youth advisory board members lived in the community of focus and either attended a local middle school, afterschool programming in a participating community center, or a youth group at a local church. Youth advisory board participation included between 15 and 20 youth prior to the COVID‐19 pandemic shutdowns in the U.S. in March 2020, and 5–7 youth after this time point. The meeting that focused on hope took place before March 2020. All youth advisory board members were Black.

Interviewers included the project lead, a clinical psychologist and Black woman, as well as graduate students (PhD and master's students) in psychology (two White women, one Latino man). Students were trained in qualitative interviewing and submitted a minimum of three practice audiotapes, which were reviewed by one of the project leaders, who provided written and oral feedback after each tape review. After students completed training, the first two tapes were reviewed by one of the project leaders, and oral and written feedback were provided. Depending on performance, students may have been asked to complete another practice interview with a project leader, who provided in vivo feedback, before continuing interviews. Functionally, this level of review meant that essentially every interview conducted by a student was reviewed for quality before they completed a subsequent interview. A snowball recruitment strategy was used. After the advisory board was established (based on leaders who were already active in the community or working with participating community centers), all advisory board members were invited to participate in interviews as well as to identify additional leaders who worked with youth in the neighborhood who could provide a useful perspective to inform intervention development. In addition to the qualitative interviews, one youth advisory board meeting was devoted to a discussion of hope. Their thoughts about hope were used as a fourth source of information (in addition to theory, existing empirical research, and community leaders' input) to provide a counterweight to the other sources of information, all of which were provided by adults.

A grounded theory approach was used to analyze the qualitative data. First, open coding was conducted by five researchers, who individually reviewed a random 30% of the interviews and generated the themes they noticed. Then the team had a series of meetings to complete secondary coding, in which they met to discuss, synthesize, and organize the themes in ways that seemed most accurate to the respondents' original intents. The following categories were created: definitions of hope, the importance of hope, indicators of the presence of hope, and indicators of the absence of hope. Following this, a preliminary thematic codebook was developed to include the themes within each category, their definitions, and examples. Based on consensus coding of the first three interviews by three coders, revisions were made for any unclear or overlapping definitions in the codebook. Following revisions to the codebook, two researchers independently coded the interviews, and all discrepancies were resolved by consensus, with a third coder making a final decision when the two coders could not come to consensus. Coding was conducted using NVivo 12.

Frequencies of the themes representing definition components of hope, the importance of hope, indicators of the presence of hope in adolescents, and indicators of the absence of hope in adolescents are represented in Table1. The interview questions relevant to hope are presented as supplemental material.

Themes related to hope derived from interviews with community leaders.

The youth advisory board described hope as a wish or a dream, something that may or may not come true, which aligned well with thefuture‐oriented vision or dreamtheme. They also talked about hope as persistence or having the motivation to continue reaching for goals despite external barriers to success or failure.

The youth advisory board discussed the advantages of having hope, mostly around hope as inspiration. For example, they described hope as something that helps you to work toward who you want to be, create dreams, encourage you to be a good person, guide you, and help you make plans. On the other hand, they indicated that sometimes hope hurts you. This may be due to what you want not coming true, hoping for unrealistic things, and then getting frustrated and giving up.

Of note, when asked about how they can tell when other youth have hope, some of our advisory board first focused onnecessary conditions for hope: they said that youth who have hope have food, money, and a place to live. When asked more specifically about how they could tell the difference in how youth show up or act when they do or do not have hope, our youth advisory board suggested that youth who have hope are more successful, high‐achieving, and hardworking. They are enthusiastic, excited, and feel good. They smile, brag, and show joy. Our youth advisory board did indicate that sometimes hopeful youth are “too much” and that their excitement could at times be aversive to other youth.

Our youth advisory board reported that youth who did not have hope were depressed, disruptive, disappointed, and frustrated. They reported that youth without hope might engage in suicide, be the class clown, be “antisocial” (in the sense of being withdrawn), or be popular—generally suggested that there was no singular way that youth without hope might present.

Based on the interviews and advisory board meetings, the research team developed a pool of items to measure hope that was consistent with the conceptualization of hope as a future‐oriented vision, a belief or expectation in something better, a sense of agency to realize that future, and persistence despite problems. Members of the research team with measure development expertise refined items for clarity and reduction in duplications. The items were then cognitively tested in a youth advisory board meeting (youth read the items out loud and provided their reactions and responses to the items). The cognitive testing resulted in changes in wording for simplicity and clarity but no major changes in content. Following this process, the scale included seven items. Two items were included from the Children's Hope Scale which cohered with the theoretical understanding of hope as involving persistence, similar to the pathways thinking proposed in Hope Theory by Snyder (“When I have a problem, I can come up with lots of ways to solve it;” “Even when others want to quit, I know I can find ways to solve the problem;” Snyder et al.,1997). Five items were generated by the authors to reflect the present study's conceptualization of hope as including an expectation or belief in something better (“I know that things don't stay bad forever”); a future‐oriented vision (“I will have a good life when I get older”); and agency (“I have what it takes to reach my goals;” “I will keep trying to reach my goals even if I fail at first”). Although not emerging as a theme related to thedefinitionof hope, most adults discussed community and adult support as an importantprerequisitefor youths' hope—also consistent with research and theory (c.f. Bryce & Fraser,2023). To explore whether that idea was part of the domain of hope, one item was created to capture others as a source of hope (i.e., “Other people believe in me”).

Participants were 311 youth and their parents or legal guardians who were members of a Qualtrics Panel. Youth were between 11 and 15 years old (M= 12.62; SD = 1.19). The sample was 66.2% male, 33.1% female, and 0.6% other. The youth sample was 62.1% White American, 32.8% Black or African American, 1% Asian, 2.3% Hispanic or Latinx, 0.6% American Indian or Alaska Native, and 1.2% Other. The sample was relatively high income; 48.6% had a household income greater than 100,000 per year, whereas 8% had a family income below the Federal poverty level at the time (less than $25,750 for a family of four).

All procedures were approved by the university's Institutional Review Board. The investigators contracted with Qualtrics to recruit a sample of 300 dyads of parents or guardians and adolescents between 11 and 15 years old. A quota sampling approach was used, with a goal of at least 100 Black youth and 100 White youth to pilot the measure. Parents or guardians received emails inviting them and their adolescent child to participate in a study. Data were collected in April 2021, and 504 responses were originally obtained. Parents or guardians completed their part of the survey, and then they passed the device to their child, who provided informed assent and completed the remainder of the survey. Problematic responses were removed, including non‐consent from parents or guardians or non‐assent from youth (75 responses) and 118 poor quality responses (including speedy responses, defined as less than half the median response time of the soft launch; and suspicious responding, such as open‐ended responses that indicated an adult rather than a child was responding to the questions). This resulted in a final sample of 311 dyads.

Parents or guardians provided informed consent electronically for themselves and their child, the youth participant. Youth participants provided informed assent electronically.

Parents or guardians provided age, race or ethnicity, and gender information about their child. Race or ethnicity was assessed by six categories (White; Black or African American; Hispanic or Latino/a/x; Asian; American Indian or Alaska Native; or Other); because this was used as part of quota sampling, respondents could only check one. The gender of the adolescent was assessed by four categories: boy, girl, nonbinary or other gender, or prefer not to say. Parents or guardians also provided information about their family household income.

General hope was measured using the Adolescent Hope Scale, a 7‐item measure developed by the authors and informed by qualitative interviews, a youth advisory board, and the Children's Hope Scale (Snyder et al.,1997). Specific hope was measured by the Goal‐Specific Hope Scale (Feldman & Dreher,2012). For this study, one open‐ended item was included that asked participants to identify their main goal for the next year. Participants then responded to three items measuring their hope specific to that goal (e.g., “I can think of the steps to take to reach this goal”).

The Problem Behavior Frequency Scale‐revised (PBFS‐R; Farrell et al.,2016) is a 36‐item self‐report measure that assesses adolescents' frequency of victimization, aggression, and other delinquent behaviors during the last 30 days. Of the 36 items, the current study used three items that measured physical aggression (e.g., “hit or slapped someone?”) and three items that measured relational aggression (e.g., “made fun of someone to make others laugh?”). All items were rated on a 6‐point frequency scale (1 =Never, 2 =1–2 times, 3 =3–5 times, 4 =6–9 times, and 6 =20 or more times). Internal consistency was good as estimated by Cronbach'sα(.91 for physical aggression and .83 for relational aggression).

The Children's Anger Management Scale (CAMS; Penza‐Clyve & Zeman,2002) is a 15‐item self‐report measure that assesses anger management in children using three subscales, namely anger emotion regulation coping (e.g., “when I'm feeling mad, I control my temper”), anger inhibition (e.g., “I hold my anger in”), and dysregulated expression (e.g., “I attack whatever it is that makes me mad”). For this study, we shortened the measure to 10 items based on the reliability from an earlier study to reduce the participant burden. All items are rated on a 5‐point scale (1 =Strongly disagreeto 5 =Strongly agree). Internal consistency as adequate; Cronbach'sαwas .82 for anger regulation, .79 for anger inhibition, and .85 for anger‐dysregulated expression.

The Basic Empathy scale (Jolliffe & Farrington,2006) is a 20‐item self‐report measure that assesses adolescents' affective empathy (11 items) and cognitive empathy (9 items). For this study, we used four items from the cognitive empathy subscale based on the reliability from an earlier study to reduce the participant burden. All responses were rated on a 6‐point scale (1 =Strongly disagreeto 6 =Strongly agree). Internal consistency was good (Cronbach'sα= .80).

The Sources of Meaning scale is a 12‐item self‐report measure that was developed by authors to assess adolescents' sources of meaning in their lives (Jeffrey & Mehari,2023). Questions were developed from a thematic analysis of community leader interviews and focus groups with after‐school care providers within the target population. This measure assesses children's sources of transcendent meaning (values about family, faith, and community; e.g., “The people in my life are important to me”). All items were rated on a 5‐point scale (1 =Strongly disagreeto 5 =Strongly agree). Internal consistency was good (Cronbach'sα= .90).

Children's well‐being and mental health were measured using the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ; Goodman,1997). The SDQ is a parent‐reported measure that assesses children's well‐being and mental health problems during the last 6 months. The SDQ consists of five subscales using 25 items on a 3‐point rating scale (0 =Not True; 1 =Somewhat True; 2 =Certainly True). For the current study, four subscales were included: emotional symptoms (e.g., “many worries or often seem worried”), conduct problems (e.g., “often loses temper”), and prosocial behavior (e.g., “considerate of other people's feelings”). Cronbach'sαwas .85 for emotional symptoms, .77 for conduct problems, .45 for peer relationship problems, and .73 for prosocial behavior.

Data were analyzed using Mplus 8. For four items on the Adolescent Hope Scale, no Black youth endorsed “strongly disagree,” in contrast to White youth, who used the whole rating scale for all items. To further explore this issue, we conducted item response theory analyses to examine the item characteristic curves of each item on the Adolescent Hope Scale in a restricted sample of White youth to determine whether the “strongly disagree” category added important information for White youth. For all items on the scale, the “strongly disagree” and “disagree” curves heavily overlapped, indicating that there was poor discrimination between these response option categories for White youth as well, such that they can be combined without a significant loss of information (Brown,2015). Based on this information, we collapsed the categories of “strongly disagree” and “disagree” given that they did not provide significantly different information for either group. We conducted confirmatory factor analyses (CFAs) to test competing models of the Adolescent Hope Scale. Items were treated as continuous, and the maximum likelihood estimator was used. We compared the fit of competing models (a one‐factor model including the general and specific hope vs. a two‐factor model) based on the chi‐squared difference tests for nested models and evaluated overall model fit using Hu and Bentler's (1999) recommendations as general guidelines. We conducted tests of measurement invariance on the final model across gender and ethnicity. Given that only one participant was identified as nonbinary in terms of gender, and this is an insufficient sample size to power invariance testing, this participant was excluded from analyses. Similarly, analyses that examined differences across ethnicity were restricted to Black and White youth due to inadequate sample size for youth who identified as members of other ethnic groups. Finally, we analyzed the extent to which the Adolescent Hope Scale was associated with theoretically related variables (e.g., empathy, anger regulation) and to which it was associated with behavioral outcomes (e.g., prosocial behavior, aggression, conduct problems, relationship problems).

A two‐factor model with separate factors for general hope and specific hope fit the data well. It also fit significantly better than a one‐factor model (p< .001; see Table2). Standardized loadings in the two‐factor confirmatory model ranged from .73–.82 for general hope and .72–.88 for specific hope (see Table3). Within the two‐factor model, general and specific hope were strongly correlated with one another (r= .87,p< .001). Both the specific hope factor and general hope factor demonstrated good internal consistency (Cronbach'sαs = .80 and .89, respectively). Multiple group analyses indicated that the models specifying configural (same factor structure), metric (same measurement unit), and scalar (full score equivalence) invariance across gender fit the data well (see Table4). Specifically, the chi‐squared tests for the metric and scalar models were nonsignificant. CFIs and TLIs for the metric and scalar models were both greater than or equal to .97, and the RMSEAs were below .05 (See Table4). Though the chi‐squared test for the configural invariance model was significant, CFI and TLI values for this model were greater than or equal to .96, and the RMSEA was less than .06. Chi‐squared difference tests indicated nonsignificant differences between each model. Thus, configural, metric, and scalar invariance across gender was supported (see Table4). Multiple group analyses further indicated that the model specifying configural, metric, and scalar invariance across ethnicity fit the data well (see Table4). Once again, chi‐squared difference tests between all three models were nonsignificant, indicating that the measure had configural, metric, and scalar invariance across Black and White youth.

Fit indices for competing models of the factor structure of the Hope Scale Items.

Standardized loadings in final two‐factor confirmatory factor model.

Fit indices and invariance testing for two‐factor model of the Hope Scale Items.

Youth‐reported general hope as measured by the Adolescent Hope Scale was significantly and positively associated with specific hope (r= .66), which supported the CFA finding that they are separate but related factors. General and specific hope were both significantly, positively associated with youth‐reported anger regulation, anger inhibition, and cognitive empathy (rs = .28–.71, allps < .001; see Table3). Both forms of hope were also negatively correlated with youth‐reported physical aggression (rs = −.20 to −.12,ps ≤ .05). Interestingly, the strongest relation was between general hope and cognitive empathy at .71. Youth‐reported general hope was also significantly, negatively associated with youth‐reported levels of relational aggression (r= −.16,p< .01). Neither general nor specific hope was significantly related to youth‐reported anger dysregulated expression. General and specific hope were significantly, positively associated with parent‐reported prosocial behavior (r= .55,p< .001 andr= .49,p< .001 respectively) and significantly, negatively associated with parent‐reported peer problems (r= −.20,p< .001 andr= −.13,p< .05 respectively). General hope, and not specific hope, was found to be significantly, negatively correlated with parent‐reported conduct problems (r= −.18,p< .01). Finally, neither general nor specific hope was significantly associated with parent‐reported emotional symptoms (see Table5).

Descriptive statistics and correlations among general hope, specific hope, and other variables of interest.

To determine the degree to which general and specific hope predicted adolescent behavior, a path analysis was conducted using MPLUS version 8. The sample was restricted to participants who identified as Black or White. All variables that are theoretically related to hope or adolescent aggression (physical and relational aggression, anger emotion regulation, anger inhibition, anger dysregulated‐expression, prosocial behavior, emotional symptoms, conduct problems, and peer relationship problems) were entered as dependent variables in the regression model after general and specific hope were regressed on gender, age, and ethnicity (see Table6). Age, gender, and ethnicity did not predict general (β= −0.09,p= .11;β= 0.01,p= .93;β= −0.09,p= .14 respectively) or specific hope (β= −0.03,p= .67;β= −0.01,p= .85;β= −0.08,p= .19 respectively). General hope significantly predicted lower levels of physical and relational aggression, conduct problems, and peer relationship problems (see Table6). General hope also predicted significantly greater anger regulation, anger inhibition, and prosocial behavior. Specific hope significantly predicted greater anger regulation and prosocial behavior, but no other outcomes.

Standardized parameter estimates for regression coefficients for relations between hope and social, emotional, and behavioral functioning.

The goal of the present study was to develop and validate a measure of hope that was rooted in a culturally grounded conceptualization of hope, but that was not necessarily culturally exclusive. The Adolescent Hope Scale incorporates a future orientation (e.g., forever); a belief in something better (e.g., things don't stay bad); and agency (e.g., I can come up with lots of ways [to solve a problem]), all of which were identified by community leaders as core components of hope. The better but distant future orientation, not necessarily tied to the individual's near future outcomes, also aligns well with philosophical theory about hope, particularly conceptualizations of hope that have emerged from collectivist, marginalized, and some religious communities (Cobb & Green,2017; Lear,2006; Stockdale,2021). The Adolescent Hope Scale also includes persistence, which was identified by the youth advisory board as a core component of hope. Persistence was also an important piece of Snyder's (1997) Children's Hope Scale (e.g., I will keep trying…even if I fail at first) and traditional philosophical conceptions of hope as an orientation toward difficult but desired outcomes.

Based on a comparison of competing models, the Adolescent Hope Scale emerged as a distinct factor, separate but related to the Goal‐Specific Hope Scale. Those findings suggest that the Adolescent Hope Scale measures general hope, which captures the trait or disposition of hope (in contrast to the goal‐specific hope scale, which may capture situation‐specific attitudes). General hope and specific hope were strongly correlated with each other, supporting convergent validity. Importantly, the factor structure had strong invariance across gender and ethnicity, suggesting that the Adolescent Hope Scale functions equivalently across male and female adolescents and Black and White adolescents in the U.S. In addition, age, gender, and ethnicity did not predict mean levels of hope as measured by the Adolescent Hope Scale, suggesting that this measure may present a viable alternative that addresses some of the measurement invariance concerns presented by results from the Children's Hope Scale (e.g., McDermott et al.,1997; Yang et al.,2021). We do recommend merging anchors on the lower end of the rating scale to avoid ethnic‐based differences in response styles.

General hope was also related to variables that were suggested by our community leaders and youth advisory board, providing both evidence of construct validity and empirical support for the community's conceptual model of hope. The community leaders painted a picture of hope among youth as being generally predictive of better functioning, but particularly in relation to others (e.g., more altruistic behavior, less conflict with those in authority, and less aggressive or delinquent behavior) with a marginal focus on less internal distress or success in individualistic goal achievement, broadly defined. The youth advisory board focused more on how hope is related to youths' internal functioning, such as greater positive affect (e.g., smile, brag, joy) and less negative affect (e.g., depression, disappointment, frustration).

Consistent with the community leaders' and youth advisory board's predictions, we found that general hope predicted greater altruism (e.g., parent‐reported prosocial behavior) and fewer behavior problems (e.g., self‐reported physical and relational aggression; parent‐reported conduct problems and peer relationship problems). These findings are novel and significantly add to the current understanding of hope. Prior research has focused on the relation between hope and internal functioning (e.g., life satisfaction, stress, internalizing problems; Berry et al.,2022; Bryce et al.,2020; Chai et al.,2018; Wong & Lim,2009). These findings suggest that hope may also play an important role in how adolescents interact with others—their prosociality, as demonstrated by empathy and prosocial behaviors—as well as their aggression, peer relationship problems, and conduct problems. Of note, conduct problems often represent ruptures in the relationships between youth and authority, including parents and teachers, in addition to institutions, such as schools and society. This aligns well with the community leaders' thoughts about indicators of the absence of hope, including problems with authority, aggression, and broken relationships. It is also consistent with a study that found a relation between hope and a broad indicator of externalizing problems (Valle et al.,2004) and studies that have examined the relations between positive future orientation and aggression (e.g., Stoddard et al.,2011).

There was mixed support for the hypothesis that hope was predictive of less distress: general hope was not related to internalizing symptoms (the “emotional symptoms” scale) according to parent report, but it was related to greater ability to regulate angry distress (e.g., greater self‐reported anger regulation). The lack of a relation between hope and emotional symptoms is inconsistent with prior research that has generally consistently found relations between hope and indicators such as perceived stress, depressive symptoms, and anxiety among youth (Berry et al.,2022; Bryce et al.,2020; Chai et al.,2018; Ciarrochi et al.,2007; Wong & Lim,2009). Our youth advisory board suggested that there is no clear pattern of how youth present outwardly when they do not have hope. Of note, our measure of emotional symptoms was parent reported, whereas most studies have used adolescent self‐report as a more accurate indicator. Along those lines, the measure of anger regulation was self‐reported and was consistent with the hypotheses. Therefore, the mixed results may have been due to differences between parent‐ and self‐report.

Distinguishing between the attitude of hope, captured by specific hope, and the disposition of hope, captured by general hope, yielded different patterns of relations to outcomes. In terms of behavior, general hope was uniquely predictive of physical and relational aggression, conduct problems, peer relationship problems, and prosocial behavior, whereas specific hope was only uniquely predictive of prosocial behavior. This would be expected based on an account of dispositional hope such as the priorities model, in which a person can have the attitude of hope about specific objects without possessing the disposition of hope (Milona,2020). For example, a person can have strong hopeful attitudes toward objects that may not be connected to having a good life. The disposition of hope, which enables people to prioritize and pursue their goals well in the face of difficulty, would likely have more widespread benefits than hopeful attitudes about specific outcomes.

Consistent with the argument that hope is a culturally grounded virtue, the results of this study—including the qualitative and quantitative components—may not be generalizable. No conclusions can be drawn about its generalizability to other ethnic groups within the U.S. besides Black and White American adolescents, other age groups (e.g., children, adults), or youth in other countries. Further qualitative research is needed to ensure that measures of hope (or of any virtue) are grounded in cultural conceptions of hope, and quantitative research to ensure that the measure is effective. More research is needed to ensure that there are measures of hope that are available and valid across groups. In addition, we did not quantitatively compare the Adolescent Hope Scale to the Children's Hope Scale—it is possible that they assess the same construct. Future research should examine the incremental validity of the Adolescent Hope Scale to the Children's Hope Scale. Furthermore, this study was cross‐sectional, making any temporal conclusions about the relation between hope and youth functioning impossible to draw. For example, it is possible that youth show aggressive or disruptive behaviors, receive consistent negative feedback from peers and adults, are labeled and rejected, and then lose hope as a consequence. Further research is needed to assess the temporal directionality of these relations. It is also possible that unassessed factors, such as parental warmth and consistency, explain all the relations among the variables.

This participatory research project results in an effective measure of hope that is predictive of a range of outcomes among adolescents, including behaviors that are public health priorities, such as aggression. Participatory action research is an underused tool that can provide unique and novel insights into problems and guide strategies to reduce health disparities and promote public health. In this case, a research project focused on positive youth development, guided by a community, identified hope as a potentially malleable factor that may reduce aggression and, in its extreme form, reduce violence that leads to injury and death. Community‐level strategies to promote hope among youth may allow youth to make future‐oriented behavioral decisions, which may result in reductions in aggression and problem behaviors more generally and promote engagement in prosocial behaviors.

This work was supported by The John Templeton Foundation via a subaward from Baylor University (PI: Schnitker) to University of South Alabama (Project Lead: Mehari). The content is that of the authors and does not represent the position of The John Templeton Foundation, which had no role in the study design, data collection procedures, data analysis or interpretation, or in the writing of the report.

Parents or guardians provided informed consent electronically for themselves and their child, the youth participant. Youth participants provided informed assent electronically.

We thank the community centers and afterschool sites that agreed to participate in the project, as well as our youth advisory board members and community leader advisory board members. We are particularly grateful for the influence of Ms. Marie Chastang and Dr. Joseph Currier, who helped to lead the broader project from which this study emerged.

A portion of this work was conducted at University of South Alabama.