This review examines the association between early life exposure to phthalates in human males and Leydig cell endocrine function. A systematic search was performed in PubMed and EMBASE, identifying 17 studies for analysis. Association scores weighted for number of phthalates and subjects were calculated for luteinizing hormone (LH), testosterone, testosterone/LH ratio and insulin‐like factor 3 (INSL3). The scores ranges from full consistency of positive (score = 1), through inconsistent (score = 0), to negative/inverse (score = −1) associations. LH and early life phthalate exposure showed a statistically significant weighted phthalate association score of 0.18. Testosterone showed largely null results, whereas testosterone/LH ratio showed a negative association, both not statistically significant. A rise in LH, and decrease of testosterone/LH ratio, indicates that early life phthalate exposure results in a demand for a larger LH stimulus to produce the same amount of testosterone, and perhaps a decreased function of the Leydig cells, that manifests with the onset of high testosterone production in puberty and adulthood. A statistically non‐significant decrease in INSL3 with a weighted phthalate association score of −0.29 supports this finding. An early life phthalate exposure‐induced decline in Leydig cell function could possibly impact the spermatogenesis and adult male fertility.

This is review of the literature on associations between early life exposure to phthalates in human males and the hormonal function of the testicular Leydig cell.

A systematic search was performed in the databases PubMed and EMBASE, identifying 17 studies for analysis.

Testosterone showed largely null results, whereas the Leydig cell stimulating hormone (luteinizing hormone [LH]) showed a positive and testosterone/LH ratio a negative association, indicating a demand for a larger LH stimulus to produce the same amount of testosterone.

An early life phthalate exposure‐induced decline in Leydig cell function could impact the spermatogenesis and adult male fertility.

Infertility is a worldwide challenge; male infertility plays a role in about 50% of cases, with idiopathic sperm abnormalities accounting for 30% of cases [1]. A co‐occurring prevalence of decreased sperm quality, hypospadias, cryptorchidism, and testicular cancer has been termed thetesticular dysgenesis syndrome, which is hypothesized to be associated with exposure to endocrine disruptive compounds (EDCs) and genetic defects, resulting in irreversible changes in the embryonal programming and differentiation of Sertoli, Leydig and germ cells [2].

Leydig and Sertoli cells are part of the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal (HPG) axis (Figure1). Gonadotropin‐releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus, stimulates the gonadotroph cells in the anterior pituitary gland to a pulsative secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulation hormone (FSH) that stimulate Leydig and Sertoli cells, respectively. Leydig cells secrete testosterone and insulin‐like factor 3 (INSL3), important for the spermatogenesis and the testicular descent during the foetal period. Testosterone is essential for development of secondary sex characteristics, development of the male gonads, stimulation of Sertoli cells in adulthood, and exerting negative feedback on GnRH and LH secretion. INSL3 is an indicator of Leydig cell function, independent of the acute feedback regulation of the HPG axis. Sertoli cells produce growth factors that stimulate the spermatogenesis and increase the number of Leydig cells as well as the number of LH receptors on Leydig cells and hence the production of testosterone [3,5].

Hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal hormone axis. GnRH from the hypothalamus stimulates the anterior pituitary gland to a pulsative secretion of LH and FSH. FSH stimulates the Sertoli cell to produce inhibin, Androgen binding protein, growth‐factors, aromatase and anti‐Müllerian hormone (AMH) (during foetal time). LH stimulates the Leydig cell to produce testosterone and INSL3. The Leydig and Sertoli cells interact through testosterone, growth factors and aromatase. The system is regulated by negative feedback of testosterone on the GnRH and LH secretion and inhibin on the FSH secretion. Adapted from figures in [3,4].

The foetal Leydig cells gives rise to a peak in androgen production at gestation weeks 11–14 necessary for the process of masculinization, followed by a decrease until birth. The HPG axis is activated again in the ‘mini‐puberty’ with a peak in testosterone and LH concentration around the 2nd month of life, resulting in maturation of the Sertoli and Leydig cells, which is considered important for future fertility. Hereafter, the testosterone concentration remains low until puberty [6,7].

Phthalates are a group of synthetic plasticizers. They are non‐covalently bound within the polymer, which makes the phthalates prone to exude from the plastic to the surrounding environment, exacerbated by exposure to high temperature, pH changes, microwaves, solvents and mechanical stress [8]. Phthalates are divided into groups according to molecular weight: Low molecular weight phthalates (LMW) are found in solvents and adhesives and in personal care products, paints, medications and cosmetics, and high molecular weight phthalates (HMW) are used in construction materials, cables, medical equipment, clothing, food packaging and toys. Exposure to phthalates occurs via ingestion, inhalation, dermal absorption, and also intravenously. Phthalates can cross the placenta and are found in breastmilk, causing early‐life exposure [8].

Phthalates are non‐persistent EDCs as they are rapidly metabolized in the human body [8]. They have been associated with anti‐androgen effects and low sperm quality in adults and inconclusive associations between phthalate exposure and testosterone in infants [8,9].

The impact of phthalate exposure depends on individual's metabolism and the route and duration of the exposure [8]. Phthalates and their metabolites can be found in amniotic fluid but are found in a higher concentration in maternal blood and urine [10]. Although exposure levels of phthalates and their metabolites are seemingly lower in neonates and infants compared to adults, they have different pharmacokinetics in absorption, metabolism, distribution and excretion. This includes higher gastric acid pH and slower gastric emptying affecting absorption, activity of hepatic and plasma enzymes affecting metabolism, differences in body composition and plasma proteins affecting drug/EDC distribution and lower tubular elimination abilities affecting renal excretion. Additionally, the immature neonatal epidermis has increased hydration, allowing for increased dermal absorption [11]. The adverse health impact of phthalate exposure may therefore be larger in foetuses and infants than adults. Studies in children have found increasing urinary phthalate concentration from 3 to 36 months of age [12], followed by decreasing amounts of urinary phthalate from age 2 to 11 years [13], indicating higher phthalate exposure in early childhood.

The aim of the present review is to combine results from studies performed on human males regarding association between phthalate exposure in utero and early life and levels of testosterone, LH and INSL3 as indicators of Leydig cell function.

The present study is a systematic review, the gold standard to summarize current research and identify knowledge gaps. Descriptions of the literature search, excluded studies, statistical analyses and assessment of the impact of publication/reporting bias are available in the Supporting InformationS1–S4. Studies were eligible for inclusion in the review if (i) hormone measurements were compared to phthalate exposure as either categorical or continuous variable; (ii) phthalate concentrations were measured in utero (maternal urine or serum), at birth (umbilical cord blood), or in children within the first year of life (serum, urine, meconium or mother's breastmilk); or (iii) outcomes were results on levels of testosterone (including testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, free testosterone or total testosterone), LH, ratio of testosterone/LH and INSL3 in umbilical cord blood, amniotic fluid, serum or other body fluid of males. Experimental studies performed in vitro or in animals, studies only presenting maternal hormones and studies reported in other languages than English were excluded. TableS3summarizes all eligible studies and justification for categorization of associations.

The included publications have assessed a wide range of phthalates and phthalate metabolites with a variety of different names and abbreviations for specific phthalates. In the present review, we have classified phthalate metabolites after their parent phthalate. TableS4shows the parent phthalate, the primary metabolite and (if any) secondary metabolites. We included the eight most frequently measured specific parent phthalates in the review. These were four LMW: di‐n‐butyl phthalate (DnBP), diisobutyl phthalate (DiBP), dimethyl phthalate (DMP) and diethyl phthalate (DEP), and four HMW: di‐(2‐ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP), diisononyl phthalate (DiNP), butylbenzyl phthalate (BBzP), and diisodecyl phthalate (DiDP).

The assessment of associations between phthalate exposure and hormone level outcomes is based on statistical significance (with and without multiple testing) in the original publications. The associations have been categorized as positive or negative (i.e., statistically significant increase or decrease in hormone levels, respectively), equivocal (i.e., attenuation of effects in adjusted analyses, correction for multiple testing or bell‐shaped dose–response relationships) and null results (statistically non‐significant associations).

The consistency of associations between studies has been assessed in two different ways: (i) Studies have been classified as showing positive associations if at least one of the eight included phthalates (or metabolites hereof) has shown statistically significant effect (study association score), and (ii) individual phthalates have been categorized and summarized to an overall association score for each study (phthalate association score). The effect for each study/phthalate has been assigned an association score, equivalent to positive (1), null (0), negative (−1) or equivocal (0.5 or −0.5) association in statistical analyses. The scale ranges from full consistency of positive (score = 1) to negative/inverse (score = −1) association. Between these extremes are inconsistent results (−1 < score > 1) and null effects (score = 0). FigureS2demonstrates the calculations of study and phthalate association scores. Association scores have been calculated in unadjusted statistical models as well as models adjusted with weight factors for the number of phthalates and subjects in the study.

The characteristics of the 17 studies included in the review are presented in Table1. Fifteen studies assessed phthalate exposure in utero, whereas two studies assessed phthalates in infant life. Phthalate exposure was examined in maternal urine (8 studies), maternal serum (4 studies), breastmilk (1 study), umbilical cord blood (1 study) and infant urine and amniotic fluid (1 study). Hormonal outcomes were examined in umbilical cord blood (6 studies), serum in the adult or adolescent offspring (5 studies), serum in the infant (3 studies), amniotic fluid (1 study), child urine/saliva (1 study), and serum of 2‐ to 11‐year‐old children (1 study). Testosterone was the most investigated hormone (17 studies), followed by LH (10 studies), testosterone/LH ratio (6 studies) and INSL3 (4 studies). Associations between individual phthalate exposure and hormone levels are shown in TablesS5–S8.

Summary of the 17 included studies on phthalate exposure during early life and hormone measurements in human males.

Abbreviations: NA = analysed, NEG = negative association, Null = no association, POS = positive association, T = testosterone.

A detailed summary of associations between phthalate exposure and hormone levels is reported in TableS9. Briefly, results on the proportion of results/studies with statistically significant associations (i.e., study association scores) are shown in Figure2. Early life exposure to phthalates was statistically significantly associated with increased concentration of LH (0.45, 95% CI: 0.09, 0.81), whereas the effects were not statistically significant for testosterone, testosterone/LH ratio and INSL3. The association on LH was robust in analysis that were weighted for number of parent phthalates and number of subjects (Figure3).

Association between phthalate exposure and hormones. Study association score and 95% CI of the statistical analysis in unadjusted analysis of LH, testosterone, testosterone/LH ratio and INSL3. The association between phthalate exposure and LH is statistically significant (i.e., error lines do not cross zero).

Association between phthalate exposure and LH. Study association score and 95% CI of unadjusted statistical analysis as well as analyses adjusted for both total number of tested parent phthalates and number of subjects (combined) or each of the weight factors (phthalates or subjects). All of the depicted associations are statistically significant (i.e., error lines do not cross zero).

In analyses where contributions of individual phthalates and study participants were assessed, there were statistically significant positive relationship between phthalate exposure and LH levels in unadjusted data (phthalate association score = 0.17, 95% CI: 0.02, 0.32) and scores weighted for the number of phthalates and subjects (0.18, 95% CI: 0.03, 0.33). Dividing the exposure into LMW and HMW phthalates shows weighted association scores of 0.22 (95% CI: 0.02, 0.42) and 0.14 (95% CI: −0.07, 0.35), respectively.

Associations between phthalate exposure and testosterone, testosterone/LH ratio and INSL3 levels were inconsistent, and not statistically significant (Figure2). The analysis for testosterone showed phthalate association scores of 0.03 (95% CI: −0.29, 0.35) and 0.11 (95% CI: −0.24, 0.45) in unadjusted and fully adjusted analysis, respectively. The fully adjusted phthalate association score for LMW phthalates was 0.15 and −0.04 for HMW phthalates. The testosterone/LH ratio was only reported in a subset of the studies that reported effects on LH (6 out of 10 studies). In these studies, unadjusted study association scores for the testosterone/LH ratio were −0.25 (95% CI: −1.17, 0.68) and −0.21 (95% CI: −1.20, 0.79) in unadjusted and fully adjusted analysis, respectively. When grouping the phthalates, LMW phthalates had a phthalate association score of −0.10, whereas it was −0.29 for HMW phthalates. A sensitivity analysis indicated study and phthalate association scores for LH in these six studies, which also reported effects on testosterone, were similar to the scores in the full dataset on LH (TableS10). The results for INSL3 were only reported in four of the studies, with an unadjusted study association score of −0.13 (95% CI: −1.48, 1.23) and −0.08 (95% CI: −1.35, 1.19) in fully adjusted analysis. Stratification into phthalate type showed a weighted association score of −0.32 for exposure to LMW and 0.11 for HMW phthalates.

This review investigates the possible effect of phthalate exposures in early life on the foetal Leydig cells measured by hormone levels and hormone level ratios. Overall, the studies show increased levels of LH in subjects with high levels of phthalate exposure. Similar association scores were obtained in unadjusted analyses and statistics adjusted for number of tested phthalates and subjects. In addition, both study and phthalate association scores showed the same effect, indicating that the positive association between phthalate exposure and LH levels is not driven by a small subset of studies with high impact on central tendency of the association.

Interestingly, our results demonstrate that testosterone levels are not affected by exposure to phthalate. Testosterone is secreted by Leydig cells in response to stimulation by LH, secreted from the anterior pituitary gland. Testosterone works in a negative feedback loop on the secretion of GnRH from the hypothalamus, therefore indirectly affecting the LH secretion (Figure1). An increase in LH with no change in testosterone suggests that a larger LH signal is necessary to produce the same amount of testosterone. The equivocal results on testosterone, together with increased LH signaling, can indicate a reduced Leydig cell function, which might be compensated for by increased LH stimuli, which is supported by our findings of a negative association in the LH/testosterone ratio. A larger or sustained LH stimulus may stress Leydig cells and result in a progression towards a wearing out of the Leydig cell function in adulthood, affecting future fertility. The statistically significant positive association of LH is primarily found for outcome measurement in adolescent sons. This may be explained by the fact that testosterone levels varies in different phases of life and a Leydig cell defect might only show when testosterone production is high in teenage and adulthood. This hypothesis implies that it should be possible to see an effect during mini‐puberty; however, it is possible that the mini‐puberty is missed when sampling the infant population, highlighting the relevancy of adjusting for age when measuring hormones in infancy [15].

We included results on INSL3 in the review as an indicator of Leydig cell function. However, only four studies have results on INSL3 and with overall negative association scores (study and phthalate association scores of −0.08 and −0.29, respectively, in models adjusted for both phthalates and number of subjects). This indicates that the negative effect is found in the studies with a higher statistical power, despite low number of studies. Decreased INSL3 levels in amniotic fluid [24,25] suggest that the effect on Leydig cells happens early in gestation, which may later affect the LH‐induced hormone production. INSL3 and testosterone are both important hormones involved in the testicular descent during the foetal period, and a decrease in either could potentially lead to cryptorchidism, which is also associated with decreased semen quality [32]. Therefore, a decrease in either INSL3 or testosterone production in Leydig cells can potentially affect the fertility later in life.

The studies in the present review have typically assessed exposure to phthalates and hormones in just one sample. Although a single urine sample is considered to be a reliable way of measuring the general phthalate exposure in the individual [33], dilution correction is necessary, and this can be done by various methods: creatinine, osmolarity or specific gravity. During pregnancy, the glomerular filtration rate increases, which may influence the excretion of metabolites and give different results depending on the method of dilution correction [34]. Phthalate exposure is influenced by diet, especially the HMW phthalates, with a peak in metabolite concentration in serum and urine after only 2–4 h after a meal [35,36]. Measurements of hormones can be complicated by circadian rhythm [37], and sampling biomarkers such as blood, urine or saliva is a proxy measure of the level in the testes [3]. Poor correlations have been found between hormones in maternal serum and umbilical cord blood samples, although maternal hormones do cross the placenta to the foetus [38]. This way, maternally produced testosterone might mask a decreased production of testosterone by Leydig cells.

Most of the included studies have measured exposure to phthalates in maternal urine (8 studies) or serum (4 studies). All out of 4 studies, which used maternal serum to measure exposure, found at least one significant result and a total of 13 statistically significant results. For maternal urine as exposure medium, only 3 out of 8 studies found a statistically significant result, with a total of 6 statistically significant results (including 2 equivocal results). This is interesting because urine is generally considered to be the preferred medium for measuring phthalate exposure [8], but phthalate concentration in urine does not seem to correlate with the hormonal outcomes.

Humans are exposed to a range of xenobiotics [8], and cocktail effects of EDCs—additive or synergistic—makes it challenging to determine cause–effect associations for specific compounds such as phthalates [39]. Another group of EDCs with effect on the spermatogenesis and HPG axis is the oestrogenic bisphenols, which are also used as plasticizers with dietary, inhalation and dermal exposure [40]. The effects in adulthood may also be a result of many years of continuous exposure to phthalates and other EDCs and not only the in utero exposure.

We have assessed human studies with data on male offspring while excluding in vitro studies and, animal studies, eliminating differences between sex and species. Although both animal and in vitro studies have the benefit of precise exposure levels, the exposures are often many orders of magnitude above the levels seen in epidemiological studies. Additionally, the effects of phthalates on Leydig cells are found to have species differences [41]. In vitro experiments typically show only acute effects, although interactions between different cells can be mimicked by co‐culture experiments in advanced cell culture models. Long‐term effects and interactions between different cell types are very important when studying EDCs, and these effects can also be very species specific.

Phthalates have been subject to a number of regulations in the EU since 1999 where a temporary ban on specific phthalates was implemented in toys for children and other childcare products [42]. The ban was made permanent in 2007, and other restrictions have since been implemented in products such as mattresses, shoes, paper and clothing (year 2020). Seven of the studies included are from countries of the EU, and approximately half have measured phthalate exposure before year 2002. With regulations in place, one might hope the future exposure is limited, although banned compounds are replaced with phthalate substitutes that are less investigated. Moreover, bans do not remove durable items such as shoes, clothing and furniture, and they might be passed on through donation, thrift stores, etc. Recycling of plastics has also been shown as a contamination source of EDCs [43]. Hopefully, the exposure to EDCs will decrease as the awareness of these problematic substances causes regulations on the production and use of these in consumer goods, but in the meantime, more research is needed to support the legislators in how to best protect the reproductive capacity of future generations.

This systematic review has highlighted an association between foetal phthalate exposure and an increase in LH concentration (statistically significant), decreased testosterone/LH ratio (between‐study heterogeneity), largely null results for testosterone and mixed results for INSL3. Taken together, we have shown that the endocrine disruption by phthalates should be investigated by measuring LH levels and the testosterone/LH ratio. Our review suggests foetal and early life phthalate exposure may alter Leydig cell function and thereby spermatogenesis in adulthood and ultimately contribute to the global decline in semen quality.