Tafel analysis is
widely used to characterize electrode kinetics.
The technique has found use in electrochemistry, catalysis, materials,
and corrosion research. Accurate Tafel analysis is especially critical
in comparison of electrocatalysts. However, classical Tafel analysis
(CTA) relies on the user’s subjective selection of a linear
range in the Tafel plot; dependent on linear regression of the user-selected
range, kinetic parameters can vary by orders of magnitude. As use
of CTA in the literature grows, a need is identified for more reliable,
user-independent Tafel analysis. Here, Taffit, an algorithm constructed
in the widely available Microsoft Excel, is presented. Taffit generates
a Tafel plot from linear sweep voltammetric data and determines the
exchange current densityj0, charge transfer
coefficient α, and Tafel slopes by closest statistical fit.
Comparisons between Taffit and CTA are made for the hydrogen evolution
reaction (HER, 2H++ 2e⇌ H2) on glassy carbon (GC) and platinum electrodes. Taffit finds
logj0values of −7.2 and −3.9
for GC and Pt under H2at pH 0, as measured without resistive
compensation. This is the first report ofj0for HER on GC. Because algorithmic fitting in the low overpotential
region uses both cathodic and anodic branches of the Tafel plot, Taffit
has greater precision than CTA. Agreement is also shown between literature
values reported by CTA and those obtained by Taffit for HER on metal
phosphide and selenide electrocatalysts. The Taffit algorithm substantially
reduces subjectivity to improve the accuracy and precision of Tafel
analysis.

Tafel analysis is a technique to measure
and characterize interfacial
heterogeneous electron transfer rates. Used in many fields, including
electrochemistry, catalysis, materials science, and corrosion, competent
Tafel analysis is especially critical for comparing different electrocatalysts.
Tafel analysis utilizes a log plot of current density, logjversus the electrode potential applied relative to the
equilibrium potential, the overpotential η. At its simplest,
a linear region is identified, and kinetic parameters are extracted
from the slope (charge transfer coefficient α) and intercept
(exchange current densityj0) over the
selected region. Extensions of Tafel theory model effects of surface
coverage, multistep mechanisms, and competing reactions.−Though advanced models and analysis tools are presented in the literature,
many researchers employ what is here designated as classical Tafel
analysis (CTA). This method is mathematically simple and approachable
to scientists with varied backgrounds, but fundamentally and mathematically,
CTA is subject to constraints that are not always recognized. Without
careful attention to the data analysis, CTA can be compromised by
user bias that erroneously overestimates electrocatalytic rates.

The challenges of well-deployed CTA are several. In part, CTA is
limited by the required user identification of a linear region for
the regression and analysis.−CTA is also limited by fundamental
theory and mathematical approximations.

CTA is based on the Butler–Volmer equation for faradaic
current measured without mass transport limitations. Faradaic current
measures only interfacial electron transfer flux, independent of nonfaradaic
charging currents and voltage drops due to uncompensated solution
resistance. CTA is limited at more extreme overpotentials, where mass
transport rates increase. As η approaches zero, CTA is limited
by mathematical approximations needed to establish the linearized
rate expression of CTA. The linearizations require that the current
is set solely by either the oxidation or the reduction. CTA cannot
be applied about the minimum logjwhere η
→ 0. Mass transport and only either the reduction or the oxidation
limit the number of digitized data points available for valid CTA,
especially at high electron transfer rates. In CTA, selection of the
linear region is constrained by fundamental, mathematical, and digitization
constraints. Furthermore, multiple values for kinetic parameters (e.g.,j0, α, and Tafel slopes) can be found within
regions deemed acceptable within the Butler–Volmer (BV) framework.
More sophisticated constraints on CTA for determining Tafel slopes
are reported. Constraints and variation
in CTA lower measurement confidence and diminish the quality of rate
parameters reported in the literature.

This work presents a more accessible Tafel analysis tool,
Taffit,
for the automatic fitting of Tafel plots based on the underlying electron
transfer theory. Taffit overcomes several limitations inherent to
CTA. Taffit is built in the ubiquitous Microsoft Excel and is designed
for use by both novices and experts in fundamental Tafel analysis.
Taffit is designed as a replacement for CTA that eliminates subjective
identification of a linear region. Like CTA, Taffit does not apply
where mass transport impacts current. Unlike CTA and all Tafel analyses,
Taffit applies simultaneously to both the anodic and cathodic branches
of the Tafel plot. This increases the number of available data points
and avoids the mathematical constraints of the CTA linearization.
Taffit applies for concurrent oxidation and reduction currents. Statistics
for nonlinear regression identify the fit to available data. Taffit
provides the best statistical fit to logj0versus η data; Taffit does not relieve the user from evaluating
the significance of the reported parameters. To demonstrate Taffit,
comparisons are provided between Taffit and CTA for both experimental
and literature data.

CTA is
fundamentally an extension
of BV kinetics. BV kinetics apply where
faradaic current is not limited by mass transport. Consider annelectron transfer reaction between species O and R, wherezis the charge.

The forward and backward rates
of reaction are defined by rate constantskfandkb. At an electrode,kfandkb(cm/s) are potential
dependent. Current densityj(A/cm2) is
proportional to the net reaction rate. The experimentally measuredjis defined by the difference in the current (flux) of
the forwardjfand backwardjbreactions.

At equilibrium, no net current
flowsj= 0, and currentsjfandjbare equal to the exchange
current densityj0. A standard rate of
heterogeneous electron transfer,j0,is
measured at equilibrium. Polarization of the electrode can drive eitherjforjb. For a reduction,
polarization of the electrode negative of the equilibrium potentialEeqfavorsjf, whereas
positive polarization favors oxidation andjb. Overpotential η defines the electrical polarization
relative toEeq.

Eis the
applied electrode potential. AtE=Eeq, η = 0,j= 0, andj0is measured.j0is related
to the standard heterogeneous rate constantk0, which is measured atEequal to the standard
potentialE0. Bothj0andk0are rate constants that
characterize the interfacial electron transfer rate.

The relationship
betweenjand η is described by the current–potential
equation.

CO(0,η) andCR(0,η)
are the concentrations of the oxidized and reduced species immediately
at the electrode surface (x= 0) at a given η.
The concentrations ofOzandRz–nin the bulk areCOandCR. All concentrations are in mol
cm–3. Typically,n= 1. Charge
transfer coefficient α is a dimensionless parameter that characterizes
the symmetry of the energy barrier in the transition state for electron
transfer; α partitions the electrical activation energy between
the reduction and oxidation. α is constrained to 0 ≤
α ≤ 1. Tafel slopes are inversely dependent onnα.Fis the Faraday constant;Ris the molar gas constant; andTis the
system temperature (K). Asf=F/RT, at 298.16 K,f= 38.92 V–1.

At equilibrium where η = 0 or under
heavy convection whereCO(0, η)
=COandCR(0, η) =CR,eqsimplifies toeq.

Eqapplies to reaction  under constraints of only faradaic current, no mass
transport effects,
no chemical reactions, all chemical species and electrode materials
stable, and electrode surface area known. It is noted that a single
transfer coefficient α characterizes the cathodic and anodic
reactions, as defined ineq.

Eqis
the most common
form of the BV equation and is the basis for all Tafel analyses. Experimentally,
slow polarization of the electrode yields a Tafel plot of logjversus η, as illustrated inFigure. At sufficiently extreme η, one of
the BV terms dominates, and the other becomes negligible. For a cathodic
segment where η is sufficiently negative thatjf≫jb,eqsimplifies to the linearized Tafel
form for the cathodic branch as shown ineq. The constraints to establish the linearization
restrict applicability of CTA; the nonlinear regression of Taffit
is not subject to linearization constraints of CTA.

Historically, this arithmetic
simplification enabled the linear graphical analysis of rate data
by CTA. Linear regression at sufficiently negative η yields
a slope −αnf/2.303 that determines α
and an intercept of logj0. At 298.16
K, the cathodic slope is −αn[59.16 mV]−1. The steeper the magnitude of the slope, the faster
the current density changes with η and the higher the αn. The intercept at η = 0 is logj0that yieldsj0, and ifE0,Eeq, andC* are known,k0is found. Under BV conditions ofeq, both branches of a Tafel plot yield the
samej0and α.

Theoretical representation
of Tafel data (black) according to the
BV equation and application of CTA linear regression (red) to isolate
kinetic parameters. Relevant equations are displayed for the slopes
and intercepts of both branches wherej0is 10–5A cm–2and α is
0.5. Transfer coefficient α, as shown, is the same for both
branches.n= 1. Within the BV model, logj0is the common intercept of both branches at
η = 0. Tafel slopes are reported as reciprocal slopes. The Tafel
slope for the cathodic branch where η < 0 is −2.303­[nfα]−1(mV/decade).

Tafel slopes are often used to report the sensitivity of
logjto decade changes in η. For η in
mV, the cathodic
Tafel slope is −2.303­(αnf)−1(mV/decade), the reciprocal of the slope ineq. At 298.16 K, this value is 59.16­(αn)−1(mV/decade). Tafel slopes report
the energy (in mV) required to increase the reaction rate by an order
of magnitude. Lower Tafel slopes report faster interfacial kinetics.

However, BV kinetics are subject to fundamental constraints on
mass transport and η, and CTA is further subject to arithmetic
constraints of linearization.Eqis fundamentally specified with no mass transport components
toj. This sets an upper limit on |η|.Eqis fundamentally specified
where |η| is sufficiently small that surface concentrations
are unperturbed from bulk concentrations. These constraints are inherent
to all Tafel analyses. But,eqfor CTA is further arithmetically constrained so that |η|
is large enough thatjis limited by onlyjf(reduction) orjb(oxidation). For slow electron transfer ratej0, these conditions are readily met. Wherej0is fast, satisfying the constraints on |η| to
allow effective CTA is less certain. For fastj0, the constraints for CTA may not be met or the number of
CTA valid data points may be very few. The quality of the data fit
by CTA may be compromised, as choice of regression range will substantially
impact values found for α andj0. For fastj0, CTA may not be valid.

As there is no universally held protocol for choice of a linear
regression region, CTA is subject to uncertainty and user bias. Users
may choose one arbitrary η region for all analyses that may
not satisfy the constraints on |η|. Even within an acceptable
|η| region, substantial variation in α andj0may result based on choice of CTA linear range. If
two different regressions are deemed valid, a researcher is left with
a choice as to optimal determination of rate parameters. This introduces
variations between researchers. Because parameters detemined by CTA
varies with researcher's choice of a linear region, quality and
confidence
in kinetic parameters determined by CTA is diminished. Comparisons
of electrocatalysts are compromised.

Taffit has advantages over
CTA. Constraints on mass transport and
surface concentrations remain, as in all Tafel analyses. Mass transport
sets the upper limit on |η|. However, Taffit fits both branches
of the Tafel plot, according toeq. Taffit relaxes constraints as η → 0
to yieldj0and a single α. The
Taffit algorithm is implemented in Excel to improve precision and
accuracy of determined kinetic parameters. Taffit substantially suppresses
user bias.

An operational schematic
for the design of Taffit is shown inFigure. Taffit imports,
processes, and fits experimental data toeq. This yieldsj0, α, and Tafel slopes while eliminating a user-selected linear
range. Taffit imports a single LSV data file (currentivsE), or alternatively, an existing Tafel plot
file (logjversus η). Either .txt and .csv
files with different data structures, delimiters, and header information
can be imported. Taffit converts data into Tafel form and isolates
values within ηwin, a user defined window around
η = 0. For example, ηwin= 60 mV fits data
± 30 mV of η = 0. ηwinandnare the only user-defined parameters in Taffit. Most typically,n= 1 and 20 ≲ ηwin≲ 180
mV. Implementation of the Taffit tool is detailed in theSupporting Information. The Excel macro file
Taffit.xlsm and an example text data file are also in SI.

Flowchart of
Taffit design and operation. Uncolored boxes represent
operational steps, and diamond boxes represent conditional statements.
The orange box represents initial inputs to the function, and the
green box represents the function completion. Blue and gold boxes
represent the entry points for the function.

Tafel data isolated by ηwinundergo nonlinear
regression based oneq. Fit quality is assessed as the standard error of the estimate σ.

jexpis the experimentally measured current andjBVis the current fit toeqat the same overpotential.Nis the
total number of data points being fit.

The Solver tool in Excel
is called to find the conditions of the
lowest σ and reports thej0, α,
and equivalent Tafel slopes of closest fit. Best fits minimize σ,
where σ ≲ 0.1 characterizes a sufficient fit within Taffit.
Slightly higher values of σ may be adequate, although the fit
is of lower statistical quality. For σ ≫ 0.1, the plot
of the fit overlaid on the experimental will be obviously incorrect.
Users are provided results, graphical data, and macro buttons to rerun
the analysis (Figure).

Example of the Taffit fitting results and kinetic parameters. Shown
are HER Tafel data for 0.45 cm2glassy carbon at 5 mV s–1in H2sparged and stirred 0.5 M H2SO4. The blue button isolates data again and is
used for changing the fitting window ηfit. The gold
button simply runs Solver again on the ηwinisolated
data.

Two different Solver optimization
algorithms can be called in Taffit.
The Evolutionary solving method is best suited for Tafel data and
can obtain results in as little as ten seconds. This is the fast Fit
Type. The GRG Nonlinear method is the slow Fit Type but can be used
to more confidently locate the values for the greatest optimization.
Installation and operational guides, VBA (Visual Basic) code, and
additional instructions are available in theSupporting Information.

Taffit is designed to mitigate subjectivity
in CTA. The tool removes
linear regression over an ill-defined range selected by the user.
Constraints on small η ranges are removed to include more data
as η → 0. As in all Tafel analyses, Taffit does not account
for mass transport observed at higher currents and so remains limited
at high |η| ranges, where mass transport limits faradaic current.
Taffit applies to faradaic current of the BV equation.iRcorrected data are especially important for highj0.The Taffit tool fits data over a wider overpotential
range and utilizes more data from the Tafel plot than CTA.

There are limitations
inherent to all Tafel analyses, as Tafel
analysis is based on the BV equation. The BV equation,eqis derived under specific constraints
common to all Tafel analyses. CTA and Taffit are Tafel analyses.
The linearization of CTA imposes further constraints as η →
0. Taffit relaxes the CTA constraints by nonlinear regressions about
η → 0. Here, the limitations of Tafel analyses, Taffit
advantages, and caveats and notes for Taffit application are outlined.

The constraints embedded
in Tafel analysis arise through the assumption used to derive the
BV equation. Tafel analysis applies to faradaic current only. Correction
for uncompensated solution resistance is especially important where
electron transfer is fast, logj0≳
−4. In the simplification of the current potential equation
(eq) to the BV equation
(eq), concentrations
at the electrode surface are set to bulk concentrations. This requires
that there is no mass transport limitation to the current, which sets
an upper limit on |η|. At sufficiently extreme overpotentials,
electron transfer rates increase to become competitive with mass transport
rates; under these conditions, faradaic current is limited by both
mass transport and electron transfer. Tafel analysis is not applicable
at these extremes of overpotentials.

In the form ofeq, Tafel analysis requires
no chemical reactions. The concentrations of Ozand Rz–nare unchanged at overpotentials valid for Tafel analysis. The electrode
and electrocatalyst are chemically and electrochemically stable.Eqdoes not account for surface
coverage or adsorption of the redox species or oxide layers on the
electrode and electrocatalyst. Tafel analysis does not include multistep
reactions beyond simultaneous electron transfers wheren> 1.

Eqis
characterized
by a single value of logj0and one value
for α. These values are common to both the cathodic and anodic
branches of the Tafel plot.

Tafel analysis characterizes the
electron transfer and does not
differentiate between an electrode and an electrocatalysts. However,
the surface area of the electrode and electrocatalyst are needed to
evaluate the current density and soj0. For a flat electrode or a monolayer of finely divided catalyst
on the electrode, the electrochemical surface area (ECSA) is easily
evaluated. Where the electrocatalyst is a particulate, the correct
ECSA is critical to determination ofj0. If ECSA is underestimated,j0is overestimated.
In comparison of different electrocatalysts, well determinedj0is essential.

CTA and Taffit are both
Tafel analyses constrained by the assumptions
used to derive the BV equation. Tafel analysis excludes mass transport
limitations to the faradaic current, which sets an upper limit on
|η|. CTA is further constrained as η → 0 because
the linearization restricts the analysis to only the cathodic or anodic
branch of the Tafel plot. In CTA, a lower limit, |η| is set
algebraically. Linear ranges selected by the user in CTA are subject
to user bias. Wherej0is fast, a valid
range of overpotential may not be accessible or the number of valid
data points may be too few to allow competent evaluation ofj0.

Taffit,
like all Tafel
analyses (eq), does
not include mass transport limitations, which sets an upper limit
on |η|. Taffit has advantages over CTA as Taffit exploits data
about η = 0. Whereas CTA is limited by constraints for linear
regression, Taffit uses nonlinear regression to fit both branches
of the Tafel plot, including data about zero overpotential. Taffit
statistically vets the quality of the fit through the standard error
σ. Minimized σ identifies the best fit of the data.

Advantages of Taffit over CTA are several. User bias of CTA associated
with selecting a linear region is eliminated. Taffit is not subject
to a lower limit on |η|, so more data points are available to
fit of the data with improved statistics. Taffit allows assessment
of fastj0where CTA may fail.

Taffit is
subject to all the limitations for Tafel analyses, as outlined above.
Two main constraints are that |η| is limited to prevent mass
transport effects and that the redox species, the electrode, and any
electrocatalyst are chemically stable.

Taffit provides best
fit of logjversus η to yield a single logj0from the intercept, and a common α from
the slopes. Tafel slopes derive α. Taffit does not remove the
user’s responsibility to critically evaluate the parameters
output by Taffit. For example, if the electrocatalyst or electrode
undergoes chemical change or forms an oxide layer, Taffit will provide
a statistically appropriate fit to the data, but interpretation of
the mechanism and chemistry will fail.

Taffit does not
address multistep mechanisms that include adsorption and chemical
steps. Taffit does allow serial electron transfer wheren> 1, consistent witheq. If Taffit returns α > 1 when run withn=
1, then tryn= 2. This is the only adaptation for
more complex reactions. For more complex mechanisms, such as oxygen
reduction (ORR) and oxygen evolution (OER) reactions, Taffit output
should be evaluated cautiously. Where the first or second electron
transfer is rate determining and other constraints including no chemical
steps are met, Taffit may apply to complex reaction sequences. If
conditions are not met for Taffit, Taffit output parameters are statistically
relevant, but physical interpretation of the results is subject to
further analysis in light of the mechanism(s).

An appropriate
measurement protocol is to measure the open circuit potential (OCP),
the equilibrium potential against which η is measured (eq). For a reduction such
as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), undertake a slow scan rate
LSV experiment scanning potential from +20 to −100 mV relative
to OCP. Collect current relative to η. Best practice is to have
both the oxidized and reduced forms in the electrolyte to establishEeq. For HER, this would be H+and
saturated H2. In the same solution, either measure the
uncompensated resistance by a small (50 mV) step in the nonfaradaic
region or use resistance compensation available on the potentiostat.

Resistance compensation is especially important where logj0≲ −4. At highj0, a few ohms of uncompensated resistance will underestimatej0. For lowj0, resistance
compensation is less critical. For measurements at small electrodes,
total current is lower and correction for solution resistance are
diminished. Details for correcting the total measured current to the
faradaic current using measured solution resistance are available
in Chapter 6 ofElectrochemical Methods. Where nonfaradaic resistance and capacitance
are measured, the charging current measured as capacitance evaluates
ECSA well, Chapter 1 ofElectrochemical Methods. ECSA is critical in evaluating particulate electrocatalyst.

Good measurement
of ECSA is critical to correct determination ofj0. Current densityjis found by normalizing
by ECSA. For particulate electrocatalysts, the ECSA can be substantially
greater than the geometric area of the electrode. Where ECSA is underestimated,j0and efficacy of the electrocatalyst are overestimated.
Taffit does not determine ECSA.

Mass transport rate increases
with scan rate. For fast electron transfer rates, an increase invmay better resolvej0. However,
as v increases, current increases, and adequate resistance compensation
is critical.

Tafel slopes and
the transfer coefficient
α are inversely related; Tafel slope for the cathodic branch
is −2.303­[nfα]−1(mV/decade).Eqconstrainsnα to between 0 and 1. If Taffit run withn= 1 returns α > 1, rerun Taffit withn=
2. If Taffit yields α of 1 or 0, or logj0equal to the maximum experimental logj,
or σ ≫ 0.1, the fit is likely not valid and Taffit should
be rerun with different constraints and a Fit Type of slow to determine
if a better fit is found. Defined ineq, α is constrained as 0 ≲ α ≲
1. If on visual inspection, the Tafel plot is fairly symmetric, an
α of about 0.5 ± 0.2 is expected; if the plot is asymmetric,
more extreme α is expected. Where the Tafel plot is symmetric
and logj0≲−4, the analysis
is typically straightforward; otherwise, attention to the mechanistic
interpretation of the fit is needed.

σ is
a statistical characterization of the quality of the fit to the data.
In general, σ ≲ 0.1 is taken as a good fit. Similar values
of σ across several ηwinare anticipated for
well fit data. Slightly higher σ values may mark an adequate
fit to the data, but the fit warrants review. Visual inspection of
the fit on the experimental Tafel plot may be useful. In cases of
valid but slightly higher σ, CTA is unlikely to yield well determined
kinetic parameters. As the number of samplesNincreases
(eq), σ tends
to decrease.Ntends to increase with wider ηwin, but ηwinis capped to avoid mass transport
effects.

If ηwinis well selected, then variation
in logj0and α with ηwinshould be minimal.
Restrict η to avoid mass transport effects captured in wider
ηwin. Mass transport impacts are more readily observed
with wider ηwin. Common choices for ηwinare between 30 and 180 mV.

Taffit is vetted against experimental data for HER
(2H++ 2e⇌H2) on glassy
carbon (GC),
platinum, and nickel electrodes and literature data for several metal
phosphide and selenide electrocatalysts.

Outcomes for Taffit
and CTA are compared. Taffit requires the user
to input ηwin. ηwinselects the
potential window over which Taffit optimizes fit toeq, where ηwinincludes
η = 0. Unlike CTA, Taffit has no lower boundary for |η|.
The upper limit on ηwinis set by the onset of mass
transport impacts on j, consistent with exclusion of mass transport
in all Tafel analyses (eq). To vet Taffit, a range of ηwinvalues were evaluated.
ηCTAidentifies the potential window over which the
data are fit by CTA. Taffit is also benchmarked against literature
data that were rigorously collected with CTA.

Tafel
plots for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER, 2H++ 2e⇌ H2) were collected experimentally
for precision comparisons. Experiments were conducted in a H2-sparged and stirred 0.5 M H2SO4solution.
Electrode potential was swept slowly in linear sweep voltammetry,
LSV, on a BASi potentiostat from positive of the open circuit potential
(OCP) through OCP and to negative of OCP. OCP, measured at equilibrium
before the LSV, is the equilibrium potentialEeq. Data are not corrected for nonfaradaic resistance (iR) drop. The three-electrode setup consisted of a 0.45
cm2Pine Instruments GC or platinum working electrode,
a CHI saturated calomel reference electrode, and a graphite rod counter
electrode. For the single measurement of HER on nickel, a 0.07 cm2BASi nickel electrode is used. Working electrodes were polished
in alumina slurries of successively finer grit (1, 0.3, and 0.05 μm)
and thoroughly rinsed prior to analysis.

Effects of ηwinand ηCTAanalysis windows were compared
for the same set of Tafel plots. Regression was performed for the
cathodic branch in a rolling ηCTAwindow, and Taffit
analyses were performed using increasing ηwinvalues.
The resulting kinetic parameters and their relative standard deviations
were compared.

Literature
Tafel data were
also used to demonstrate Taffit. Representative Tafel plots or LSVs
were used for data analysis, where available. Materials science research
typically produces Tafel plot segments; these are not full Tafel plots.
Tafel segment plots contain only linear segments of the Tafel plots.
Available regions were fit using Taffit and the resulting kinetic
parameters; commonly, Tafel slopes were compared.

Taffit is first applied to experimental data collected for this
study. The purpose is to demonstrate that Taffit increases precision
and decreases user bias. Measurements are made for HER at electrodes
with fast and slow kinetics. Taffit is also used to fit Tafel data
available in the literature. Tafel slope comparisons are used for
validation for Taffit. A first report of kinetic parameters for HER
on glassy carbon is made.

Two electrode
materials, Pt and
GC, were chosen for comparing algorithmic Taffit and classical CTA
analyses. Pt and GC electrodes present kinetic extremes for HER catalysis.
SeeFigure. The overpotential
needed to drive HER on Pt is minimal. Reductive overpotentials of
no more than a few tens of millivolts result in HER current onset.
Conversely, overpotentials in excess of −0.9 V are required
to drive HER on GC. Precision for Taffit and CTA is compared for the
two extreme cases.

Representative LSV curves for HER on Pt (red) and GC (green)
disk
electrodes in H2sparged and stirred 0.5 M H2SO4, collected at 100 mV/s. The thermodynamic HER redox
potential (dashed gray line) is included for reference.

To avoid user bias, direct comparison of experimental kinetic
parameters
from Taffit and CTA is not appropriate. As choice of regression region
can significantly impact kinetic parameters determined by CTA, user
bias toward agreement between Taffit and CTA is introduced. To avoid
bias, comparisons of the precision are more appropriate. Averages
and standard deviations are reported.

Figureshows Taffit and
CTA results for a single representative
Pt scan. HER kinetics on Pt are fast, and deviations from BV are expected
to onset at low |η| as mass transport and electron transfer
rates both limitj. InFiguretop, Taffit yields a narrow range of logj0with ηwinvalues of 60, 120,
and 240 mV, with slightly higher logj0with wider ηwin, as expected as mass transport
contributions toj. Impacts of ηwinon measured logj0are not substantial,
as show inFigure. InFigurebottom,
CTA for HER yields more substantial deviations in slope as the user
selected linear regression range ηCTAchanges. No valid overpotential window ηCTAis
reached at Pt because well before |η| required forjf≫jbis reached,
sufficient H2is generated to violate constraints onC(0, η) equal toC*. Choice of ηCTAhas a profound effect on evaluation of logj0from the intercept and α from the slope. No CTA
regression produces a commonj0with the
anodic branch. This illustrates impacts of user bias in CTA.

Representative
Tafel data (black lines) for HER on 0.45 cm2Pt in H2sparged and stirred 0.5 M H2SO4recorded
withoutiRcompensation
at 5 mV s–2. Top: Algorithmic, Taffits (colored
circles) across different fitting windows, ηwin.
Shown are fits in 60 (red), 120 (green), and 240 mV (yellow) windows
around η = 0 (dashed line). Bottom: Select linear regressions
(colored lines) for the same Pt Tafel plot. Shown are linear regressions
for the anodic segment (red) as well as cathodic regressions (blue,
green, and yellow) for different ηCTA. CTA slopes
identify different values of α and the intercepts identify different
values of logj0.

The advantages of Taffit are most apparent in cases of fast kinetics,
as on Pt. Data analysis for HER on Pt is shown inTablefor Taffit and CTA. Although
still restricted by BV mass transport constraints, variation from
subjectivity in η is markedly lower for Taffit. From the Table,
the relative standard deviation RSD forj0is 65% for CTA and 13% for Taffit. The precision of logj0is markedly higher for Taffit.

The commonly
reported literature logj0value for HER
on Pt is −3. The
experimental data reported here are not corrected for the uncompensated
resistance. For high electron transfer rates, a few ohms of uncompensated
solution resistance readily deppresses the experimentally determinedj0.,Wherej0is low, resistance to charge transfer is larger and
the uncompensated resistance has relatively less or negligible impact
on measuredj0.

An important parameter
when using Taffit to evaluate α isn, the number
of electrons. It is typically assumed thatn= 1
for electron transfer reactions. However,n= 2
is common for HER on Pt in water.n= 2 is not uncommon
for fast reactions where one electron transfer
is fast, and the other is slow. For HER on Pt, the apparentnis a simultaneous two-electron transfer. Withn= 1, Taffit yields a transfer coefficient of 1.97, which
is outside the range between 0 and 1 expected for partition of the
free energy of activation in the transition state. Taffit is run again
to evaluaten= 2. Forn= 2, the
precision in α and the corresponding Tafel slope is 33% for
CTA and 9% with Taffit. In the table, α values of 0.3 and 0.83
are reported for CTA and Taffit. In Taffit, the common α value
leads to (1 – α) = 0.17 for the anodic branch, consistent
with greater sensitivity to η for HER than the hydrogen oxidation
reaction (HOR).

On Pt forn= 2, the expected
HER Tafel slope
is 30 mV/dec, consistent with fast electron transfer. For HER at Pt
microelectrodes and detailed data analysis, a Tafel slope of 30 mV/decade
is reported in 1 M HClO4. Here,
Taffit yields −(36 ± 3) mV/decade. As no valid region
exists for CTA, the Tafel slope of −(100 ± 30) mV/decade
is not applicable. Tafel slope of 30 mV/dec identifies Volmer Tafel
kinetics on Pt. In Volmer Tafel kinetics,
two H+ions are reduced to H•adsorbed
on Pt to rapidly yield H2. Taffit exploits data in the
low |η| range to efficiently evaluate kinetic parameters ofj0, α, and Tafel slope with good precision.
Application of Taffit to HER on Pt statistically validates the fit
of logjversus η, but the physical significance
of the determined parameters relies on assessing the HER mechanism
specific to Pt.

GC is a poor
electrocatalyst for
HER. Slow kinetics for HER on GC are apparent in Tafel plots with
lower logj. CTA is more readily applied with slower
interfacial kinetics than for fast kinetics. CTA and Taffit results
are presented inFigure. In CTA where multiple ηCTAranges
are valid, variation in logj0and α
is still observed based on the user choice of the linear region. No
common logj0and α are identified for the two branches by CTA. Only minor
variation with ηwinis noted for Taffit as ηwinincreases. Taffit yields common logj0and α.

Representative Tafel plot for HER on 0.45 cm2GC in
H2sparged and stirred 0.5 M H2SO4, measured withoutiRcompensation at 5 mV s–1. Top: Algorithmic Taffit (colored circles) across
different fitting windows. Shown are fits in 60 (pink), 120 (green),
and 240 mV (yellow) windows around η = 0 (dashed line). Bottom:
Select linear regressions (colored lines) for the same Tafel plot.
Shown are linear regressions for the anodic segment (pink) as well
as cathodic regressions (blue, green, and yellow). Common logj0and α are not found by CTA.

Data analysis for HER on GC is summarized inTable, wheren=
1. Precision is higher on GC than on Pt because logj0is lower on GC. For lowerj0, relative impacts of uncompensated resistance
on reported parameters are lesser. Precision forj0, α, logj0, and Tafel
slope is higher for Taffit. The data are better fit by Taffit than
CTA. Comparable logj0andj0values are found for the two methods. However, α
values and Tafel slopes differ substantially. The Tafel slope determined
by Taffit is closer to expected HER benchmarks with lower RSD. Mechanisms
are nominally classified as Tafel, Heyrovsky, and Volmer steps based
on Tafel slopes of 30, 40, and 120 mV/dec. An HER Tafel slope of −170 mV/dec is nominally consistent
with Volmer kinetics, perhaps impacted by the surface coverage. In
Volmer kinetics, the rate-determining step is a single electron transfer
from an electrode atom to protons to form adsorbed H•.

Rates of HER on nickel are intermediate
between Pt and GC. A screenshot of Taffit for H2sparged
0.5 M H2SO4at a 0.07 cm2nickel
electrode is shown inFigure. The equilibrium potentialEeqwas measured. The fitting window, ηwin= 90 mV.
Values were invariant for ηwinbetween 20 and 120
mV for the single replicate electrode. Taffit yields logj0= −4.6; the error of estimate, σ = 0.017,
which is adequate. Taffit yieldsj0about
5-fold higher than reported by Trasatti. Given the single replicate and limited precision of the electrode
area, logj0values are not dissimilar.
From Taffit, the transfer coefficient α = 0.24 forn= 1, consistent with asymmetric partition of energy in the transition
state for HER. This is reflected in the distinct cathodic and anodic
Tafel slopes of −243 and 78 mV/dec. Identification of the linear
range for CTA is difficult because logj0is moderately high, and Tafel slopes on approach to minimum η
are steep.

Screenshot of Taffit for HER on 0.07 cm2Ni electrode
in H2sparged and stirred 0.5 M H2SO4, measured withoutiRcompensation at 1 mV s–1. Potential range for LSV is +20 mV to −100
mV relative to the open circuit potential (OCP). Taffit (red) overlays
the experimental data presented as a Tafel plot. The fit type was
slow over ηwin= 90 mV. logj0= −4.6. Similar results were found for other fit types
and ηwinranges.

In summary, data and precision analyses are shown inTablefor both fast (Pt) and slow
(GC) electron transfer kinetics. Taffit offers decreased analysis
time and better precision. Precision is higher for Taffit for all
parameters under conditions of both fast and slow kinetics; kinetic
parameters are as anticipated for HER measurements. For fast kinetics
on Pt, no fundamentally and arithmetically valid linear range is available
for CTA. Because Taffit exploits data at low |η| and fits both
logjbranches toeq, Taffit fits high rate data. Taffit finds the single
α that yields the same logj0for
the anodic and cathodic branches. Although the same exchange current
densities are measured by CTA and Taffit for slower electron transfer
rates on GC, the range of ηCTAincludes
several valid but distinct slopes for logjversus
η. Taffit yields more precise values ofj0and both more accurate and precise values of α and
the Tafel slope. For Pt, Taffit statistically confirmed the quality
of the fit of logj0versus η, but
review of then= 2 mechanism was required to interpret
the results. Taffit for GC and Pt indicate HER mechanisms limited
by Volmer and Tafel steps, respectively. For a single replicate for
HER on Ni, Taffit finds logj0= −4.6,
α = 0.24, and cathodic and anodic Tafel slopes of −243
and + 78 mV/dec, within an acceptable σ over a range of ηwin.

Comparisons
were made between
Taffit and CTA for HER using different electrocatalyst materials.
Metal phosphides, carbon supported platinum, and cobalt derived catalysts
reported in the literature were used for comparisons.,Full Tafel plots or LSVs were used where possible. If full plots
were unavailable, representative Tafel segments were used (Figure). Of note are the
reversed axes used in plotting the literature data, η versus
logj. This is common in catalyst studies for easier
determination of the Tafel slope in mV/dec, where logj0is roughly estimated from the intercept as η →
0.

Representative HER Tafel plot segments for several different electrocatalysts
in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reprinted with permission from
ref . Copyright
2019, American Chemical Society.

Taffit results and comparisons to the literature Tafel data are
shown inTable. The
literature data were analyzed by CTA. Exchange current densities are
not commonly reported in materials studies. Comparisons are made to
reported Tafel slopes.

In the
majority of the comparisons made, the literature CTA and
the algorithmic Taffit Tafel slopes show good agreement. With the
exception of 10% Pt-C, the differences in the Tafel slopes are not
sufficient to change the interpretation of the data as Volmer, Tafel,
or Heyrovsky limited. Taffit is able to reproduce the Tafel slope
from representative segments of Tafel plots. The greatest difference
between the two methods is for 10 % Pt-C. It is not surprising that
the largest discrepancy would be reported for a system with fast kinetics.
As described above, regression of Pt HER Tafel plots is a difficult
procedure. Small changes in the CTA regression range can produce substantially
different kinetic parameters. The representative Pt-C plot inFigureinvolved regression
across a small range of low η values, which can significantly
diminished the quality of CTA data analysis. In general, for these
literature data, correlation between CTA and Taffit is good.

Taffit provides algorithmic analysis of Tafel data to evaluate
kinetic parameters for interfacial electron transfer of logj0,j0, α,
and Tafel slopes. As compared to fits by classical means (CTA), Taffit
provides higher precision and mitigates user bias. As in all Tafel
analyses, Taffit and CTA follow BV kinetics that preclude mass transport
effects. Taffit data are analyzed without the user identified linear
regions of CTA. Taffit minimizes standard error in fit to the BV equation
(eq) in an overpotential
window ηwinabout η = 0. Taffit fits both anodic
and cathodic branches of the Tafel plot and finds logj0and α common to both branches, as specified by
the BV equation. Cathodic and anodic Tafel slopes are found.

The Taffit algorithm is deployed in Microsoft Excel. Taffit is
designed for ease of use by nonexperts. Analysis is fast and efficient
to determinej0, α, and equivalent
Tafel slope by closest fit to the BV equation by minimizing the standard
error of the estimate. Taffit offers several advantages over the more
conventional CTA. Principally, the tool shows greater precision and
substantially decreases user bias inherent to CTA. Taffit utilizes
data as |η|→ 0 to facilitate measurements for faster
kinetics. Taffit statistically vets the fit of logjversus η, but interpretation of the fitting parameters should
be reviewed in light of the mechanism. It should be confirmed that
the conditions for all Tafel analyses are meet in interpretation of
Taffit results.

Taffit is vetted against experimental data for
HER on Pt and GC
electrodes. Easily deployed, Taffit provides a first report for HER
on glassy carbon at pH 0 under H2as logj0of −7 and Tafel slope of −170 mV/decade,
forn= 1. Good agreement is observed between values
reported in the literature and those fit by Taffit. Knowledge of specific
mechanistic properties and characteristics of the system is not necessary
for the use of Taffit. The developed tool is generalized and applicable
to various electrochemical systems.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.5c00038.

CRediT:Joshua Codutoconceptualization, data curation, investigation,
methodology, software, validation, writing - original draft;Johna Leddyfunding acquisition, project administration, supervision,
writing - review & editing.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.