The youth age group (15–24 years) is a crucial transition period between adolescence and adulthood, which shapes the sexual behaviour of humans as an adult. Unsafe sexual behaviours, such as Multiple Sexual Partnerships (MSP), can increase the risk of sexually transmitted diseases among Indian males and females. Hence, to prevent MSP early, an assessment of MSP is needed among Indian youth along with its determinants for targeted interventions.

This is a secondary data analysis of the National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5, 2019–2021) dataset. It included 4,669 Indian men (15–24 years) and 8,817 Indian women (15–24 years). MSP was defined as having more than one lifetime sexual partner. Nested multilevel logistic regression was used to estimate Odds Ratio, denoting the associations between MSP and explanatory variables (Socio-demographic, health-related, and behavioural factors).

The prevalence of Multiple Sexual Partnerships (MSP) among Indian youth males (15–24 years) was 19.04%, and among Indian youth females (15–24 years) was 3.49%. Comprehensive knowledge regarding HIV/AIDS made a difference only among youth females (Odds Ratio (OR) 0.58), but this was not observed among males. Tobacco use (OR 1.87), alcohol use (OR 1.70), unmarried status (OR 2.17), domestic violence history (OR 1.26), and employment status (OR 1.40) increased the odds of MSP among Indian youth males (p< 0.05).

Around one in five Indian youth males and 3.49% of Indian youth females had Multiple Sexual Partnerships (MSP). Comprehensive knowledge about HIV influences the MSP of youth females, but not youth males. Broadening sexuality education, reducing substance abuse, combatting domestic violence, changing gender norms, and studying the emerging socio-cultural determinants of MSP are needed to reduce risky sexual behaviours among Indian males and females.

The youth (15–24 years) age group represents a crucial transition from adolescence to adulthood [1]. Various behavioural and psychological changes characterize this period, and such changes become an integral part of later life. One such behaviour that develops physiologically during this period is sexual behaviour. Safe sexual practices developed during this time might be crucial for sustaining safe sexual practices later in life [2]. This can prevent diseases linked to unsafe sexual practices at an early stage.

One of the key unsafe sexual practices that might be cultivated during this period is Multiple Sexual Partnerships (MSP) [2]. MSP is defined as engaging in physical sex with more than one sexual partner ever in a lifetime [3]. Although men report higher rates of MSP, Indian women may experience more adverse consequences due to three reasons [4–6]. The first reason is the stigma. Patriarchal factors associate MSP with masculinity and permit MSP among men, while women are expected to have greater sexual fidelity [7]. This may lead to underreporting of MSP among women in India, and reduced health-seeking behaviour due to fear of stigma. Hence, despite data suggesting more men engage in MSP (14%) compared to women (4%), we need to pay attention to research MSP among women [4]. Secondly, female partners are often passive partners in sex, and passive partners are more affected by Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) [8]. Thirdly, the urogenital anatomy makes females more prone to STI-related complications [8].

For these reasons, MSP is linked to STI including Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection [9] and complications of STIs such as pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), adverse reproductive outcomes [10–12], infertility [12,13], and even cervical cancer [14]. Among the diseases caused by risky sexual behaviours, the highest Age Specific Mortality Rate (ASMR) was for HIV/AIDS [8.48 /100,000 people] with Age Specific Disability Rate (ASDR) [447.44 /100,000 people]. The second highest ASMR was for Cervical cancer [ASMR: 3.40/100,000 people and ASDR: 107.2 /100,000 people] followed by sexually transmitted infections excluding HIV [ASMR: 0.10 /100,000 people and ASMR: 16.14 /100,000 people] [15]. The diseases attributed to risky sexual practices had the highest impact in lower resource settings like Sub Saharan Africa [15].

In this way, MSP can affect males and females at both stages, when they are youth and when they become older. Hence, preventing or identifying MSP in the youth population via targeted behavioural interventions can prevent such diseases. We need comprehensive knowledge about the determinants of MSP to target specific populations for interventions and combat the challenges of stigma. As men engage more in MSP and females are more prone to suffer due to MSP, we need to assess both male and female youth for MSP.

In India, there is a paucity of studies on MSP among youth females [4,16–19]. There are studies assessing other outcomes with MSP as a risk factor but not focussing on MSP as an outcome with social determinants [20]. Given the complex, evolving nature of MSP, we need to have periodical data on MSP and its determinants among Indian youth for targeted interventions.

Hence, we aimed to estimate the national-wide prevalence of MSP and stratified prevalence of MSP in different regions, states, and union territories (UT) among Indian youth (15–24 years). We also aimed to identify different demographic, socioeconomic, and health-related determinants of MSP and determine the inequalities of MSP distribution across wealth index and education status among the study population.

This study is a secondary analysis of cross-sectional data from the National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5, 2019–2021), a nationally representative demographic and health survey conducted in India [21].

The NFHS primarily targets women of reproductive age and children under five across Indian states, resulting in an uneven sample size between genders. Our analysis included male and female youth aged 15–24 years who participated in the survey. World Health Organisation (WHO) has defined individuals aged 15–24 years as youth [1].

Both married and unmarried women aged 15–49 years, who participated in the NFHS-5 survey, from several Indian states were included. Women who declined to report their sexual history related to MSP were excluded from the analysis.

A multi-phase, stratified, cluster random sampling method using probability proportional to size (PPS) was employed. The survey covered 636,699 households, including 101,839 men and 724,115 women. We performed a complete case analysis (row-wise deletion) to handle missing data, resulting in a final sample of 4669 youth men and 8817 youth women for analysis [22].

Four structured questionnaires—Household, Woman’s, Man’s, and Biomarker—were used through Computer-Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) in local languages. The Men’s Schedule collected data on marital status, offspring, contraception, sexual behaviour, nutrition, health problems, gender attitudes, domestic violence, and HIV/ Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) related knowledge. The Woman’s Schedule focused on marriage, fertility, contraception, sexual behaviour, HIV/AIDS knowledge, women’s empowerment, and domestic abuse. Blood pressure and random blood glucose were measured for both genders [22].

Participants reporting more than one sexual partner in their lifetime were classified as having Multiple Sexual Partnerships (MSP) [3].

Explanatory variables were categorized into demographic and socio-economic factors, health-related factors, and behavioural factors.

Demographic and socio-economic factors included marital status (never married, married, widowed, divorced, separated), family size (1–5 members, > 5 members), education level (illiterate, primary, secondary, higher secondary), caste (Scheduled Tribe, Scheduled Caste, OBC, Others), region (north, central, east, northeast, west, south), religion (Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Others), employment status (employed, unemployed), residence (rural, urban), wealth index (poorest, poorer, middle, richer, richest), age group (15–18, 19–24 years), and domestic violence experience (yes, no) [23,24].

Health-related factors included diabetes status (present, absent, unknown) and hypertension status (present, absent, unknown) [25,26].

Behavioural factors included alcohol consumption (yes, no), smoking or tobacco use (yes, no), comprehensive HIV/AIDS knowledge (present, absent), and media exposure (television, radio, phone use) (present, absent) [27].

We conducted the statistical analysis using STATA version 18 (StataCorp LLC, College Station, TX), applying individual-level survey weights for accuracy. Maps created in Microsoft Excel visualized MSP distribution across Indian states and union territories (UTs). A bivariate logistic regression assessed initial associations between MSP and explanatory variables. We then performed nested multilevel logistic regression across three models. Model 1 included demographic and socio-economic factors. Model 2 added health-related factors and socio-demographic factors, and Model 3 included behavioural factors along with health-related factors and socio-demographic factors [28–30].

Less than 90% of the males and females from the original NFHS-5 dataset had the variable of interest for our analysis. Hence, we employed complete case analysis (CCA) to handle missing data and reduce selection bias.

The socioeconomic inequalities in MSP among Indian youth (men, women) were disaggregated as per wealth index and education status at the national level using concentration index [31]. The area between the concentration curve and the line of equality was computed by first plotting the cumulative proportion of the population ranked by wealth index/ education status against the cumulative proportion of MSP. A concentration index of zero indicates no socioeconomic inequality. A positive value depicts that the distribution of MSP is more among the richest while a negative value depicts that the distribution is more among the poorest. Higher value shows greater inequality (both in negative and positive directions) [32,33].

Indian states and union territories were categorised into low (0 to 33.33rd percentile), medium (33.34 to 66.66th percentile) and high (66.67 to 100th percentile) as per multiple sexual partners in youth men and women. We have produced an Indian map to document these categories with Microsoft Excel.

The prevalence of MSP was lower among female participants (3.49%) compared to male participants (19.04%) and this pattern was similar across all subgroups (see Table1).

Inequity assessment revealed that educational level is a significant factor for youth males. The reporting of MSP was more concentrated among educated males compared to uneducated males (Figs.2and3).

Our nationally representative data indicate that Indian youth males (19.04%) report higher engagement in Multiple Sexual Partnerships (MSP) compared to Indian youth females (3.49%). This aligns with existing knowledge on MSP [5,6]. This gender-based discrepancy can be attributed to two primary factors: (1) conservative cultural norms that discourage MSP more among females than males [4], and (2) social desirability bias, which may cause females to underreport MSP due to societal expectations. Deeply rooted gender hierarchies in India contribute to the reduced agency of young women in initiating or negotiating sexual encounters. The fear of reputational damage, parental control, and even violence can suppress both actual behaviours and willingness to report MSP among female youth. There is relatively less research on MSP among Indian youth females compared to their male counterparts. Our study’s findings on MSP among youth males differ from other Indian studies, which may be attributed to variations in the study period [4,18,19].

Females aged 19–24 years showed lower odds of MSP compared to those aged 15–18 years. This suggests a growing preference for multiple sexual partnerships among younger females. This may be due to early initiation of sexual activity, peer pressure, peer coercion, increased exposure to sexual content in media and limited access to sexuality education among adolescents [34]. The findings underscore the need for age-appropriate reproductive health interventions targeted at adolescents to address risky sexual behaviour and empower adolescents to make informed choices.

Another potential explanation for this finding is the heightened social desirability bias among married Indian youth females, who may be reluctant to disclose MSP due to societal stigma. Given that the median age of marriage for Indian females is approximately 18.5 years, those aged 19–24 may be more likely to underreport their true sexual behaviour. While unmarried youth with higher MSP should be the primary focus of behavioural interventions, married youth should not be overlooked. Previous studies have similarly highlighted differences in MSP between unmarried and married participants for both males [16,18] and females [35].

Our findings also show that employed youth males had higher odds of MSP, a pattern not observed in females. This could be due to the increased social autonomy, economic independence, and broader social networks available to employed males. This disparity may be also due to the differing nature of employment between genders. Male employment often involves mobility, peer interaction, and exposure to urban environments, while female employment is often confined to informal, home-based, or lower autonomy sectors, limiting exposure and opportunity for new social or sexual networks. The results align with previous studies, such as those by Mbele et al., which suggest similar trends among women in other settings [35].

The presence of comprehensive knowledge about HIV/AIDS was associated with reduced MSP only among females, not males. This suggests that awareness programs effectively influenced sexual practices in women but had a limited impact on men. Prior secondary analyses of NFHS-3 and NFHS-4 data similarly found that knowledge-based interventions alone had limited effect on young Indian males [19]. Though awareness can lead to improved behaviour, the persistent influence of social norms around masculinity, which encourage risk-taking behaviours, as well as the impairing effects of alcohol and tobacco use, may also play a role in the overall outcomes. Future research should investigate the limited effectiveness of knowledge-based interventions for Indian men to improve public health strategies [36,37].

This is further supported by our finding that MSPs were more concentrated among educated Indian youth males. This observation contrasts with findings from other studies in India [18,19]. This counterintuitive association may be due to the role of increased digital exposure, urban migration, and access to dating networks among educated youth males, which may increase the chances of MSP. However, further qualitative studies are required in this area, to generate a hypothesis for further testing. There were no significant differences in MSP between various castes or religions, as consistent with other findings [19].

Our analysis also indicates that domestic violence is associated with increased odds of MSP among Indian youth males but not females. This finding aligns with prior research suggesting that men may engage in MSP as a coping mechanism for domestic violence, which could be linked to mental health challenges and dysfunctional relationships [38]. However, underreporting of both domestic violence and MSP cannot be ruled out. It is important to note that NFHS-5 defines domestic violence as physical or sexual violence by a spouse, excluding psychological coercion recognized under the Domestic Violence Act of 2005 [22,39]. This limitation may explain the absence of an association between domestic violence and MSP among females in our study, despite other research suggesting such a link [20]. Additionally, the relatively short duration of marriage for younger females may reduce the likelihood of relationship dissatisfaction leading to MSP. Reverse causality, where MSP could lead to relationship tensions and subsequent domestic violence, is another possible explanation.

Tobacco or alcohol use was associated with higher odds of MSP among youth males, consistent with previous evidence linking substance use to risky behaviours in both males [16,40] and females [4,40,41]. These substances are often associated with social environments that facilitate MSP and may lower inhibitions, increasing the likelihood of engaging in risky sexual behaviours. The relationship may also be bidirectional, with MSP contributing to relationship conflicts and subsequent substance use.

A notable but unclear finding is that female youth with diabetes had 3.51 times higher odds of MSP. The wide confidence interval (95% CI: 1.36–9.07) suggests that sparse data bias may be responsible for this association. Another reason which might have led to a spurious association can be the classification of diabetes mellitus in the national survey, based on random blood glucose. This could have led to misclassification bias. Hence, further research is needed to clarify the relationship between diabetes and MSP, especially given the limitations of NFHS-5 in diagnosing diabetes through random blood glucose measurements [22].

No significant associations were found between MSP and urban or rural residence or media exposure for either gender, consistent with previous studies [16,19,35]. While prior analyses of NFHS-3 and NFHS-4 data have reported associations between economic status and MSP in earlier survey waves, our findings suggest that cultural influences on MSP may be becoming more uniform across socio-economic groups among males over time [18,19].

Regional variations in prevalence of Multiple Sexual Partnerships (MSP) were observed among the Indian youth, especially in males. Compared to the youth in the northern region, the youth from the central (OR: 1.30) and eastern (OR: 1.42) regions had significantly higher odds of having MSP. At the state level, the youth in Uttarakhand (39.2%), Arunachal Pradesh (40.16%), Telangana (30.9%), Delhi (29.03%), and Mizoram (36.36%) had higher proportions of MSP, especially among males. The lowest MSP were reported in Ladakh (0%), Puducherry (0%), Chandigarh (0%) and Lakshadweep (0%).

The following reasons can be possible for this observation: (a) sociocultural and tribal factors, especially in the north-eastern and central states; (b) urban–rural differentials in access to health education and reproductive health services; (c) potential cultural mix due to cross-border migration (especially in NE and eastern states); (d) higher tourism in urban areas; and (e) differential reporting bias and interviewer effects arising from varying norms and perceptions of acceptability of behaviours in different states and UTs.

We believe that recent legal changes in India, such as the decriminalization of adultery, may gradually increase the acceptance and reporting of MSP in the future [42]. Furthermore, the growing access to digital platforms, privacy in communication, and changing perceptions around romantic autonomy among urban Indian youth may also influence how MSP is normalized or hidden. Therefore, periodic studies are necessary to monitor trends in MSP over time and inform future public health interventions.

Our study employed a robust sampling strategy, including a large sample size and probability-based sampling, to minimize error and strengthen the validity of our findings.

We used a nested multilevel logistic regression approach to account for the nested nature of the NFHS-5 data (individuals nested within households and states) and to determine the relative, incremental contributions of various variable groups step-by-step. It helps in adjusting for clustering, reducing confounding, and assessing the incremental effects of demographic, health-related, and behavioural factors on MSPs.

However, less than 90% of the males and females from the original NFHS-5 dataset had the variable of interest for our analysis. This may introduce selection bias. Hence, we employed complete case analysis (CCA) to handle missing data. Methods like imputation may not be appropriate and may introduce systematic error for Sensitive Behavioural Variables like MSP, where missingness could be non-random or driven by disclosure reluctance, may introduce systematic bias rather than reduce it. However, it is to be noted that complete case analysis may not fully eliminate the bias, if the history of MSP was not recorded due to selective reporting.

Social desirability bias can be a reason for selective reporting and can be a key limitation of our study. Even with reported data, social desirability can potentially lead to differential misclassification of MSP and experiences of domestic violence across genders. This can lead to potential under-reporting of MSP, especially among Indian females and married participants. Stigma, cultural taboos, and fear of judgment may impair honest reporting of sexual behaviour.

To reduce confounding and account for clustering effects and variance, we utilized a nested multi-level regression analysis, enhancing the validity of our associations. However, the cross-sectional design of the study limits our ability to establish causality or determine the direction of relationships, especially in cases of association of MSP with domestic violence and substance use.

As the survey’s sample size was estimated to assess national wide estimates of MSP, the sample size may not be adequate for estimating state wise sub-group estimates, as indicating by wider confidence intervals observed in our study. This might have increased sampling error in estimating state-wise, subgroup estimates.

MSP was defined as more than one lifetime sexual partner. This may not accurately reflect current sexual behaviour, frequency, concurrency of partnerships, or recent risky behaviours, which might be more closely linked to STI risk.

Public health programs should prioritize unmarried youth due to their higher engagement in Multiple Sexual Partnerships (MSP). However, married youth, particularly women aged 19–24, should not be neglected. Programs like the Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK) or school-based programs can be scaled up by using age-appropriate, culture-specific modules on safe sexual behaviour. Scaling up of peer led education programs, which train adolescent peer educators to deliver sessions on sexual health, substance use and gender norms can be scaled up.

Gender-specific approaches to sexual health education: Since comprehensive knowledge about HIV/AIDS was linked to reduced MSP only among females, future awareness programs should adopt gender-specific strategies. Although, as comprehensive HIV knowledge was protective only among females, programs for males should not only provide information but also address gender norms, risky masculinity and help-seeking behaviours.

The prevalence of Multiple Sexual Partnerships (MSP) among Indian youth males (15–24 years) was 19.04%, and among Indian youth females (15–24 years) was 3.49%. This reflects gender-specific behavioural patterns and social norms in India, which may suppress risky behaviours or reduce the likelihood of its reporting among older females. However, our study observed an increased MSP among young adolescent females aged 15–18 years, reflecting changing MSP patterns in India among younger generations.

Comprehensive knowledge about HIV influenced MSP among young women, but not among young men. Thus, educational interventions appear to be more effective in influencing women’s behaviour than traditional masculinity. Public health communication strategies should be designed to enhance awareness, address social attitudes that contribute to risky behaviour and promote behaviour change among young men.

The concentration of MSP among educated male youth’s contrary to earlier findings challenges our understanding of sexual behaviour and highlights the need for further research into the motivations and perceptions of risk among the educated youth.

Employment status, substance use (alcohol and tobacco) and experience of domestic violence were significantly associated with MSP in males but not in females, highlighting the need for gender specific tailoring of targeted interventions.

Overall, this study underscores the considerable burden and multi-factorial nature of MSP among Indian youth and the need for gender-sensitive, age-specific and culturally nuanced interventions. Broadening sexuality education, reducing substance abuse, combatting domestic violence, and studying the emerging socio-cultural determinants of MSP are needed to reduce risky sexual behaviours among Indian males and females.

We extend our sincere appreciation to the participants and the International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) for their contributions.