Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) develops in some premature infants andmay becharacterized by permanent severe retinal damage necessitating early detection and prompt treatment. The purpose of this study was toinvestigatewhether specific miRNAs in tear extracellular vesicles (EVs)are associated withthe development of ROP requiring treatment. Tear sampleswere collected from 47 infants,including 33 with ROP and 14 without ROP; of the ROP group,18 infants required treatment. The miRNAs expressed in EVs were profiled by real-time PCR array. An exploratory analysis of differential miRNA expression using tear EV samples from 35 infants was performed.Network analysis conducted for the miRNAs for ROP requiring treatment revealed critical networks of miRNAs linked to IGF1R and VEGF. A machine learning study utilizing the random forest model identified 13 miRNAs with high importance score for the treatment-requiring ROP eyes. After adjustments for birth weight, miR-520a-5p was identified as a candidatemarker. Network analysis confirmed a significant association of miR-520a-5p with the VEGF-centered network. When the Gradient boosting decision tree was applied, miR-520a-5p discriminated treatment-requiring ROP with accuracy of 77.8% and an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.889. For the validation phase, 12 unanalyzed infants were examined for the diagnostic accuracy of miR-520a-5p, and the findings confirmed a high diagnostic accuracy of 91.7% and AUC of 0.875 for treatment-required ROP eyes.Notably,miR-520a-5p expression was strongly influenced by infant immaturity,as reflected by gestational age. These findings provide new insights into ROP pathophysiology and suggest that tear-derived miRNAs,particularly those in EVs,may serve as potential biomarkers and inform future therapeutic strategies.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-15856-2.

Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a retinal neovascular disorder that develops in preterm or low birthweight infants. The development of ROP isstronglyassociated withlow gestational ageand low birthweight1. The Early Treatment for ROP Study reported that the incidence of ROP was 68% in infants with birthweights < 1251 g2.

The retinal vasculature system is not fully developed in preterm infants, and avascular zones are present in the peripheral retina.In most cases of ROP,loss of physiologic hypoxia impairs normal retinal vascular development3.This insufficient hypoxic drive suppresses the production of angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF),and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1),leading to delayed or arrested maturation of retinal vessels.3In rare cases,such as so-called “big baby ROP” with high oxygen exposure,oxidative stress can contribute to retinal vascular injury.

ROP develops in more than one-third of low birthweight preterm infants1. Eyes with severe ROP can progress to retinal detachment and blindness, and it is the leading cause of blindness in children1.

In cancer and neurological diseases, analyses of the biopsies of the blood, urine, and tear fluid are of interest because of the ease of their collection. In general, the biomarkers are nucleic acids, metabolites, proteins, and cytokines in these liquid biopsies. In recent years, extracellular vesicles (EVs) in the biopsied fluid specimens have been attracting attention as possible sources of biomarkers, e,g., surface markers can be detected in EV of some diseases and can serve as biomarkers of the disease. The detection of surface proteins in the EVs of the blood in colorectal cancer patients or in the tear fluid of breast cancer patients can be used to diagnose the presence of the disease4,5.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are contained in a stable state in EVs, and they are non-protein coding RNAs of approximately 22 nucleotides. These miRNAs interact with the untranslated regions of target mRNAs to regulate the expression of the genes. Therefore, determining the expression patterns of miRNAs may lead to the identification of disease-discriminating miRNAs. For example, the EV-derived miRNAs in the blood of patients were able to identify 13 types of cancers and Alzheimer’s disease6. In addition, EV-derived miRNAs in the urine can identify patients with prostate cancer7. Nevertheless, the miRNAs in the EVs of tears have not been examined to determine whether they can be used to diagnose ROP.

Thus, the purpose of this study was toinvestigatewhether EVs in tears contain miRNAs thatare associated withsevere ROPand could serve as potential diagnostic markers or provide insights into disease pathophysiology. To address this,we profiled the miRNAs in tear EVs from infants and examined whether specific miRNAs were associated with the presence of ROP requiring therapeutic intervention. We found that miR-520a-5p was strongly associated with both ROP disease activity and the immaturity of infants,as reflected by gestational age.

We studied 47 eyes of 47 infants who were born in the Tottori University Hospital between February 2018 and March 2022 and whose mean birthweight was 1234 ± 70.5 g. Twenty-three (48.9%) of the infants were girls. The infants were classified as those developing stage I or higher ROP according to the International Classification of ROP (ICROP) study8. Thirty-three eyes of 33 patients were placed in the ROP group. There were 14 eyes of 14 premature infants that did not develop ROP (no ROP group), and they were used as controls.

Analyses of the Asian Neonatal Network Collaboration (AsianNeo) indicated that ROP screening was performed in infants born at < 32 to 34 weeks in Asian countries9. Based on earlier studies10, the initial fundus examination for ROP screening was conducted at either 29 or 30 weeks postmenstrual age, or at 3 weeks chronological age, depending on which came later.

A signed written informed consent to participate in the study was obtained from the parents of the participants prior to sample collection. The procedures used in this study were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Tottori(approval ID: 19A105), and they conformed to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.

After an initial screening ROPexamination, the tear fluids were collected at 34 weeks postmenstrual age. Schirmer test strip was placed in the lower cul-de-sac of the eye for collection of the tear fluid. The exposed strips were stored in sterile tubes at −80° C until analyses.

For the tests, the strips were eluted with 1 ml of phosphate buffered saline and kept at 4° C overnight11,12.The EVs were isolated by a polymer precipitation-based method using ExoQuick-TC (SBI System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA) according to manufacturer’s instructions11. The EVs were extracted from the precipitated pellet which were lysed for the RNAs extraction.

The EVs in the tears were assayed for the presence of surface protein markers using the ExoScreen assay4. For this, anti-CD9, anti-CD147, or anti-EpCAM antibody-coated AlphaLISA acceptor beads and donor beads were measured for singlet oxygen emitted from the donor beads by acceptor beads using AlphaLISA (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA). The ExoScreen assay detects surface markers on EVs with a diameter of ≤ 200 nm because of the maximum flying distance of a singlet oxygen between donor and acceptor beads.

EV miRNA profiling was performed using a commercial PCR array targeting 380 human miRNAs (SeraMir Exosome RNA Amplification Kit,System Biosciences,Palo Alto,CA). The miRNA panel consists of pre-selected human miRNAs included by the manufacturer.

The RNAs from the EVs were polyadenylated with polyA polymerase and annealed with SeraMir 3’ Adapter Oligo. The RNAs were reverse transcribed with 5’ SeraMir Switch Oligo and Reverse Transcriptase to synthesize single stranded cDNAs.

To detect the 380 miRNAs, SYBR Green qPCR Master mix buffer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), 3’ SeraMir Reverse Primer, and 380 5’ SeraMir PCR Primer Mix were used to perform the quantitative real-time PCR on a ViiA 7 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The cycles were repeated 40 times. Based on the expression profile, a threshold for expression was set at a Cycle Threshold (CT) of < 35. The average CT value for all miRNAs in the sample was used as the endogenous control, and the ΔCT value was calculated by subtracting this average CT value from the CT value of each miRNA. The miRNA expression level was set at 2−ΔCT.

Forty-seven eyes from 47 infants were studied with 18 having treatment-requiring ROP, 15 having non-treatment-requiring ROP, and 14 without ROP. Treatment requirement was defined as any stage in zone I with plus, stage 3 in zone I without plus, stages 2–3 in zone II with plus, or aggressive ROP based on guidelines of the Early Treatment For Retinopathy Of Prematurity Cooperative Group (ETROP)13and International Classification of Retinopathy of Prematurity (ICROP)8.

To identify the miRNA markers, the tear samples of 35 eyes of 35 infants (14 treatment-requiring ROP eyes, 11 non-treatment-requiring ROP eyes, and 10 eyes without ROP) collected by 2021 were analyzed.

A random forest model was used to examine whether a specific miRNA could differentiate the treatment-requiring ROP group from non-treatment requirement ROP or without ROP groups. To evaluate the diagnostic efficacy, 9 cases that were not used for training were evaluated to assess the diagnostic accuracy and area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristics (ROCs) at the identification phase.

To determine miRNAs that was needed to differentiate treatment-requiring ROP, a variable selection was conducted using the Boruta algorithm (https://github.com/scikit-learn-contrib/boruta_py). Boruta is a feature selection method that identifies relevant features by comparing the importance of the original features with randomly permuted versions, known as shadow features. The algorithm leverages a random forest classifier to compute the feature importance scores. Each feature’s score is compared against the highest importance of its corresponding shadow features. Features that consistently show higher importance than the shadow features across multiple iterations are deemed significant, while those that do not are considered irrelevant and are excluded. This approach ensures robust feature selection even in datasets with complex interactions and noise14.

Candidate markers for treatment-requiring ROP were selected based on two criteria: (1) having a high importance score as identified by the Boruta feature selection algorithm,and (2) being significantly upregulated in treatment-requiring ROP cases compared to non-treatment-requiring cases.

For the validation phase, 12 eyes of 12 infants (4 treatment-requiring ROP eyes, 4 non-treatment-requiring ROP eyes, 4 eyes without ROP) collected by 2022 were used as test data set. They were not used for the miRNA selection process using Boruta and evaluation of diagnostic efficacy. After extraction of the miRNAs at the identification phase, diagnostic accuracy was tested for this test data set using the gradient boosting decision tree model.

The data are expressed as the means ± standard error of the means.

The significance of the differences in the characteristics between the ROP and no ROP groups was determined by the Mann-Whitney U Tests, and the correctedPvalues using the false discovery rate. Network analysis of the miRNAs associated with the ROP were performed using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). Relevant clinical data were analyzed using logistic regression.

The primary endpoint of this study was the ability of miRNAs to discriminate treatment-requiring ROP,as evaluated by AUC. We performed a power analysis using AUC of 0.8 based on our preliminary analysis for the identification cohort (n1 = 18 treatment-requiring ROP,n2 = 29 non-treatment/normal). The statistical power was calculated assuming a null hypothesis of AUC = 0.5,alpha = 0.0515.The results indicated that the current sample size achieves over 95% power to detect an AUC of 0.8.

All the statistical analyses were performed with sklearn packages (Python),pROC package for R,and Stata17 (StataCorp LLC,State of Texas,USA).

We studied 47 eyes of 47 infants including 33 infants with ROP and 14 infants without ROP. Of the 33 ROP infants, 18 infants were treatment-required, and 15 were non-treatment-required. The mean gestational age was 180 ± 3 days for treatment-requiring cases, 209 ± 3 days for non-treatment-requiring cases, and 231 ± 2 days for the no ROP cases (Table1). There were 44.4% girls in the treatment-requiring ROP group, 60.0% in the non-treatment requiring ROP group, and 42.9% in the no ROP group. The birth weight was 804 ± 52 g in the treatment-requiring ROP group, 1262 ± 92 g in the non-treatment-requiring ROP group, and 1758 ± 73 g in the no ROP group.

ROP, Retinopathy of Prematurity. Values are means ± SEM.

ROP is known to be associated with low birthweight and some systemic factors. When logistic regression analysis was used to assess the associations of ROP, the odds ratio for low birthweight was 9.9 (per quintile, logistic regression analysis,P< 0.001). Administration of surfactant and low Apgar score at 5 min were also significantly associated with ROP (OR for surfactant = 14,P= 0.001; Apgar score = 0.5,P= 0.013, logistic regression analysis).

To identify the miRNA marker for treatment-requiring ROP eyes, analysis was conducted in the identification phase and the validation phase (Fig.1). For the identification phase, 25 infants with ROP and 10 infants without ROP were analyzed from tears collected by 2021. For the validation phase, newly collected samples from 12 infants (8 ROP eyes and 4 without ROP eyes) were assessed for validity of the identified miRNAs in 2022.

Diagram of study design. For the initial screening of miRNAs, tear extracellular vesicles from 35 infants were analyzed using a PCR array. Candidate miRNAs identified in this phase were then tested for validation in an independent cohort of patients.

To analyze the EVs in the tears of the ROP infants, EVs were extracted from infant tear strips and analyzed for surface EV markers using the ExoScreen assay. The assays detected high levels of the surface expression of the established EV marker, CD9. Low level of epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and CD147 were co-expressed with the CD9 on the EVs (Fig.2).

Expression of the surface marker on extracellular vesicles (EVs) in tears. The EVs in tears were examined for surface expression of CD9, CD147, and EpCAM using the Exoscreen Assay.

To screen candidate miRNAs for treatment-requiring ROP, we first examined the differential expression of miRNA between the ROP and no ROP eyes as the identification phase. When examined for the differential expression of miRNA between the ROP and no ROP eyes, 202 miRNAs were differentially expressed in the ROP eyes (Mann-Whitney U test,P< 0.05, after multiple comparison correction).

In the ROP eyes, 88 miRNAs had more than a 10-fold higher expression (P< 0.05), and the miRNA with the highest fold change was miR-96 followed by let-7a and miR-297 (Table2). The expressions of 10 miRNAs were significantly lower in the ROP eyes.

Differentially expressed miRNA in the extracellular vesicles of ROP eyes compared to no ROP eyes.

The development of ROP is associated with the birthweight and some systemic factors. We examined the expressions of the 202 miRNAs that were elevated in the ROP-affected eyes after adjustment of the birthweight. When adjusted for the effects of birthweight, linear regression analysis indicated that 27 miRNAs were significantly upregulated in the ROP patients (Table3). Of these, miR-449a, miR-523, and miR-342-3p had the highest upregulation in the ROP eyes.

miRNA associated with retinopathy of prematurity after adjustment for birthweight.

Linear regression analysis after adjustment for birthweight.

To analyze the association of activity of ROP and the miRNA in tear EV, the expressions of the 202 miRNAs are shown in a heatmap (Fig.3). The higher expression profile in the ROP eyes as well as differential expression between treatment-requiring and non-treatment-requiring ROP is shown.

Differential expression of 202 miRNA in extracellular vesicles in the tears of ROP infants. Fourteen treatment-requiring ROP eyes, 11 non-treatment-requiring ROP eyes, 10 eyes without ROP were analyzed as identification phase data set. The heat map is shown with clustering analysis.Intensity scale indicates Log10 expression values.

A network analysis of the differentially expressed genes between treatment-requiring ROP eyes and non-treatment requiring ROP eyes was conductedto determine the biological significance of the miRNAs in the tear EVs (fold change > 2 compared to non-treatment-requiring ROP, FDR < 0.05, accessed on 2024 August 16). The 41 miRNAs that were identified were further analyzed as network eligible genes.

Network analysis showed that the first network was related to Gene Expression, Neurological Disease, Organismal Injury and Abnormalities (P= 10−47, Table4). The second network was centered on IGF1R, and annotated as Gene Expression, Organismal injury, and Abnormalities, Reproductive System Disease (P= 10−29).miR-340 and miR-449 in this network was connected downstream of AGO2,illustrating its association within this angiogenic regulatory network. However,no direction of change was identified for these pathways in the present analysis.

Pathway analysis of miRNAs in the extracellular vesicles of treatment-requiring ROP.

miRNA (Fold change > 2) were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway analysis.

The third network was centered on ERK, p38 MAPK, and NFκB pathway, which is associated with VEGF as angiogenesis. (P= 10−26).This network was predicted to be activated,with miR-96 and miR-520a-5p positioned within key pathways associated with angiogenesis (Fig.4). No direction of change was identified for this pathway.

Network analysis of miRNA in extracellular vesicles in tear of treatment-requiring ROP infants. The miRNA in the extracellular vesicles of tear were analyzed using the Ingenuity pathway analysis. Network (P= 10−26) associated with angiogenesis are shown. The network was associated with VEGF, ERK, NFκB, and p38 MAPK.miR-520a-5p at the top node of the network was connected downstream of the miR-515 family,illustrating its association within this angiogenic regulatory network. Image was created using Ingenuity pathway analysis software.

The network analysis indicated that a differential expression of the miRNAs in treatment-requiring ROP cases appeared to have relevant features to describe the activity of ROP.

We sought to determine the miRNAs which mightdiscriminate among treatment-requiring ROP,non-treatment-requiring ROP,and no ROP groupsusing identification phase data. For this, we calculated the importance of each of the 202 miRNAs todiscriminatetreatment-requiring ROP using a random forest algorithm. Boruta program identified 13 candidate miRNAs which had higher importance scores than those of randomly permuted expression levels of original miRNAs (Fig.5).

Importance score to discriminate treatment-requiring ROP infants. Importance score was analyzed using random forest and Boruta programs using 14 treatment-requiring ROP, 11 non-treatment-requiring ROP infants, and 10 infants without ROP as identification phase data set.

For the treatment-requiring ROP cases, 11 miRNAs were differentially expressed compared to non-treatment-requiring ROP cases (P< 0.05, Mann-Whitney U test). Increased miRNAs were miR-188-3p (fold change (FC): 13.6), miR-520b (FC: 6.6), miR-520a-5p (FC: 6.2), miR-130b (FC: 1.4), miR-504 (FC: 1.3), and miR-190b (FC: 1.1).

In contrast, the reduced miRNAs were miR-517a (FC: 0.12), miR-505 (FC: 0.14) (Fig.5), miR-199a-5p (FC: 0.33), miR-524-3p (FC: 0.42), and miR-320b (FC: 0.50).

all the 35 eyes from the identification phase data set were evaluated. The diagnostic accuracy for treatment-requiring ROP eyes was were 77.8%. Diagnostic efficacy evaluated by area under the curve (AUC) was 0.889 (95% confidence interval (95%CI): 0.625–1.0).

To assess for a dose-response relationship,we performed ordered logistic regression using miR-520a-5p. Ordered logistic regression confirmed a significant dose-response relationship between miR-520a-5p and ROP severity across the three groups (OR per quintile = 2.98,95% CI: 1.66–5.34,P< 0.001).

To confirm the validity of miRNA520a-5p in identifying treatment-requiring ROP eyes, the validation phase data was used. For this, 4 treatment-requiring ROP eyes, 4 non-treatment-requiring ROP eyes, and 4 no ROP eyes, which were independent and not used for miRNA selection by Boruta or model construction, were assessed as the final test data set. Diagnostic accuracy for treatment-requiring ROP cases was 91.7%. The diagnostic efficacy evaluated by area under the curve (AUC) was 0.875 (95% confidence interval (95%CI): 0.5–1.0). This indicates that miRNA520a-5p may serve as a miRNA marker toidentifytreatment-requiring ROP eyes.

To assess the relationship between miRNAs and clinical maturity,we performed both multivariable regression and structural equation modeling (SEM). SEM showed that gestational age (GA) was strongly and negatively associated with both miR-520a-5p (per quintile,coefficient = −0.37,p < 0.001) and treatment-requiring ROP (coefficient = −0.11,p = 0.001). miR-520a-5p levels were highly negatively correlated with GA,and its effect was not independent from GA.

In contrast,the miRNA with the highest importance score for classification was miR-378 (Fig.4). When miR-378 was assessed for association with treatment requirement,a significant negative association was observed (per quintile,coefficient = −0.07,p= 0.04),and this effect was independent of GA.

We have successfully identified specific biomarkers for identifying treatment-requiring ROP eyes in the EVs of tear fluid of premature infants. Tear profiling and characterization of the tear EVs may be a minimally invasive method for diagnosing treatment-requiring ROP eyes. This should then improve the management and the long-term prognosis of ROP.

To our knowledge,this is the first study to report the diagnostic potential of miRNAs derived from tear EVs for detecting treatment-requiring ROP in premature infants. Among these,miR-520a-5p emerged as a novel biomarker,demonstrating high accuracy and AUC in both identification and validation cohorts.

EV-associated miRNAs are particularly promising as biomarkers because their encapsulation within lipid bilayers protects them from degradation by RNases prevalent in biological fluids,increasing their stability and reproducibility compared to free-circulating miRNAs16.Moreover,EV-derived miRNAs are thought to reflect active intercellular communication and disease-related processes,providing greater disease specificity than total (free + EV) miRNA,which may include degraded or non-specific RNA fragments and thus suffer from increased background noise17.

Consistent with this,studies in oncology and neurology have shown that EV-associated miRNAs outperform total miRNAs in diagnostic accuracy. For example,early colorectal cancer studies revealed that small EV miRNA profiles had greater diagnostic utility than cell-free plasma miRNAs18.Similarly,a systematic review in ischemic stroke highlighted the prognostic significance of EV-miRNAs19.

Within ophthalmology,previous research has reported EVs in ocular fluids such as aqueous humor and vitreous fluid,and more recently in tears,as relevant sources of miRNAs associated with diseases like AMD and diabetic retinopathy9,11,20–22.While plasma miRNA panels have achieved regulatory approval in systemic diseases like early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma and pancreatic cancer17,23,their sensitivity and specificity for localized ocular diseases may be limited.

For ocular conditions,tissue-specific sources such as aqueous humor,vitreous fluid,and tears may better reflect disease-related changes. In contrast,tear fluid collection is safe and feasible even in fragile premature infants,making it particularly suitable for biomarker research in ROP.

Indeed,the functions of these miRNAs are mediated by EVs through intercellular communication,and the miRNA content of ocular EVs may more accurately represent local disease states compared to systemic (serum/plasma) biomarkers.

We were able to detect EVs in the tear fluid of premature infants. Tear fluid can be easily and non-invasively collected even from premature infants in poor general condition. Our findings showed that it contained miRNAs in the EVs that can be helpful as diagnostic markers. However, comprehensive findings in these analyses have not been performed.

We have profiled and characterized the miRNAs in the EVs of tear fluid. Our results showed that miR-520a-5p is a good candidate for a biomarker of severe ROP. This diagnostic ability may be attributed to the unique ability of EVs to encapsulate and preserve miRNAs ensuring their stability and specificity for disease detection.

Previous studies have established a foundation by identifying cytokines, complements, and other proteins as potential biomarkers in intraocular fluid and tear fluid24,25. Notably, elevated levels of interleukin (IL)−6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, IL-15, interferon (IFN)-γ, CXCL10, CCL3, CCL4, apolipoprotein (APO)A1, APOC3, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)2, MMP9, C3, C4, and complement factor H (CFH) have been detected in the intraocular fluid of patients with ROP25,26. These findings indicated a complex interplay of inflammatory cytokines and vascular remodeling factors in choroidal angiogenesis. Interestingly, they are similar to the cytokines found in age-related macular degeneration27–29.

Tear fluid analyses is a less invasive method for diagnosing ROP that can attain information that are compatible to those obtained from the more traditional examinations of intraocular fluid. These analyses revealed elevated levels of certain biomarkers in the tear fluid of ROP patients, for example the IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra), IL-6, IL-8, CCL2, MMP2, MMP9, and angiogenin25,26,29,30.These findings are consistent with those observed in the intraocular fluid.

For ROP, miRNA profiling of EVs has not been conducted, however, systemic alterations of miRNA profiles have been reported. In peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of infants requiring treatment for ROP, alterations in 125 tsRNAs and 205 miRNAs have been reported31. This highlights their potential roles as diagnostic biomarkers and the effectiveness of therapeutic targets, considering their involvement in critical biological processes such as cellular metabolism, transcription regulation, and Th17 cell differentiation31.

In contrast to the cell-associated miRNA profiles, Metin et al. have attempted to determine the pathogenic ability of the free form miRNAs in plasma32. They analyzed the miRNAs from stage 3 with plus ROP patients and premature infants without ROP and reported a high expression of miR-23a and miR-200b-3p in the 96 miRNAs in ROP eyes. However, very few miRNAs had a differential expression, and plasma miRNAs may not be specific enough for the search. Thus, the pathophysiology of a disease process may not be well reflected in free miRNA in systemic conditions32.

The functions of the miRNAs have been determined to be accomplished by EV-mediated intercellular transmission17. The miRNAs in EVs may well reflect the disease pathology or stage. In addition, the detection sensitivities of the miRNAs in the EVsmay behigher than that of serum biomarkers17.

Ischemic processes affect the development of treatment-requiring ROP significantly.Our network analysis (Fig.4) shows that miR-520a-5p is integrated within a network characterized by key angiogenic and inflammatory mediators such as VEGF and NFκB. Notably,miR-520a-5p appears to be regulated upstream by the miR-515 family,which also influences NFκB signaling. This suggests that the broader C19MC (chromosome 19 microRNA cluster)/miR-515 family,including but not limited to miR-520a-5p,may play an important regulatory role in retinal ischemic processes. In addition,miR-520a-3p was implicated in regulation of protein expression in the HIF-1α pathway,which is relevant to ischemic retinal vasculopathy. Overall,these findings suggest that multiple members of the C19MC cluster—including both miR-520a-5p and miR-515—may serve as potential therapeutic targets or biomarkers in ROP,rather than a single miRNA acting independently.

Our network analysis also identified the IGF1R centered pathway (Table4, secondary pathway). IGF1 is essential for normal development of retinal vasculature. Low level of IGF-1 has been shown to be correlated with the severity of ROP33. Moreover, measurements of the weight gain and IGF-1 leveldiscriminatedthe development of ROP with high certainty34. In this network, miR-340 and miR-449, which had high importance scores (Fig.5), were shown to beindirectly associated via AGO2 (Supplementary Fig. 1).

We found miR-520a-5p based on importance score to discriminate treatment-requiring ROP (Fig.5). The findings shown in Fig.5indicate that miR-378 had the highest importance score. miR-378 regulates angiogenesis, metabolism, and muscle regeneration35. In the angiogenic process, miR-378 regulates VEGF-A levels via interaction with 3’UTR directly. Indirectly, miR-378 regulates VEGF-A via sonic hedgehog signaling35. Second highest importance score was observed for miR-340, and it was shown to regulate angiogenesis on the cornea by repressing PROX1 and EMP236. The third highest importance score was found for miR-93. miR-93 directly regulates VEGF via interaction with VEGFA 3’UTR, and also regulates angiogenic process during the progression of diabetic nephropathy37. Collectively, the miRNAs identified by the importance scoring were enriched for the angiogenic pathway.

ROP is an ocular angiogenesis abnormality that is associated with hypoxia. Mouse models or in vitro experiments have revealed the important roles of miRNAs in ROP38,39. Liu et al. reported a high expression of miR-145 in a mouse model of oxygen-induced retinopathy (OIR)39which was also upregulated in the tear EV of ROP infants (Table2, fold increase = 7.27). miR-145 may contribute to the pathogenesis of ROP by upregulating angiogenic functions such as proliferation, migration, and tube formation of human retinal endothelial cells (HRECs).

EVs may also be involved in the pathogenesis of ROP although not enough is known about the function of EVs in ROP at present. In the oxygen-induced retinopathy (OIR) mouse model, EVs derived from retinal microglial cells suppressed the angiogenesis and photoreceptor apoptosis40. miR-24-3p (Table2) was shown enriched in the EV, and targets IRE1α -X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) cascade, which lead to the regulation of hypoxia-induced photoreceptor apoptosis. Thus, the miRNAs in EVs can be operative in in vivo settings.

This study has limitations. The data presented were derived from a small sample collected from a single institution indicating that additional validations in other institutions are necessary.Furthermore,while our initial findings suggested that miR-520a-5p in tear EVs could discriminate treatment-requiring ROP,subsequent analyses indicated that induction of 520a-5p was highly associated with GA,and was not independent of GA.

Another limitation is that,although we used a PCR panel covering 380 human miRNAs,our approach was not fully comprehensive. We did not employ unbiased RNA sequencing. Thus,it is possible that other relevant miRNAs were not captured by our panel.

At present, the miRNAs found in the tear EVs of eyes with ROP have not been extensively investigated in a clinical context.Our findings provide initial insight but also highlight the importance of accounting for developmental confounders such as gestational age. Future studies should include larger,matched cohorts and consider longitudinal sampling to clarify the independent roles of miRNAs in ROP pathogenesis and their potential as diagnostic biomarkers. Functional validation studies will also be important to elucidate the biological relevance of miR-520a-5p and other related miRNAs.

In summary,we have shown that miR-520a-5p levels in tear-derived EVs are associated with treatment-requiring ROP. Our findings support the potential utility of tear EV-derived miRNAs as minimally invasive biomarkers and provide a foundation for future studies investigating their clinical significance and biological role in ROP.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.