Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is a microvascular complication of diabetes and a major cause of kidney failure; current treatment methods still need improvement. Sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) is an NAD+-dependent protein deacetylase located in the mitochondria, where it regulates the activity and biological functions of diverse proteins and influences various mitochondrial functionsviadeacetylation. Increasing research indicates that SIRT3 holds promise as a therapeutic target for DKD. This review examines SIRT3’s impact on mitochondrial functions, including mitochondrial biogenesis, autophagy, dynamics, oxidative homeostasis, and energy metabolism. We summarize that SIRT3 delays the progression of DKD by inhibiting oxidative stress, reducing inflammation, regulating cell death, and modulating energy metabolism. Finally, we categorize the applications of SIRT3 activators in renal diseases. In summary, this review provides a thorough understanding of SIRT3’s functional role in DKD and proposes a potential therapeutic approach pending clinical validation.

Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is one of the serious chronic microvascular complications, affecting approximately 30–40% of patients with diabetes worldwide [1,2]. DKD has now become the leading cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in China and developed countries, surpassing chronic glomerulonephritis [3,4]. Despite extensive research, effective treatments for DKD still need to be improved [5]. The 5-year relative survival rate of patients with diabetes-induced ESRD is 36%, which is nearly equivalent to that of patients with lung cancer [6]. These patients need dialysis or kidney transplantation. However, neither of these renal replacement therapies cures chronic kidney failure, resulting in a significant burden of mortality and morbidity associated with the condition. Therefore, there is a pressing need to explore new and innovative therapies for treating DKD to alleviate the economic burden on society and families and enhance the quality of life for patients.

Recent studies on DKD have revealed that kidney injury is influenced by various factors such as metabolic abnormalities [7], oxidative stress [8], mitochondrial disorders [9], inflammatory cascade reactions [10], and cell death [11,12]. Although the pathogenesis of DKD is multifaceted, mitochondrial dysfunction has been identified as a critical factor contributing to the progressive decline in renal function among patients with diabetes [13]. As the metabolic center of cellular energy, mitochondria play an important role in preserving intracellular homeostasis amidst various stresses [14]. Mitochondria are involved in biological processes, such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production, calcium signaling, and apoptosis [15]. Additionally, damaged mitochondria promote the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which significantly influence metabolic and cell signaling pathways, including inflammation and apoptosis, in response to hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia [16,17]. Therefore, mitochondrial dysfunction is critical to the development and progression of DKD.

Sirtuins (SIRT) are a family of NAD+-dependent histone deacetylases that modulate mitochondrial acetylation levels. Research indicates that SIRT3 participates in nearly all facets of mitochondrial metabolism and homeostasis, safeguarding mitochondria from various forms of damage [18]. Increasing evidence confirms that SIRT3 is vital in various physiological processes, including apoptosis, energy metabolism, oxidative stress, autophagy, inflammation, and aging [19]. Numerous studies demonstrate that altering SIRT3 activity can influence the progression and management of kidney diseases, emphasizing the important role of SIRT3 in renal diseases [20–22]. This suggests that SIRT3 is a potential therapeutic target for DKD.

This review consolidates significant research advancements concerning SIRT3, encompassing its structure, deacetylation mechanism, and disease implications. Additionally, we elaborate how SIRT3 contributes to the onset and advancement of DKD. We also provide a detailed discussion of the utilization of SIRT3 activators in renal diseases, highlighting the therapeutic potential of SIRT3 in DKD. Finally, we address the primary opportunities and challenges in SIRT3 research pertaining to DKD with the aim of advancing clinical applications.

SIRTs are a family of NAD+-dependent histone deacetylases that include seven members in mammals, namely SIRT1 through SIRT7 [23]. SIRT1, SIRT6, and SIRT7 are primarily found in the nucleus, SIRT2 is found in the cytoplasm, while those of SIRT3, SIRT4 and SIRT5 are mainly located in mitochondria [24] (Figure 1(A)). Mitochondrial SIRTs exhibit deacetylase activity, with SIRT3 demonstrating significantly higher activity than SIRT4 and SIRT5. SIRT3 plays a crucial role in modulating the mitochondrial acetylome, and its deacetylase function, which is essential for regulating mitochondrial biology and various pathophysiological processes, including the redox state. Thus, this review focuses on SIRT3.

Location and structure of SIRT3. (A) The location of SIRTs. SIRT3 is primarily situated in the mitochondrial matrix. (B)The structure of SIRT3. SIRT3 contains NAD+ binding domain, Zn2+ metal binding site and a binding site.

Under physiological conditions, SIRT3 is primarily situated in the mitochondrial matrix and regulates mitochondrial function. It is predominantly expressed in mitochondria-rich [18], metabolically active tissues, such as the kidney, heart, brain, muscle, liver, and adipose tissue [25–30]. As a deacetylase, SIRT3 possesses a conserved enzymatic core comprising two functional structural domains: a large Rossmann-folded structural domain that binds to NAD+ and a smaller domain containing a helical bundle and a zinc-binding motif, along with the substrate-binding site for SIRT3 [29] (Figure 1(B)). SIRT3 directly controls the activity of mitochondrial proteinsviadeacetylation. Additionally, it indirectly influences its level by regulating the gene expression of mitochondrial proteins in the nucleus. Therefore, SIRT3 can modulate mitochondrial function through various mechanisms, such as mitophagy, energy metabolism, and redox balance [31]. Through these mechanisms, SIRT3 is associated with various diseases, including heart failure, osteoarthritis, diabetes and its complications, neurological disorders, cancer, and aging [25,32–36]. The following sections will provide a detailed description of the deacetylation function of SIRT3.

Acetylating mitochondrial proteins is vital for maintaining the function of mitochondria [18]. As an important deacetylase within the mitochondria, acetylation modifications regulated by SIRT3 are essential for preserving or enhancing mitochondrial function in tissues. SIRT3 directly interacts with various mitochondrial proteins involved in diverse aspects of mitochondrial biological functions, including lipid metabolism, ATP production, oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), fatty acid oxidation (FAO), and oxidative stress [37,38]. Importantly, they are involved in mitochondrial biosynthesis, including mitochondrial DNA replication, transcription, translation, mitochondrial fission and fusion, and the maintenance of membrane integrity [33]. Overall, SIRT3 helps to maintain mitochondrial homeostasis by regulating the acetylation levels of its substrates, thereby delaying disease progression. Mitochondrial homeostasis is critical for the maintaining normal kidney function [39]. Several mechanisms, such as mitochondrial biogenesis, dynamics, mitophagy, oxidative balance, and metabolism, contribute to mitochondrial homeostasis under both physiological and pathological conditions [40]. Subsequently, we expand on the deacetylation process of SIRT3 based on the classification of mitochondrial functions (Figure 2).

The function of SIRT3 by deacetylation. SIRT3 impacts various mitochondrial functions, such as mitochondrial biogenesis, dynamics, mitophagy, oxidative balance, and energy metabolism, through its deacetylation activity on different targets.

Growing evidence shows that SIRT3 is important in the process of mitochondrial biogenesis. SIRT3 improves dysfunctional mitochondrial bioenergetics in cardiovascular diseases by deacetylating optic atrophy 1 (OPA1) and (succinate dehydrogenase) subunit A (SDHA) [41,42]. In renal cancer, SIRT3 overexpression promotes mitochondrial biogenesis by upregulating mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM)viadeacetylation [43]. Additionally, SIRT3 facilitates the deacetylation and activation of forkhead box O3 (FOXO3), which increasing the expression of TFAM and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α), further promoting mitochondrial biogenesis [44]. Mitochondrial dynamics, which involve maintaining structural integrity and function by regulating mitochondrial fusion or division processes, are also influenced by SIRT3 [45]. SIRT3 regulates mitochondrial dynamics by deacetylating i-AAA protease (YME1L1) to inhibit OPA1 cleavage, promoting mitochondrial fusion and restoring T cell function in tumors [46]. Additionally, SIRT3 directly deacetylates OPA1 to prevent self-cleavage and improve mitochondrial dynamics [47]. Intermittent fasting increases SIRT3 expression, deacetylating malate dehydrogenase 2 (MDH2), and regulates the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-FIS1 pathway. This process ameliorates lipid metabolism disorders by promoting mitochondrial fusion in hyperlipidemic mice [48]. SIRT3 deacetylation function also plays a key role in regulating mitophagy. In sepsis-induced acute kidney injury (AKI), SIRT3 expression is reduced. SIRT3 activation enhances TFAM to exert nephroprotective effects through deacetylation and promotes mitophagy [49]. In hepatic fibrosis, SIRT3 regulates PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) and nonneuronal SNAP25-like protein 1 (NIPSNAP1) deacetylation to promote mitophagy, reducing α-SMA and Col1a1 levels and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition [50]. Additionally, SIRT3 binds to and deacetylates PINK1 and parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase (Parkin), further enhancing mitophagy [51].

Mitochondrial redox homeostasis is critical for maintaining cellular homeostasis and survival in response to environmental stimuli [52]. In AKI models, SIRT3 agonists increase SIRT3 expression, reduce superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) acetylation, lower mtROS, restore ATP levels, reverse mitochondrial morphology, and mitigate apoptosis, inflammation, and fibrosis [53]. SIRT3 also enhances cardiac function by deacetylating SOD2 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 (IDH2) to reduce oxidative stress [54]. SIRT3 deacetylates peroxiredoxin-3 (PRDX3) in intestinal ischemia-reperfusion injury, significantly reducing in mitochondrial oxidative damage and apoptosis [55]. Additionally, SIRT3-mediated deacetylation of FOXO3a and FOXO1 enhances oxidative homeostasis [56,57]. Specifically, deacetylation of FOXO1 by SIRT3 diminishes oxidative stress and inhibits inflammatory responses and apoptosis [57]. Mitochondria are the central hubs of metabolic pathways that produce ATP and the building blocks necessary for lipid, nucleic acid, and protein biosynthesis [58]. Renal proximal tubular epithelial cells rely on mitochondrial OXPHOS, and SIRT3 deacetylates pyruvate dehydrogenase E1α (PDHE1α) to enable metabolic reprogramming and prevent fibrosis [59]. In mouse AKI, SIRT3 activates liver kinase B1 (LKB1) deacetylation and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), promoting fatty acid oxidation (FAO), enhancing mitochondrial function, and reducing ROS, lipid peroxidation, apoptosis, and renal injury [60]. Additionally, SIRT3 deacetylates frataxin to decrease mitochondrial iron accumulation and lipid peroxidation. It also enhances macrophage phagocytosis and anti-inflammatory activity to alleviate cardiac inflammation [61]. SIRT3 deacetylates P53, thereby reducing lung epithelial senescence and iron deposition to alleviate pulmonary fibrosis and inflammation [62]. In nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), SIRT3 overexpression deacetylates long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCAD) to improve mitochondrial energetics and acetyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family member 1 (ACSS1) to enhance fatty acid metabolism, reducing lipotoxicity [63,64]. In summary, SIRT3’s deacetylation function in mitochondria enhances mitochondrial homeostasis, exhibits anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-fibrotic properties, and attenuates cell death (Table 1).

Abbreviations: OPA1, deacetylating optic atrophy 1; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; SDHA, (succinate dehydrogenase) subunit A; TFAM, mitochondrial transcription factor A; FOXO3, forkhead box O3; YME1L1, i-AAA protease; MDH2, malate dehydrogenase 2; AKI, acute kidney injury; ECM, extracellular matrix; PINK1, PTEN-induced kinase 1; NIPSNAP1, nonneuronal SNAP25-like protein 1; Parkin, parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase; SOD2, superoxide dismutase 2; IDH2, isocitrate dehydrogenase 2; PRDX3, peroxiredoxin-3; I/R, ischemia/reperfusion; FOXO1, forkhead box O1; PDHE1α, pyruvate dehydrogenase E1α; CKD, chronic kidney disease; LKB1, liver kinase B1; ROS, reactive oxygen species; LCAD, long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase; NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; ACSS1, acetyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family member 1.

Oxidative stress arises from the excessive accumulation of ROS in the body due to an imbalance between oxidants and antioxidants, which causes oxidative damage [65]. ROS are primarily generated by the mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC), with additional sources including nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase and glucose metabolism [66,67]. Basal ROS levels are critical for maintaining cellular tissue functions such as gene expression and molecular transcription [68]. However, excess ROS can lead to pathological state of the body, including the progression of DKD [69]. A strong correlation exists between excess ROS and DKD levels. Prolonged hyperglycemia produces more ROS and relieves anti-oxidant defenses by scavenging enzymes for glycosylation [70]. Mitochondrial dysfunction further exacerbates ROS generation, driving renal injury. ROS overproduction is considered the primary trigger of DKD, inducing mediators that increase glomerular basement membrane (GBM) components, podocyte loss, endothelial detachment, tubular damage, and tubulointerstitial fibrosis [71,72]. Ultimately, these factors contribute to decreased renal function and failure.

SIRT3 is vital for regulating oxidative stress in DKD; it scavenges ROSviadeacetylating enzymes like SOD and IDH [73]. In DKD mouse models, SIRT3 expression/activity drops. Activating SIRT3 reduces ROS, improves proteinuria, and mitigates glomerular injury by deacetylating SOD2 [74]. In a high-fat diet (HFD)/streptozotocin (STZ)-induced DKD model, renal SIRT3 and antioxidant enzyme (SOD, catalase, GSH/T-GSH) activities are reduced. SIRT3 activationviaFOXO3a deacetylation upregulates Mn-SOD and catalase (FOXO3a targets), mitigating renal injury [75]. FOXO3a is also closely associated with the regulatory factor phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K). SIRT3 activates the PI3K/Akt/FOXO3a signaling pathway to mitigate high glucose (HG)-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis in renal tubular epithelial cells (RTECs) [76]. Additionally, activating the AMPK/SIRT3 pathway reduces Bcl2-like 19 kDa interacting protein 3 (Bnip3) expression, alleviating oxidative stress and apoptosis in DKD kidneys and HG-exposed cells [77]. Therefore, increasing SIRT3 expression can mitigate oxidative stress in DKD, and ameliorate renal injury.

Traditionally, DKD is attributed to metabolic disorders. However, in patients with diabetes, the pathophysiology often involves chronic sterile inflammation. For instance, renal biopsies reveal significant inflammatory cellular infiltrates [78]. In DKD, hyperglycemia, metabolic defects and secondary injury mediators can lead to renal cell damage, resulting in the release of pro-inflammatory factors [79–81]. These mediators initiate an inflammatory cascade, recruiting inflammatory cells including macrophages, monocytes, NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasomes, and activated T-cells to infiltrate the kidneys, further promoting renal damage and fibrosis, and accelerating the progression of DKD [82,83]. In a mouse model of DKD induced by HFD and STZ, and in a DKD cell model using HG cultured human RTECs (HK-2), the expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-6, and IL-18 are significantly elevated compared to those in the control group. This indicates that inflammatory factors are upregulated in DKD [84]. Therefore, it is necessary to slow the progression of DKD by modulating the inflammatory response.

The activity of SIRT3 is closely associated with inflammatory responses. In SIRT3 knockdown mice, NLRP3 inflammasomes and IL-1β expression levels are elevated compared to those in other mice, suggesting an enhanced inflammatory response [85]. In DKD rats, activation of the SIRT3/FOXO1 signaling pathway downregulates the expression of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6, thereby attenuating the renal inflammatory response [86]. Additionally, SIRT3 attenuates inflammation by increasing SOD2 levels and suppressing the expression of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1). This inhibition effectively reduces the accumulation of renal tubular ROS induced by palmitate, MCP-1 expression, and oxidative stress associated with inflammatory responses [87]. In another study, researchers observe reduced SIRT3 expression in the renal cortex and increased advanced glycation end products and ROS levels. They also note decreased anti-oxidant enzymes levels, elevated inflammatory cytokines levels, reduced anti-inflammatory factor levels, thickened glomerular membranes, altered cellular adhesion, and changes in endothelial permeability. SIRT3 activation may mitigate inflammation by reducing ROS and suppressing inflammatory cytokines, thereby improving renal injury [88].

Cell death processes, such as apoptosis, autophagy, pyroptosis, and ferroptosis, occur during the course of DKD [12,89–91]. The role of inflammation in the onset and progression of DKD is well-documented [92]. Pyroptosis and ferroptosis are types of programmed cell death linked to inflammation [93]. Autophagy is a self-digestion process that maintains intracellular homeostasis and inhibits inflammation, thereby protecting the kidney [94]. Cell death is closely associated with this condition, considering the pivotal role of inflammation in DKD.

Apoptosis is an evolutionarily conserved mode of cell death regulation and is often considered a non-inflammatory cell death process [95]. Under normal physiological conditions, apoptosis and cell division maintain the total number of cells in the body. In DKD, various factors promote apoptosis, leading to interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy, exacerbating renal failure [12]. Increasing evidence confirms the fundamental role of apoptosis in the pathogenesis of DKD. A notable increase in the ratio of the apoptosis marker Bax/Bcl2 and the level of cleaved caspase-3 protein is observed in HG-induced HK-2 cells [76], suggesting that apoptosis contributes to RTECs injury in patients with DKD. Excess ROS can lead to DNA damage, which initiates the apoptotic pathway. On one hand, elevated levels of SIRT3 protects against apoptosis by reducing ROS production. Conversely, SIRT3 overexpression counteracts the HG-induced activation of the Akt/FOXO signaling pathway, thereby mitigating apoptosis [76]. Additionally, apoptosis is attenuated by AMPK/SIRT3 axis activation, thereby inhibiting Bnip3 [77].

Pyroptosis is a gasdermin-mediated programmed cell death process dependent on the autoproteolysis of NLRP3-inflammasome-regulated caspase-1. It is characterized by cytoplasmic swelling, chromatin condensation, plasma membrane rupture, and the release of cellular contents, which subsequently triggers an intense inflammatory response [96–98]. Recent research indicates that cellular pyroptosis is linked to the pathogenesis of AKI and chronic kidney disease (CKD) [99–101]. The lack of gasdermin E (GSDME) reduces renal tubular injury, inflammation, and fibrosis induced by ureteral obstruction [102]. Blocking pyroptosis in endothelial cells or RTECs inhibits inflammatory response, thereby preventing DKD progression [99,103]. In patients with DKD, GSDMD expression is increased in the renal tubules. Electron microscopy reveals organelle swelling and damage, GBM thickening, reduced podocyte density, and decreased endothelial cell count [104]. This study also finds that activation of JNK to inhibit SIRT3 expression promotes cellular pyroptosis [104]. JNK is a member of the MAPK family that regulates various cellular behaviors such as cell differentiation, proliferation, and metabolic reprogramming [105]. This indicates that upregulation of SIRT3 expression inhibits cellular pyroptosis. Another study demonstrates that SIRT3 resists pyroptosis by modulating FOXO3a [106].

Ferroptosis is a type of nonapoptotic cell death caused by the accumulation of intracellular iron, leading to the buildup of harmful peroxidized lipids. It is characterized by reduced antioxidant capacity, iron overload, and the accumulation of lipid peroxidation products [107–109]. A related study reveals that ferroptosis is linked to kidney injury in STZ-induced type 1 diabetic and db/db mice. Furthermore, SLC7A11 and glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) expression levels are significantly downregulated in renal biopsy specimens from patients with DM. This mechanism may be related to the HG-induced production of ROS and Malondialdehyde in podocytes and the inhibition of SOD and GSH synthesis and accumulation. Due to the high sensitivity of podocytes to ROS, excessive ROS can induce irreversible damage to podocyte structure and function, resulting in ferroptosis and DKD [110,111]. Excess ROS can induce ferroptosis in RTECs. Downregulation of SIRT3 in the diabetic group significantly reduces the expression levels of GPX4, glutaredoxin3, PRDX3, and thioredoxin-2 proteins compared to those in normal Beagles. SIRT3 activation inhibits ferroptosis through SOD2 deacetylation and increases GPX4 expression [112]. Other studies confirm that SIRT3 activation can effectively inhibit ferroptosis, providing further theoretical support for our study [113,114].

Autophagy is a fundamental physiological process that removes damaged organelles and protein aggregates, thereby recycling and remobilizing nutrients [115]. There is increasing evidence that under conditions of HG stress stimulation, impaired autophagy leads to the accumulation of damaged organelles and proteins, disrupting intracellular homeostasis, and resulting in renal tissue damage and DKD [116–118]. Therefore, inhibition of HG-induced autophagy is a key pathogenic factor in DKD [11]. It shows that attenuation of autophagy impairment is associated with the repair of RTECs damage by hyperglycemia [119,120]. Modulating the lactate/SIRT3/AMPK or SIRT3/DRP1 pathways enhances autophagy dysfunction in an AKI model [121,122]. In HG-stimulated HK-2 cells, the expression of LC3II and Beclin-1 is decreased. However, SIRT3 overexpression reverses HG-induced inhibition of autophagy. Moreover, SIRT3 promotes autophagy by inhibiting the Notch-1/Hes-1 pathway [123]. Notch-1 demonstrates to participate in cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis [124]. Activation of Notch-1 is associated with podocyte injury in DKD [125]. Another study finds that, compared to amniotic fluid stem cells (AFSCs) implanted alone, AFSCs overexpressing SIRT3 significantly enhanced cell survival by activating mitochondrial autophagy, leading to a notable reduction in glomerular cell apoptosis and inhibition of renal interstitial fibrosis [126]. In other diseases, SIRT3 overexpression attenuates SOD2 acetylation, reduces mROS levels, and prevents autophagic cell death [127]. These findings indicate that SIRT3 regulation of autophagy could be a promising approach for treating DKD.

Disorders of glucolipid metabolism are important factors in the development of chronic complications of diabetes. Hyperglycemia is considered the primary initiating factor of kidney injury in DKD [128]. Excess glucose generates ROS through various pathways. Dysregulation of lipid metabolism is linked to inflammation, podocyte dysfunction, fibrosis, and a decline in estimated glomerular filtration rate [129]. Furthermore, diabetes is often accompanied by obesity, which leads to fat accumulation in the kidneys [130]. In DKD, excessive lipid accumulation surpasses the capacity for lipid droplet storage, leading to damage to the podocytes and tubular cell structures [131]. Therefore, abnormalities in both glucose and lipid-energy metabolism affect the structure and function of the glomeruli and tubules in patients with DKD, with the severity of these abnormalities closely correlating with the condition’s progression.

SIRT3 is a key intermediate molecule that regulates metabolic shifts in the kidney, and its deficiency leads to metabolic damage in DKD [132]. Under normal physiological conditions, proximal tubules primarily utilize β-oxidation of free fatty acids for energy. However, in diabetic conditions, SIRT3 deficiency causes abnormal glycolysis by activating pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) dimer formation and hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF1α) accumulation, thereby promoting metabolic shifts toward aberrant glycolysis to stimulate fibrosis. In renal tubular cells, SIRT3 activation ameliorates fibrosis by inhibiting aberrant glycolysis [133]. Deficiency of SIRT3 results in abnormal glycolysis and simultaneous epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition by activating the TGFβ/Smad3 pathway, inducing PKM2-type dimerization, and accumulating HIF1α. N-acetyl-seryl-aspartyl-lysyl-proline (Ac-SDKP) is an endogenous antifibrotic mediator that restores normal mitochondrial metabolism and FAO [134]. It also inhibits glucose metabolism defects associated with HIF1α-inducible proteins by repairing SIRT3, while decreasing CPT1α expression [135]. In diabetic mice, the proximal renal tubules exhibit up-regulated expression of genes associated with stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (Scd1), and downregulated level of genes involved in fatty acid β-oxidation and OXPHOS. Pathologically, extensive fat deposition is observed in renal tissues, particularly within the renal tubules. SIRT3 regulates lipid metabolism in renal tubules through the AMPK or uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) signaling pathways [135]. AMPK, which is influenced by SIRT3, promotes lipid mobilization in adipocytes [136], while UCP1 regulates lipid deposition and facilitates the direct utilization of thermogenic lipids [135]. Additionally, ketogenesis plays a crucial role in reversing energy metabolism in DKD. Ketogenesis provides renoprotective effects by activating SIRT3, which helps mitigate oxidative stress. Overexpression of SIRT3 counteracts the suppression of SMCT1 expression induced by hyperinsulinemia, consequently decreasing β-hydroxybutyrate uptake [137,138]. Studies show that AMPK and PGC-1α activation prevents HG-induced lipid accumulation in podocytes, while SIRT3 can activate AMPK. Therefore, SIRT3 can be utilized to regulate metabolism and alleviate kidney injury in DKD (Figure 3).

The mechanisms of SIRT3 in DKD. SIRT3 delays the progression of DKD by inhibiting oxidative stress, reducing inflammation, regulating cell death, and modulating energy metabolism.

Increasing evidence indicates that SIRT3 intervention can ameliorate diabetic kidney injury, highlighting its potential as a therapeutic strategy. SIRT3 activators exhibit anti-inflammatory properties, inhibit oxidative stress, exert anti-fibrotic effects, and regulate metabolism. Agonists capable of modulating SIRT3 for diagnosing and treating kidney diseases can be broadly categorized into three groups: small molecules, natural products, and clinical drugs (Figure 4). All of these demonstrate efficacy in alleviating kidney injury (Tables 2and3).

Pleiotropic effect of SIRT3 activators in kidney diseases. These drugs provide nephroprotective effects by decreasing oxidative stress and inflammation, enhancing metabolism, safeguarding mitochondrial function, reducing apoptosis, and diminishing fibrosis.

Positive modulators of SIRT3 as potential therapies for DKD and other kidney diseases.

Abbreviations: Metrnl, Meteorin-like; SIRT3, Sirtuin 3; AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; DKD, diabetic kidney disease; HFD, high-fat diet; STZ, streptozotocin; UCP1, uncoupling protein 1; PA, palmitic acid; HG, high glucose; PGC-1α, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1α; SIRT1, Sirtuin 1; Err-α, estrogen-related receptor-α; Bnip3, Bcl2-like 19 kDa interacting protein 3; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; FOXO3a, forkhead box O3; HK-2, human renal tubular epithelial cells; AKI, acute kidney injury; ATPb, ATP synthase b; OPA1, optic atrophy 1; SOD2, superoxide dismutase 2; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ROS, reactive oxygen species; Nrf2, nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2; GPX4, glutathione peroxidase 4; CKD, chronic kidney disease; 5/6Nx, 5/6 nephrectomy; VSMCs, vascular smooth muscle cells; BPA, Bisphenol A; TGF-β, transforming growth factor β; CAT, catalase; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-alpha; TCMK-1, mouse tubular epithelial; FIS1, mitochondrial fission 1 protein; TFAM, mitochondrial transcription factor A; UUO, unilateral ureteral obstruction.

Clinical drugs activate SIRT3 for the treatment of DKD and other kidney diseases.

Abbreviations: ERK‑Yap, extra-cellular signal‑regulated kinase‑Yes‑associated protein;SIRT3, Sirtuin 3; DKD, diabetic kidney disease; HG, high glucose; AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; SOD2, superoxide dismutase 2; ROS, reactive oxygen species; AKI, acute kidney injury; I/R, ischemia and reperfusion; HK-2, human renal tubular epithelial cells; SIRT1, Sirtuin 1;PGC-1α, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1α; IFNα, interferon-α; RMCs, renal mesangial cells.

Meteorin-like (Metrnl) is a hormone recently found to be released by skeletal muscle and adipose tissue during exercise and exposure to cold [139]. It exerts metabolic effects and improves glucose metabolism, thereby influencing diabetes progression [140]. Serum Metrnl concentrations are negatively correlated with renal function and DKD, and the expression level of Metrnl in renal biopsy tissues from patients with DKD is significantly reduced [141]. Metrnl negatively regulates lipid accumulation in the kidneys of DKD. The inhibitor of SIRT3 abolishes AMPK activation induced by Metrnl overexpression and counteracts the protective effects of Metrnl on mitochondrial dynamics in RTECs. This indicates that Metrnl exerts its therapeutic effects by enhancing the expression of SIRT3 [135].

Several studies employ the TGR5 agonist INT777 and the FXR/TGR5 dual agonist INT767 to upregulate SIRT3 expression, thereby preventing podocyte injury, mesangial dilation, and renal interstitial fibrosis in DKD mice [142,143]. INT777 promotes mitochondrial biosynthesis and prevents oxidative stress and lipid accumulation in the kidneys. Additionally, INT767 acts through these pathways, inhibits endoplasmic reticulum stress and activates AMPK. Stanniocalcin-1 (STC-1) is an autocrine or paracrine factor that exhibits anti-oxidant, mitochondrial, and anti-apoptotic activities [144]. STC-1 suppresses Bnip3 expression by activating the AMPK/SIRT3 pathway, thereby enhancing oxidative balance and reducing cell apoptosis. Clinical trial finds that higher STC-1 levels correlate with better prognosis in patients with DKD [77]. Pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) is a novel vitamin B known for its anti-oxidant and anti-apoptotic effects. In HG-stimulated HK-2 cells, PQQ significantly enhances SIRT3 expression and reduces apoptosisviathe PI3K/Akt/FOXO3a signaling pathway [76]. Thus, these small molecules show promise as potential therapeutic agents for patients with DKD.

Natural products and their active ingredients have become important options for treating various chronic diseases, including DKD [160]. Reducing oxidative stress delays DKD progression. Several natural products and their extracts are found to inhibit oxidative stress by upregulating SIRT3 expression. Honokiol, a nontoxic small-molecule polyphenol isolated fromMagnolia officinalisis utilized as an activator of SIRT3 in research on various diseases, including kidney diseases [161], metabolic disorders [162], and cardiovascular conditions [163]. In ob/ob mice, honokiol selectively modulates the SIRT3 pathway, leading to deacetylation of SOD2, reduced ROS levels, and preservation of mitochondrial structure and function. This can reduce proteinuria and alleviate glomerular lesions [74]. Apigenin, a flavonoid present in vegetables, fruits, herbs, and plant-based beverages, can inhibit CD38 expression in the kidneys of diabetic rats, enhance SIRT3 activity in RTECs, reduce mitochondrial oxidative stress, thereby improving diabetic kidney injury such as tubulointerstitial fibrosis, tubular cell injury, and pro-inflammatory gene expression [164].

Salvianolic acid B (SAB), the most common bioactive component in the traditional Chinese medicineSalvia miltiorrhiza Bunge, is shown to alleviate oxidative stress in DKD by activating the SIRT3/FOXO1 signaling pathway. It also reduces pro-inflammatory cytokines, exerting protective effects on the kidneys [86]. Calycosin (C16H12O5), the main active ingredient inRadix astragali(Astragalus membranaceus), is widely used to alleviate symptoms of diabetes and DKD [165–167]. In HG-treated cells, calycosin significantly increases the expression of SIRT-3/SOD2 and reduces ROS production, thereby restoring cellular viability and preventing membrane damage caused by HG treatment [168].Molineria recurvata(MR) [88], purple rice husk extract (PRHE) [169], ursolic acid [170], and aucubin [75] can all improve diabetic kidney injury by reducing oxidative stress.

In the AKI model, dihydromyricetin activates SIRT3 to inhibit inflammation responses, oxidative stress, and apoptosis, thereby mitigating gentamicin-induced renal function deterioration [171]. Notoginsenoside Fc alleviates renal tubular injury and improves mitochondrial dysfunction by modulating the SIRT3/SOD2 pathway [172]. Resveratrol can ameliorate cadmium-induced renal injury. However, following the administration of SIRT3 siRNA, mitochondrial function was attenuated, indicating that SIRT3 is a crucial target through which resveratrol exerts its effects [173]. Melatonin exhibits nephroprotective effects against oxidative stress, apoptosis, and inflammation by activating SIRT3 [174]. Several studies explore SIRT3 agonists that inhibit oxidative stress, suppress inflammation, prevent cell death, and restore mitochondrial function to ameliorate renal injury in cisplatin-induced AKI [161,175–177]. Rhein reduces renal interstitial fibrosis and enhances antioxidant activityviathe SIRT3/FOXO3a pathway in CKD [178]. Poricoic acid A and diosmin upregulate SIRT3 expression, exerting anti-fibrotic and anti-inflammatory effects to protect the kidneys in a unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) model [179,180]. Resveratrol significantly restores injured glomerular structure through SIRT3-mediated autophagy [181]. Green tea polyphenols mitigate HFD-induced renal oxidative stress and impairmentviathe ketogenic/SIRT3 pathway [138]. This indicates that numerous natural products serve as SIRT3 agonists, prompting further investigation into related studies in the field of DKD.

Liraglutide is an anti-diabetic medication and a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist. In an experimental model of DKD induced by HFD, unilateral nephrectomy, and STZ, liraglutide alleviates renal ectopic lipid deposition by promoting AMPK phosphorylation, inhibiting lipid synthesis, and enhancing lipolysis [182]. In a single-center clinical trial, liraglutide is found to be antihyperglycemic, anti-inflammation and anti-oxidative stress, improve podocyte injury, reduce urinary albumin excretion, and protect kidney function [183]. In HG-stimulated human renal mesangial cells, liraglutide maintains cell viability by activating the extracellular signal-regulated kinase-Yap (ERK-Yap) signaling pathway, upregulating SIRT3 expression, and inhibiting mitochondrial apoptosis [184].

Another classic hypoglycemic drug, metformin, can improve renal function in SIRT3 KR mice. Compared with SIRT3 WT mice, SIRT3 KR mice exhibit increased antioxidant and metabolic changes during AKI. This suggests that SIRT3 is a target through which metformin ameliorates renal inflammation and fibrosis [53]. Silybin and magnesium isoglycyrrhizinate (MgIG), both clinically used in treating liver disease, exert nephroprotective effects by enhancing SIRT3 expression, thereby ameliorating cisplatin-induced mitochondrial damage in mice and cells [185,186]. Eplerenone, an antihypertensive drug, preserves mitochondrial function and cell survival by increasing SIRT1, SIRT3, and PGC-1α levels. It also reduces renal inflammation by inhibiting the NF-κB signaling pathway [187]. Dexmedetomidine (DEX), an α2-adrenoceptor agonist used clinically for sedation and analgesia, protects kidneys from ischemia-reperfusion injury by inhibiting mitochondrial damage and apoptosis through upregulation of SIRT3 in an AKI model [188]. In a nephritis model, DEX promotes SIRT3 expression and inhibited interferon (IFN)α-induced inflammation, oxidative stress, and apoptosis, thereby providing nephroprotection [189]. We discover that besides hypoglycemic drugs, anti-hypertensive medications, liver disease treatments, and sedative and analgesic drugs elevated SIRT3 expression in kidney disease. This finding suggests implications for studying these or similar drugs for DKD.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is crucial in the development of DKD. SIRT3 is a mitochondrial sirtuin that activates various proteins and transcription factors through deacetylation. This influences multiple aspects of mitochondrial biological functions and contributes to mitochondrial biosynthesis. Overall, SIRT3 helps maintain mitochondrial homeostasis and improves mitochondrial dysfunction by regulating substrate acetylation levels, making it a potential therapeutic target that awaits clinical validation.

SIRT3 expression is decreased in the serum and renal tissues of patients with diabetes and has been shown to be inhibited in several DKD animal models [74,135,170,190]. The decline in renal function is more pronounced, and renal tissue fibrosis is more severe in SIRT3 knockout mice [191]. Reduced SIRT3 levels can lead to DKD by causing mitochondrial dysfunction, increased oxidative stress, inflammation, and disturbances in energy metabolism. We summarize SIRT3’s role in DKD, focusing on its ability to inhibit oxidative stress, mitigate inflammation, regulate cell death, and modulate energy metabolism. These findings indicate that SIRT3 could be a valuable therapeutic target for DKD.

SIRT3 activators, including small molecules, natural extracts, and clinical drugs, exhibit protective effects against kidney diseases. These results show that SIRT3 is vital for slowing the progression of kidney diseases, particularly through its anti-fibrotic, anti-inflammatory effects, reduction of oxidative stress, and regulation of mitochondrial function and energy metabolism. These findings underscore the urgent need for a thorough exploration of the diverse properties of SIRT3 before clinical application.

In summary, activating SIRT3 expression contributes to alleviating kidney diseases such as DKD. However, everything has two sides, and there is a substantial amount of research that remains unaddressed. For example, there is a dearth of high-quality human studies, challenges persist in the pharmacological activation of mitochondrial proteins, and there are potential off-target effects that may arise from SIRT3 modulation. Currently, there is a paucity of clinical research data on SIRT3. Through summarizing the existing literature, we plan to conduct subsequent clinical trials related to SIRT3, including investigating the expression of SIRT3 in renal tissues as well as in serum, with the aim of better serving clinical practice.

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant NO. 82174296, U23A20504, 82174144), National High Level Hospital Clinical Research Funding (NO. 2023-NHLHCRF-DJMS-05, 2024-NHLHCRF-JBGS-ZH-01), Elite Medical Professionals project of China-Japan Friendship Hospital (NO. ZRJY2024-GG11).

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).