Cerebral small vessel diseases (cSVDs) contribute significantly to stroke and dementia. Advanced 7 T MRI techniques have revealed small vessel dysfunction in cSVD patients, linked to global white matter damage cross-sectionally. However, it remains unclear whether these vascular deficits predict progressive tissue damage. This longitudinal study examined the spatial relationship between local vascular function and white matter damage progression in patients with Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL). Twenty-two patients underwent baseline small vessel function assessment using 7 T MRI. Voxelwise blood-oxygenation level-dependent cerebrovascular reactivity (BOLD-CVR) to a hypercapnic was evaluated. White matter changes were assessed on 3 T MRI over two years, analyzing mean diffusivity changes and conversion of normal-appearing white matter to white matter hyperintensities (WMH). Results showed significant global increases in white matter damage over time. Voxelwise analysis revealed that lower baseline BOLD-CVR magnitude and higher dispersion were associated with increased white matter damage and WMH progression at specific locations at follow-up. However, whole-brain vascular function measures did not predict white matter changes at a global level. These findings suggest that local vascular function plays a key role in white matter damage progression in CADASIL, highlighting the importance of regional vascular health in cSVDs.

Therefore, this longitudinal study aims to determine the spatial coherence between local small vessel function and progression of white matter damage in patients with CADASIL. Our primary analyses assessed this association locally, at the voxel level, using functional measures of white matter (WM) CVR to a hypercapnic stimulus to assess local small vessel function. The WM CVR signal is generally low at clinical field strengths and may not be enough to derive meaningful local information. In this work, we therefore used 7 T MRI to assess WM CVR at the voxel level and associated it with incident WMH and deterioration of white matter microstructure measured with diffusion MRI (mean diffusivity, MD), two complementary, but distinct markers of progressive white matter damage. To put local voxel-wise associations in perspective to global effects, we performed secondary analyses with global small vessel function measures, including perforating artery flow and pulsatility in relation to global indicators of white matter damage.

Patients with CADASIL were recruited through the ZOOM@SVDs study, a prospective cohort study with a follow-up measurement after two years.18This was a collaborative study between the University Medical Center Utrecht (UMCU) in the Netherlands and the Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU), Munich, Germany. At the LMU, 23 patients with CADASIL and 13 unrelated, age, and sex-matched controls were recruited for the baseline assessment between October 2017 and July 2019. Participants underwent a 3 T brain MRI at baseline and travelled to the UMCU 8–28 days after the baseline visit to undergo a 7T brain MRI. Not all participants successfully underwent all 7 T MRI scans. Follow-up MRIs were performed two years after baseline at LMU.

The present longitudinal study only included the CADASIL patients in the analysis. CADASIL was confirmed in these participants by molecular testing for mutation of the NOTCH3 gene or through skin biopsy. The Medical Ethics Review Committees of the UMCU (Project number NL62090.041.17) and LMU (Project Number 17-088) approved the study, which was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the European law of General Data Protection Regulation. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.

Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) data were processed following a previously described method.21In short, the raw data were initially visually inspected for major artefacts. Scans were denoised and corrected for Gibbs, distortion, and motion artefacts and intensity bias. After pre-processing, the diffusion tensors were calculated on the b = 0 and b = 1000 m/s2data to obtain the white matter MD maps. Peak width of skeletonised mean diffusivity (PSMD) was computed with the MD maps using the publicly available script (https://github.com/miac-research/psmd).22PSMD is an index of the dispersion of the MD values across the white matter skeleton and has been described in detail before. PSMDNAWMwas computed for the NAWM. The NAWM masks were acquired by subtracting lesions (i.e. WMH and lacunes) from the total white matter mask.

Small vessel function was assessed on 7T MRI with two complementary measures in different regions of interest. All these measures, along with their respective analysis pipelines, have been described in detail before.18In short, the following functional measures were assessed.

To quantify the progression of white matter damage over time locally, MD maps were first linearly registered to the FLAIR scans at baseline and follow-up, using FLIRT from the Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB) software library (FSL) v6.0.6.31Follow-up FLAIR scans were then registered to the baseline FLAIR scans using a combination of affine registration and non-linear deformation with the symmetrical normalisation approach32using the Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs) software package.33WMH were masked out during the deformation to prevent size changes of the lesions. Finally, 7T BOLD scans were registered to baseline FLAIR space using ‘epi_reg’ from FSL.31All local analyses were thus performed in FLAIR space with 1 mm isotropic resolution. BOLD-CVR data were upsampled with trilinear interpolation to match the 1 mm isotropic resolution of the FLAIR data. An overview of the registration process is shown inFigure 1.

Registration-overview linking longitudinal white matter damage to baseline small vessel function. (a) DWI scans were registered to FLAIR scans at baseline and follow-up (b) using linear affine registration with ‘FSL FLIRT.12’ (d) Follow-up FLAIR scans were then registered to baseline FLAIR (c) using non-linear deformation with the symmetric normalisation method of the ANTs software package.13,14(e) The functional 7T BOLD-CVR data (acquired voxel size 2 mm isotropic; upsampled to 1mm isotropic) were registered to baseline FLAIR data (voxel size 1 mm isotropic) using linear registration with ‘FSL epi_reg12’ and trilinear interpolation. ANTs: advanced normalization tools; BOLD: blood-oxygenation level-dependent; CVR: cerebrovascular reactivity; DWI: diffusion-weighted imaging; FLAIR: fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; FSL: FMRIB software library; MD: mean diffusivity; NAWM: normal-appearing white matter; WMH: white matter hyperintensity.

Following registration, the WM masks were eroded to correct for segmentation and registration errors at the boundary between WM and GM and to mitigate partial volume effects from GM. An erosion kernel of 2 mm was chosen based on the acquired resolution of the 7T BOLD-CVR data and the biological point-spread function of the BOLD signal (∼1.5 mm).34Additionally, a region dilated 6 mm around the ventricles in FLAIR space was masked out to exclude the effects of the large subependymal veins around the ventricles on the BOLD-CVR data. The size of this region was empirically determined by choosing a dilation size that would mask out any remaining partial volume effects of the ventricles in all participants. Baseline WM MD maps were subtracted from follow-up WM MD maps in baseline FLAIR image space to obtain voxel-wise ΔMD maps. Baseline and follow-up WMH masks in baseline FLAIR image space were subtracted from each other in native FLAIR space to obtain masks indicating the stable voxels in NAWM and masks of the NAWM voxels that progressed to WMH, and similarly, masks of WMH voxels that reverted to NAWM after a two-year follow-up (Figure 2). We used these masks to define the “tissue fate” for all WM voxels, i.e., NAWM remaining stable, NAWM progressing to WMH, and WMH reverting to NAWM after a two-year follow-up.

White matter hyperintensity changes after a two-year follow-up. (a) The top row shows a frequency map of WMH of the whole cohort at baseline and after two-year follow-up, including a frequency map of the locations with incident WMH and (b) FLAIR scans of an individual participant are shown in the bottom row for baseline on the left and follow-up in the middle. The arrows indicate new WMH lesions appearing after two-year follow-up. BOLD-CVR: blood-oxygenation level-dependent cerebrovascular reactivity; FLAIR: fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; GM: gray matter; NAWM: normal-appearing white matter; WMH: white matter hyperintensity; WM: white matter.

Global white matter injury progression was characterised as changes in total WMH volume and PSMDNAWM, measured in native FLAIR and DWI space, respectively, after a two-year follow-up. WMH at baseline and follow-up were normalised to intracranial volume (ICV). Normalised WMH and PSMDNAWMwere subsequently cube-root transformed. Global white matter damage progression was defined as follow-up WMH and PSMDNAWMminus baseline WMH and PSMDNAWM(i.e. ΔWMH = WMHfollow-up– WMHbaseline; ΔPSMDNAWM= PSMDNAWM follow-up– PSMDNAWM baseline).

First, the baseline mean BOLD-CVR magnitude and dispersion were compared between the NAWM and WMH with a paired t-test. Moreover, the global association between small vessel function and white matter damage burden at baseline was assessed with Spearman correlations because of the skewness of the baseline data. Correction for age was not performed because age is strongly collinear with disease burden in CADASIL.

Then, the median percentages of NAWM voxels progressing to WMH and WMH reverting to NAWM were computed across participants, with corresponding interquartile ranges (IQR). Last, a paired t-test was performed to assess if the changes in WMH volume and ΔMDNAWM(ΔMDNAWM=MDNAWM follow-up–MDNAWM baseline) and PSMDNAWMafter a two-year follow-up were significantly different.

To assess the voxel-wise associations of small vessel function measures and local progression of white matter damage across the whole cohort, all baseline NAWM voxels of all participants were concatenated into a single dataset with corresponding baseline BOLD-CVR magnitude, BOLD-CVR dispersion, ΔetCO2, tissue fate, ΔMD, and participant ID. Voxel-wise CVR magnitude (%) or dispersion (s) measurements were entered as individual fixed effects into linear mixed models for ΔMD and tissue fate, respectively. All models were corrected for ΔetCO2 as fixed effect. All models included the participant ID as a random effect to account for between-subject effects. Additionally, to accommodate for possible between-subjects age effects, we added Age as an additional fixed effect in the models in sensitivity analyses. These analyses were also performed separately for stable NAWM and NAWM to WMH voxels.

For “tissue fate”, linear mixed models were used, and odds ratios (OR) were calculated for the association between CVR magnitude and dispersion with the odds of NAWM progressing to WMH and the reversion of WMH to NAWM.

As an additional exploratory analysis, a one-way ANOVA was performed to compare the mean regional BOLD-CVR (magnitude, dispersion) at baseline between the white matter fate regions (stable NAWM, NAWM to WMH, and stable WMH) across all patients. Tukey’s HSD Test for multiple comparisons was used in the post-hoc analyses. We also report the BOLD-CVR in stable WMH and grey matter for comparison.

The global association between small vessel function at baseline and progressive white matter damage was assessed with regression analyses. All small vessel function measures were entered in univariate linear regression models with ΔWMH and ΔPSMDNAWMas dependent variables.

All linear mixed model analyses were performed in R (version 4.2.1, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) with the ‘lme4’ package. The exploratory and global analyses were performed in MATLAB (version R2021a, the MathWorks, Natick, MA). A significance level of p < 0.05 was considered significant after correction for multiple comparisons for all the primary, exploratory, and global secondary analyses.

The data that support the findings of this study are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.

Of the original 23 patients with CADASIL recruited at baseline, 22 had a successful follow-up. Seventeen of the 22 participants with a successful follow-up had a completed BOLD-CVR at baseline. The mean age of the 22 included patients was 51 years (range: 28–67). Six of the patients (27%) had a history of stroke. The median WMH volume was 51 mL, or 3.5% of ICV. Twelve patients (55%) had lacunes, and twelve patients had microbleeds detected with 3T MRI. Characteristics of the included patients have been described in detail before7and are shown inTable 1. The median follow-up time of the study population was 25 months (range: 24–39 months).

ICV: intracranial volume; IQR: inter-quartile range; MD: mean diffusivity; PSMD: Peak width of the skeletonized mean diffusivity; SD: standard deviation; WMH: white matter hyperintensities.

At baseline, the BOLD-CVR magnitude (n = 17) was lower in the WMH compared to NAWM (NAWM. mean ± SD: 0.054 ± 0.047%/mmHg vs. WMH: 0.013 ± 0.026%/mmHg; p < 0.001), and the dispersion was higher in WMH compared to NAWM (NAWM: 46 s ± 13s vs. WMH: 59 ± 15 s; p < 0.001). The BOLD-CVR magnitude in GM was 0.26 ± 0.13%/mmHg, and dispersion was 14 ± 8 s. Perforating artery pulsatility measures were obtained from all patients at baseline (Supplementary Fig. 1). The cross-sectional associations of global small vessel function measures with baseline white matter damage reported previously are in Supplementary Table 2, for reference. Blood flow velocity of the perforating arteries at the CSO was negatively associated with baseline WMH volume (Spearman’s ρ: −0.48;p =0.025) and PSMDNAWM(Spearman’s ρ: −0.44;p =0.040). The pulsatility index of the perforating arteries at the CSO was negatively associated with baseline WMH volume (Spearman’s ρ: −0.43;p =0.049).

At follow-up, the median WMH volume increase [IQR] was 5.1 [8.7] mL (0.3 [0.6]% of ICV; p < 0.001) over all included patients (Table 2). The median volume [IQR] of NAWM voxels converting to WMH was 5.1 [8.3] mL (4.1 [8.3]% of total NAWM), and the median volume [IQR] of WMH voxels converting to NAWM was 0.15 [0.53] mL (1.3 [1.9]% of total WMH). There was a significant increase of ΔMDNAWM(mean difference ± SD (mm2/s × 10−4): 0.13 ± 0.17; p = 0.003) after a two-year follow-up. ΔPSMDNAWMalso significantly increased after two-year follow-up (mean difference ± SD (mm2/s × 10−4): 0.15 ± 0.28; p = 0.011) (Supplementary Figure 2). Sensitivity analyses with Age as an additional covariate in the voxel-wise analyses did not show any differences in the results (Supplemental Material).

ICV: intracranial volume; IQR: inter-quartile range; MD: mean diffusivity; NAWM: normal appearing white matter; PSMD: Peak width of the skeletonised mean diffusivity; SD: standard deviation; WMH: white matter hyperintensities; in the 17 patients included in the BOLD-CVR analyses these numbers were similar: (Supplementary Table 1).

Baseline NAWM BOLD-CVR magnitude was negatively associated with baseline MD at voxel-level (β [95% CI]: −13.4 [−13.5 – −13.4] × 10−6;p <1.0 ×10−15), indicating that voxels with a lower baseline BOLD-CVR magnitude were associated with a higher baseline MD (Supplementary Fig. 1). For the primary longitudinal voxel-wise analysis, baseline NAWM BOLD-CVR magnitude was negatively associated with the change in MD (ΔMD) (β [95% CI]: −1.17 [−1.21 – −1.12] × 10−6;p <1 × 10−15) as shown inFigure 3. This negative association was observed both in NAWM voxels remaining stable and in those converting to WMH, albeit five-fold stronger in the latter (NAWM stable: β [95% CI] = −0.64 [−0.68–−0.60] ×10−6;p <1 × 10−15, NAWM to WMH: β [95% CI] = −3.20 [−3.54–−2.86] × 10−6;p <1 × 10−15).

Voxelwise association between baseline BOLD-CVR and longitudinal ΔMD. Voxelwise linear mixed model associations between baseline BOLD-CVR and longitudinal ΔMD are shown for NAWM in FLAIR space (voxel size 1 mm isotropic). Associations are shown for all NAWM at baseline (a), separated into NAWM that remained stable (green) and progressed to WMH (purple) after a two-year follow-up (b). Unstandardised regression coefficients (β) are shown for each association with 95%-CI; *: all were significant at p < 1.0 × 10−15. The shaded area represents the standard error from the regression fit. BOLD: blood-oxygenation level-dependent; CI: confidence interval; CVR: cerebrovascular reactivity; MD: mean diffusivity; NAWM: normal-appearing white matter.

Similarly, BOLD-CVR dispersion at baseline was positively associated with baseline MD at voxel-level (β [95% CI]: 0.30 [0.30–0.31]×10−6;p <1 × 10−15). Longitudinally, the BOLD-CVR dispersion was positively associated with ΔMD on a voxel-level (β [95% CI]: 0.047 [0.045–0.049]×10−6;p <1 × 10−15). This positive association between BOLD-CVR dispersion and ΔMD was observed both in stable NAWM voxels and those converting to WMH, with the latter association being three times stronger (NAWM stable: β [95% CI] = 0.034 [0.032–0.036]×10−6;p <1 × 10−15, NAWM to WMH: β [95% CI] = 0.11 [0.096–0.12]×10−6;p <1 × 10−15).

BOLD-CVR also predicted conversion of NAWM to WMH at voxel-level; the lower the CVR magnitude and the higher the BOLD-CVR dispersion, the higher the chance of conversion (OR per % 0.81 ([95% CI]: [0.81–0.82];p <1 × 10−15and per 10 s 1.06 ([95% CI]: [1.06–1.06];p <1 × 10−15, respectively;Table 3). Moreover, BOLD-CVR magnitude was positively and dispersion negatively associated with the odds of WMH reverting back to NAWM (magnitude OR per % 1.06 ([95% CI]: [1.04–1.09];p =1.3 × 10−7and dispersion OR per 10 s 0.95 ([95% CI]: [0.95–0.96];p <1 × 10−15, respectively;Table 3). Baseline BOLD-CVR according to tissue fate regions of interest are presented in Supplementary Table 1, for reference.

Voxelwise associations between local BOLD-CVR at baseline and tissue fate.

The linear mixed model results between BOLD-CVR in NAWM and voxelwise tissue fate are represented with ORs with 95%-CI and p-values. ORs are given per percentage of BOLD-CVR magnitude and per 10 s of BOLD-CVR dispersion. A p-value ≤0.05 denotes statistical significance.

BOLD: blood-oxygenation level-dependent; CI: confidence interval; CVR: cerebrovascular reactivity; NAWM: normal-appearing white matter; OR: odds ratio; WMH: white matter hyperintensity.

Table 4shows the global associations of the baseline small vessel function measures with longitudinal white matter damage change. No consistent relations were found between any of the global small vessel function measures, including BOLD-CVR, and the progression of WMH volume or PSMDNAWMafter a two-year follow-up (allp> 0.05), also in terms of directions of effects.

Associations between global small vessel function at baseline and global longitudinal white matter damage change.

Baseline associations between global measures of small vessel function and white matter damage. For white matter damage, ΔWMH volume and NAWM ΔPSMD were used. p ≤ 0.05 denoted statistical significance. All BOLD-CVR models were adjusted for end-tidal CO2.

β: standardised beta; BG: basal ganglia; BOLD: blood-oxygenation level-dependent; CI: confidence interval; CSO: centrum semioval; NAWM: normal-appearing white matter; PSMD: Peak width of the skeletonized mean diffusivity; WMH: white matter hyperintensities.

Using high-field 7T MRI and voxel-wise analyses, we show that local white matter CVR predicts local progression of white matter damage over time, reflected in increasing MD values and progression of WMH, whereas higher CVR in WMH predicts reversal to NAWM in patients with CADASIL. The secondary global analysis did not capture an association between small vessel function and progression of white matter damage globally across the brain, likely due to a lack of sensitivity. These findings imply that local deficits in vascular function contribute to the development of white matter damage over time in patients with CADASIL.

This study was performed in patients with CADASIL, a genetic disorder caused by a mutation of the NOTCH3 gene with a very distinct pathophysiology and rapid lesion growth. We found a WMH growth of 0.5% of ICV over two years, which aligns with what was previously reported for CADASIL.41Interestingly, some WMH voxels reverted to NAWM after a two-year follow-up in all patients; however, the amount of regression observed in our study was lower than the threshold (0.25 mL) that has been proposed previously in literature as the minimum amount of regression that can be visually appreciated.42,43Pre-clinical studies have shown that mice with the NOTCH3 mutation exhibit impaired cerebral blood flow regulation and impaired cerebrovascular function prior to structural abnormalities, such as brain parenchyma lesions or loss of vascular smooth muscle cells.44,45Loss of smooth muscle cells is also reported at autopsy in patients with CADASIL.46,47Of note is that CVR, in response to a hypercapnic stimulus, is predominantly a myogenic mechanism of the vascular smooth muscle cells. When impaired, this leads to decreased relaxation or increased resistance of the small vessels.44Our findings show that impaired BOLD-CVR could be a marker for local dysfunction, possibly reflecting the loss of vascular smooth muscle cells, and an interesting intervention target for preventing disease progression in cSVDs. A recent study into the effects of antihypertensive drugs on CVR found that different classes of antihypertensive drugs differentially affect global CVR in patients with CADASIL.48This shows that, despite the vascular pathology, CVR can still be manipulated in patients with CADASIL. The findings of our study warrant further research on CVR and how it could be influenced to prevent disease progression in cSVDs.

We demonstrated that locally impaired BOLD-CVR precedes the local progression of cSVDs. Still, how it interacts with other locally contributing factors of cSVDs, such as tissue perfusion,49blood-brain-barrier integrity,50cerebral autoregulatory reserve,51or oxygen metabolism is unknown.52With the use of more advanced MR or hybrid PET-MRI based imaging approaches, other contributing factors in cSVDs such as local oxygen extraction or glucose metabolism, can be captured and could complement BOLD-CVR by providing a more comprehensive understanding of tissue health and vascular-metabolic coupling.53It is also unclear at what stage of the disease CVR becomes impaired, though it has been reported to happen in the early stages of neurodegenerative disorders.54,55Likely, BOLD-CVR is not the only vascular function predictor of white matter progression, and other measures used in this study, reflecting small vessel pulsatility, could be associated on a local level as well. However, the nature of these other measurements does not support voxel-wise analyses. The relative importance of CVR, or small vessel function in general, as a predictor of progressive white matter damage in cSVDs needs to be further studied, potentially benefiting from AI-based prediction modelling,56,57especially in combination with cardiovascular risk factors and other functional measures that can be obtained from different modalities. Such a multi-modal approach would better characterise the role of small vessel function in the progression of cSVDs.

The strengths of this study lie in its longitudinal design, with a homogeneous study population and advanced methods using 7T MRI to measure small vessel function on a voxel-wise level. The voxel-wise analyses using linear mixed models captured the subtle progression of two different complementary, yet distinct measures of white matter damage in relation to local deficits of BOLD-CVR, also owing to the large number of voxels that could be included across patients in the analyses.

This study also had several limitations. Fine-graded voxel-wise analyses may be affected by registration errors between modalities and between baseline and follow-up. This could lead to assigning the wrong tissue fate to WM voxels at baseline and may add variance to the voxel-wise analysis. Such registration errors likely have the biggest potential impact on the NAWM to WMH classification. However, these registration errors would lead to both under- and overestimations of the effect size. Moreover, we observed similar findings with the DWI data, suggesting that potential registration errors did not have a decisive effect on the results. Another potential limitation is the physiological variability of CVR across anatomical regions, which could influence the results. However, given that the association between baseline CVR and longitudinal damage was observed over the entire white matter irrespective of location, we believe our findings primarily reflect the disease-driven processes rather than region-specific difference in baseline CVR. Another limitation was the short follow-up time, relatively low disease burden, and sample size of our population, which might have affected the observable range of global damage progression and could possibly explain the lack of observed global effects, but much less so for the primary, voxel-based analyses. Lastly, the study was only performed in patients with CADASIL, meaning that these results do not necessarily generalise to other forms of cSVD, but as mentioned before, it does provide a homogenous study condition. This is further emphasised by previous work7,9showing that different small vessel function measures are affected between CADASIL and sporadic cSVDs. Other studies have shown that vascular dysfunction in CADASIL and sporadic cSVDs are in different proportions relative to each other, reflecting different stages of the disease.8Further research, including other forms of cSVDs, with larger populations and longer follow-up times, is warranted to compare with our results found in CADASIL.

These results show that in patients with CADASIL, cerebrovascular reactivity predicts further white matter damage and reversal of WMH locally, at the voxel level, but not globally. These results suggest that local small vessel dysfunction is causally related to white matter damage progression.

We thank Tine Arts and Laurien Onkenhout for assistance in 7T data acquisition and Mathias Hübner for assistance in 3T data acquisition.

Funding:The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: SDTP, JCWS and ND are supported by the Rudolf Magnus Brain Center Fellowship.

AK was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy within the framework of the Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (EXC 2145 SyNergy – ID 390857198). ZOOM@SVDs is part of SVDs@target that has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovative program under grant agreement No. 666881.

JMW is supported by the UK Dementia Research Institute which receives its funding from DRI Ltd, funded by the UK Medical Research Council, Alzheimer’s Society and Alzheimer’s Research UK (award no. UKDRI–4002 and UKDRI-4205).

Authors’ contributions:Stanley DT Pham -Study conception and design, analysis and interpretation of data, drafting of manuscript.

Supplementary material:Supplemental material for this article is available online.