In children diagnosed with cancer, both physical and mental health are significantly impacted. Physical activity has emerged as a promising non-pharmacological intervention to improve both physical and psychosocial wellbeing, with growing evidence supporting its role in improving survivorship. Notably, pediatric patients who engage in regular physical activity demonstrate reduced all-cause mortality, particularly among female patients. Current research in physical activity and pediatric oncology aims to further improve mental and physical health, cardiac function, survival outcomes, and overall care. This paper provides an overview of the current state and future directions of the field, emphasizing the need for stronger evidence to support the integration of physical activity as a standard component of care. As the field advances, coordinated efforts among clinicians, researchers, and policy stakeholders will be critical to ensure equitable access to regular physical activity support for all pediatric cancer patients.

Ongoing efforts in the field of physical activity and pediatric oncology continue to be pursued to improve patients’ mental and physical health, cardiac health, as well as survival rates and care. Therefore, the aim of this paper is to provide an overview of the present status and future directions in physical activity and childhood cancer, from research and clinical standpoints.

Having a physically active lifestyle, in contrast, is associated with significantly lower mortality rates.38,39The evidence is so strong that the World Health Organization reports that between 30% and 50% of cancer cases can be prevented by engaging in regular physical activity.40Beyond its role in preventing chronic diseases (eg, cardiac diseases) and extending lifespan, engaging in regular physical activity also offers a multitude of physical and mental health benefits.41Age-specific physical activity guidelines have been developed to favor adequate lifestyle-related behaviors in children, adolescents, and adults. In the general population, the U.S. Physical Activity Guidelines recommend that children and adolescents engage in a minimum of 60 min of enjoyable moderate-to-vigorous intensity physical activity each day.41For adults, the recommendations include a minimum of 150 min per week of moderate intensity physical activity, with at least 2 days per week of muscle-strengthening activities.41These U.S. Physical Activity Guidelines serve as a foundation for building lifelong healthy behaviors that support physical health, quality of life and well-being. In essence, the key takeaway message from these guidelines is that people should be “avoiding inactivity”.

The evidence is robust and strengthens the importance of engaging in regular physical activity, as an integral part of each person’ daily routine. According to several agencies, such as the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM),42,43the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO)44or the Children's Oncology Group (COG),45physical inactivity is a public health problem and should be avoided at all costs.

Since the first studies in the field of physical activity and pediatric oncology, the peer reviewed literature has expanded, ranging from observational studies to rigorous randomized controlled trials, systematic reviews and meta-analyses. As of June 2025, a search of PubMed, using the following search terms (((cancer) OR (oncology)) AND ((child*) OR (adolescent*))) AND ((Exercise) OR (“physical activit*”)) nets a total of 6752 publications. Collectively, the research reinforces the following message: physical activity is a vital component of care and treatment for children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer. A multitude of published studies offers robust support of the benefits of physical activity during cancer treatments in children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer.26,27,47,50These studies emphasize the importance of integrating physical activity programs into the comprehensive care strategy for children and adolescent diagnosed with cancer. In particular, findings consistently show significant health effects in favour of physical activity interventions, compared to usual care. In fact, children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer who engage in regular physical activity during their cancer treatments report better physical health, psychosocial wellbeing, and quality of life.26,27,29-32,47,50These benefits are maintained well beyond the end of the physical activity programs. These findings are supported by a Cochrane review dedicated to summarizing physical activity training interventions in children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer.50Indeed, the review reported enhancements across various health-related outcomes, including patients’ cardiorespiratory fitness, body composition, flexibility, muscle endurance, muscle strength, health-related quality of life, and physical activity levels across the cancer continuum.50This comprehensive work emphasizes, once again, the powerful effects of engaging in physical activity, strengthening its role as an indispensable component of care.

Therefore, it is imperative to recognize that children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer who are not engaging in regular physical activity are exposing themselves to higher risks of developing chronic diseases and unfavorable physical and psychosocial outcomes. In response to the growing body of evidence in the field of physical activity and pediatric oncology, the International Pediatric Oncology Exercise (iPOEG) guidelines were published in 2021.26,27These guidelines represent a momentous advancement in clinical research, supporting the emergency of integrating physical activity as standard of care and a central therapeutic strategy across the entire cancer continuum. The iPOEG guidelines provide a comprehensive framework to understand and implement physical activity programs that meet the unique needs of children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer. These guidelines recognize that physical activity programs have several benefits for children and adolescents’ health by managing and improving their long-term symptoms. They share a resounding international message that children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer who are receiving active treatments should integrate daily movement into their lives.

By encouraging regular physical activity, the iPOEG guidelines aim to improve patients’ long-term health-related quality of life, lifestyle-related behaviors, and encourage a more active future. Nevertheless, despite all the health benefits and advantages associated with physical activity in oncology, it remains a challenge to ensure that children and adolescents incorporate regular physical activity into their lives. The data shows that, on average, only half of children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer adhere to the recommended physical activity guidelines.11,12Alarming statistics from the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) indicate that over 70% of these pediatric patients are significantly less likely to engage in regular physical activity, compared to their healthy peers.13This disparity in physical activity levels can impact their survivorship and have lasting consequences on their overall health-related quality of life and overall survival.

The importance of physical activity extends beyond its integration during treatments, as it remains vital during cancer recovery for children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer. Cancer therapy is associated with a vast spectrum of health-related complications (eg, organ dysfunction, second malignancies, chemotherapy-related cardiotoxicity, neurocognitive and psychological issues) that can significantly compromise the quality of life of CCS. Moreover, these long-term health complications, if left unaddressed, may even predispose them to early mortality.

In fact, CCS face an alarming sevenfold increase in the risk of dying from cardiovascular diseases compared to their peers in the general population, making cardiovascular diseases the leading cause of non-cancer-related mortality in this young population.6However, the current literature supports that CCS who engage in regular physical activity have a reduced risk of adverse cardiac outcomes, including improved markers of cardiovascular health, a decreased risk of obvious cardiovascular disease, and a decreased all-cause mortality risk compared to survivors who are not physically active.51These benefits extend even to those who have previously undergone cardiotoxic therapies, making physical activity a therapeutic choice of paramount importance for children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer. While the benefits of physical activity are well-established in adult cancer survivors to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence,52the need for stronger evidence pertaining to its impact on cancer survival and relapse in pediatric oncology remains a priority.

Therefore, physical activity during cancer recovery and survivorship is vital for children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer. Its impact extends far beyond the immediate effects on patients’ health-related outcomes. While physical activity may not reverse the damage caused by treatment, it has the power to prevent frailty and the accelerated aging process often seen in CCS.61Consequently, physical activity is an indispensable therapy to improve survival outcomes and should be recognized as a standard of care.

The enduring battle against cancer and cancer recurrence is a long-term health issue that children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer are confronted with on a daily basis. physical activity plays an important role in improving their health after treatments. However, the long-term surveillance of CCS has unveiled a concerning trend in their physical activity levels. Indeed, a report from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey evidenced a significant decline in CCS’ physical activity levels, indicating a sedentary behavior state.62An observational cohort study has, however, reported that the levels of physical activity among CCS are similar to those observed in the general population.63Nevertheless, CCS’ cardiorespiratory fitness level has been reported to be significantly lower when compared to their healthy peers.63These findings prompt not only concerns, but a sense of urgency. These findings are accentuated by the fact that low levels of physical activity are associated with a lower cardiac health.19,34Moreover, an inactive lifestyle behavior has been associated with cardiovascular diseases in CCS.64CCS’ health requires immediate attention and intervention, and physical activity can play a pivotal role. Therefore, researchers have formulated a compelling hypothesis that children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer may require a higher daily dose of physical activity compared to adults diagnosed with cancer. This would help guarantee their optimal development and better physical and mental health-related outcomes in CCS.

From the youngest age, physical activity should be part of daily life. It is during childhood that the chronic adaptations associated with physical activity hold the greatest potential for long-term efficacy and benefits, extending into adulthood.65Physical activity during childhood is fundamental and is described as a key health behavior to prevent chronic diseases.66It is important to understand, however, that children and adolescents who have undergone cancer treatments may have experienced disruptions to their healthy habits. Hence, CCS may need specific support to initiate lifestyle-related behavior changes toward engaging in more physical activity. Healthcare professionals and caregivers play a vital role in encouraging children and adolescents to move more every day. For CCS with lower physical activity levels, defined as less than 60 min of moderate-to-vigorous intensity physical activity per day every week, the need for support and guidance is particularly critical.

Published studies have consistently demonstrated the benefits of regular physical activity for CCS, including improvements in physical fitness and the prevention of late adverse effects related to treatment and treatment-related morbidity.25,67In 2021, a systematic review of randomized controlled trials that focused on physical activity interventions for CCS revealed that most of the included studies aimed to enhance physical activity levels and promote healthier behaviors, employing a variety of strategies to achieve these goals.68Moreover, a cross-sectional study in CCS has highlighted that those with a high physical activity level exhibit a lower percentage of fat mass, reduced abdominal subcutaneous and visceral fat, greater lean body mass, and improved insulin sensitivity compared to survivors reporting lower levels of physical activity.69Most recently, an umbrella review has emphasized the extensive benefits of physical activity for CCS.70Reviews have shown the substantial long-term effects of physical activity on cardiorespiratory fitness, physical function, muscle strength, body composition, cognitive functioning, and health-related quality of life.50,70The literature not only highlights the positive impacts of physical activity on CCS’ physical and mental health, but also sheds light on the importance of tailored support and intervention strategies to improve survivors’ long-term health outcomes.

In oncology, physical activity programs need to be meticulously designed to provide essential support to patients by enhancing their health behavior in order to replace their unhealthy lifestyle habits or risky health behavior practices. One of the key challenges in promoting healthy behaviors is the design of programs tailored to CCS that will favor their adherence to physical activity post-cancer treatments. Researchers employ a multitude of strategies to favor healthy lifestyle behaviors in CCS.71-77For patients diagnosed with cancer, it has been reported that stimulating patients’ self-efficacy and belief that they can change their behavior is an important concept to initiate or motivate their behavior.78In fact, research has consistently shown that individuals who have a sense of control over their behavior are more likely to engage in physical activity compared to those who do not have a sense of control.79,80This notion of control is reinforced in children and adolescents, as they often seek autonomy over their actions in a context where they want to have control of their behavior.

The literature shares undisputable evidence supporting the integration of physical activity into the care of CCS. It reinforces the imperative of incorporating lifestyle interventions, with physical activity programs, within survivorship programs.

The recent report from the National Cancer Institute suggests that nearly 500 000 children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer are alive in the United States.5It is anticipated that at least 125 000 CCS (∼25% of them) will develop a condition secondary to their treatment that could be eliminated or attenuated by being regularly physically active.7,27,45In childhood cancer survivors, it has been reported that engaging in regular physical activity is associated with a lower prevalence of late adverse effects in health outcomes (metabolic health, cardiac health, cognitive health, and mental health).20,21,81Favorably, progress toward establishing physical activity as an integral aspect of care for children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer has been made. While a consensus designating exercise as medicine has not been reached, experts agree on the pressing need for more data and stronger evidence-based medicine. These are essential prerequisites before the formulation of guidelines on exercise prescription that can address specific cancer-related health outcomes; as are already in place for adults diagnosed with cancer.42The International Pediatric Oncology Exercise (iPOEG) guidelines emerge as the first recommendations for children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer,26,27setting a precedent for the integration of physical activity into pediatric oncology care.

The integration of physical activity as a standard of care in pediatric oncology is only a matter of time. The broader understanding of the benefits, safety, and feasibility of regular physical activity is as important as understanding the key barriers that might hinder children and adolescents in adhering to healthy behaviors. By addressing these common barriers and implementing physical activity programs to overcome them, we not only pave the way for better outcomes in pediatric oncology but also empower children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer to take charge of their health and wellbeing, thus improving their overall quality of life.

(a) A paramount priority is the development of novel strategies to prevent and mitigate the physical and psychosocial adverse effects associated with cancer therapies in CCS. This initiative should start by extending physical activity support during active cancer therapies. Toward this goal, physical activity programs should be safe, feasible and enjoyable. This approach aligns with the recent iPOEG guidelines,27emphasizing the importance of providing physical activity support early in the cancer care journey. To achieve these objectives, it will be necessary to develop new screening and referral methods to ensure the accessibility of these programs for patients and their families. Furthermore, a multidisciplinary approach is vital to address the specific needs of patients and to overcome barriers, ultimately facilitating the adoption of a long-term healthy lifestyle.

(b) Another pivotal area of focus should be the education of healthcare providers. There is an essential need to favor the implementation of physical activity programs in pediatric oncology, and the education of healthcare providers on the benefits of physical activity is a first step toward this goal. The impact of physicians and healthcare providers on patients’ health behaviors is well documented within the field of pediatric oncology.93,94Nevertheless, physicians have recognized that they rarely engage in physical activity conversations with their patients during active treatments.95A parallel observation in adult oncology emphasizes the lack of training in this domain, thus limiting their ability to recommend physical activity to their patients.96In pediatric oncology, healthcare providers acknowledge that they need additional training to promote physical activity to effectively address barriers and to increase the quality of their physical activity conversations with young patients.97Given that patients value physicians’ opinion,95the training of physicians and healthcare providers is crucial to share accurate physical activity recommendations during regular clinic visits and routine delivery of care.

(c) Addressing cardiometabolic outcomes in CCS is another imperative research area. Indeed, CCS face a 2-fold increase in the risk of developing metabolic syndrome, with an astonishing 12.6-fold risk among those exposed to specific therapies, such as total body irradiation or abdominal radiation or cranial radiation.60,98It has been shown that CCS have elevated levels of inflammatory biomarkers and adipokines, including IL-6.10,99High levels of IL-6 have been characterized as a marker for metabolic disorder and cardiovascular disease.100In breast cancer survivors, physical activity interventions have been shown to decrease the serum concentrations of IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-2. These markers are associated with metabolic disorders and cardiovascular diseases.101However, data specific to CCS is currently lacking, justifying the pressing need for studies exploring the impact of physical activity interventions on cardiometabolic outcomes in CCS.

(d) Accelerated aging and frailty in CCS is a pressing issue. Recent reports have shown that CCS encounter accelerated aging, characterized by a disproportionate loss of exercise capacity, cognitive decline, and early onset of chronic medical conditions.102This condition raises their risk of morbidity and results in a discrepancy between their chronological and physiological ages. Notably, over 10% of young adult survivors of childhood cancer exhibit a frailty phenotype.61,102This involves experiencing 3 or more of the following: low skeletal muscle mass, exhaustion, low energy expenditure, slowness, or weakness. In addition, 20% of survivors are categorized as prefrail.61,102physical activity can prevent accelerated aging and frailty in CCS. Comprehensive studies are required to strengthen the existing evidence and to explore the effect of physical activity on the biomarkers associated with aging.

(e) Studies focusing on parental and family involvement is another great area of interest. Traditionally, physical activity programs focus primarily on children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer and survivors. While a few have extended their scope to encompass patients and their families, there is a need to develop family-based physical activity interventions in pediatric oncology. Such interventions have potential of yielding promising benefits by educating the whole family on the adoption of healthy lifestyle habits, including regular physical activity and a healthy diet. As children often model their healthy and unhealthy behaviors after their parents, empowering families with essential knowledge on health behaviors can bring benefits to the entire family unit. It would also offer an opportunity for parents and children to be physically active together. Therefore, novel strategies need to be developed to facilitate the integration of parents and families into physical activity programs. For example, the “Stoplight diet for children” program provides a simple graphic visual guide to steer families toward healthy dietary habits.103Future studies might also want to develop additional educational content for families of children and adolescents diagnoses with cancer, enhancing their overall wellbeing and quality of life.

To conclude, the evidence makes it clear that children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer benefit from engaging in regular physical activity, either during or after treatments. The evidence supports the safety, benefits, and feasibility of physical activity programs in pediatric oncology. And while it is indisputable that physical activity in pediatric oncology should be a standard of care, physical activity support is not always available to everyone. Patients from underrepresented populations (eg, non-Hispanic Blacks, Hispanics), patients with lower levels of education, and unemployed individuals typically have lower levels of leisure-time physical activity.104The lack of safe space, time, and social support reinforces disparities among patients living with and beyond cancer. Therefore, interdisciplinary efforts are needed, and clinicians, researchers, and policy stakeholders need to work together to favor patients’ access to regular physical activity support, as a standard of care. Recent advances in research in the field of physical activity and pediatric oncology, in addition to the interest of healthcare providers in supporting the implementation of physical activity programs for their patients, are an encouraging perspective for these patients.