Trachoma is the world’s major infectious cause of blindness, responsible for blinding 1.9 million people, including 1.2 million irreversibly. It is still endemic predominantly in sub-Saharan Africa, including Ethiopia. Five or more follicles in the upper tarsal conjunctiva measuring at least 0.5 mm indicate trachomatous inflammation-follicular (TF) disease. No previous study determined the prevalence of TF, and it had not been determined for the study area to satisfy adequate geospatial representation/spatial distribution of TF among children 1–9 years old. These study findings can help programmers understand the prevalence of TF and identify the villages in the study area where TF will be clustered to implement appropriate intervention strategies to support the current trachoma control and elimination program and to help achieve SDG Goal 3 target 3.3 and Goal 6. Therefore, this study addressed those gaps by identifying TF’s prevalence and spatial distribution using spatial analytical techniques and models in Yilmana Densa and Gonji Kolela Districts.

The study utilizes spatial autocorrelation methodologies, including Global Moran’s I and Local Getis-Ord statistics, to describe and map spatial clusters. The global Moran’s I statistic was used to evaluate the global spatial autocorrelation of TF prevalence. The Gi_Bin field was computed in hot spot spatial analysis, independent of the False Discovery Rate correction (FDR), to detect important hot spots and cold spots. Bins of +/-3, +/-2, and +/-1 indicated statistically significant clustering of the TF distribution with 99%, 95%, and 90% confidence levels, respectively. However, non-significant TF clusters were identified with a 0 bin.

This study found that the prevalence of TF was 17.8% (95% CI: 15.3–20.2%). From spatial analytical techniques and models, the global spatial autocorrelation analysis based on feature locations and attribute values revealed a clustering of TF among children aged 1–9 years across the study area (Global Moran’s I = 0.849, p-value < 0.0001). In hot spot spatial analysis, fourteen hot spot clusters were detected. Eight clusters were detected as significantly clustered from those fourteen hot spot areas at the 99% confidence level. The study also found that the distribution of TF was not spatially random. It was clustered at the village levels and showed strong spatial patterns. It was affected by different locations based on sociodemographic, environmental, and behavioral factors. It was more clustered in Gonji Kolela District compared to Yilmana Densa District. This study showed that trachoma is a family-based disease.

TF was found to be higher than the WHO recommended threshold of 10% to say that trachoma is a severe public health problem to conduct MDA and eliminate trachoma as a Public Health problem in a community when the prevalence of TF is less than 5%. The results of the study may be used to support the current trachoma control and elimination program, and to help achieve SDG Goal 3 target 3.3 and Goal 6. Intervention against TF may also have an impact on poverty (SDG1) and hunger (SDG2), may improve education (SDG4), work, and economic growth (SDG8). These will be helpful to decide whether the Yilmana Densa and Gonji Kolela Districts meet VISION 2020, “The Right to Sight” (elimination of the major causes of avoidable blindness), an initiative launched in Ethiopia in September 2002. It is recommended that coordinated work on implementing the WHO endorsed SAFE strategy in particular, and enhancing the overall living conditions of the community be given a high priority.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12889-025-24257-z.

Trachoma is an eye disease that is the world’s leading infectious cause of blindness. 40.6 million people suffer from active trachoma, with 77% of these cases occurring in 29 endemic African countries, responsible for blinding 1.9 million people, including 1.2 million irreversibly. In Ethiopia, the prevalence of active trachoma among children aged 1–9 years is 40.1%, with some regional variations. The Amhara region has the highest prevalence at 62.6% [1]. It is still endemic predominantly in sub-Saharan Africa, including Ethiopia [2].

Trachoma is a family-based disease, clustering at the household and community levels [3]. Its distribution also shows strong spatial patterns [4]. A study in 13 countries showed that TF was not clustered among those with household-level access to sanitation and water [5].

This neglected tropical disease is caused by ocular infection with the bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis [6–8], and transmitted through direct eye-to-eye spread (eye and nose discharge from infected individuals), hand-to-hand contacts, or indirect spread through sharing of towels, fomites, pillows, eye-seeking flies (particularly Musca sorbens), coughing, and sneezing [9].

There are five stages of trachoma: Trachomatous inflammation-follicular (TF) is the presence of five or more follicles in the upper tarsal conjunctiva of at least 0.5 mm diameter; trachomatous inflammation-intense (TI) is a noticeable thickening of the tarsal conjunctiva caused by inflammation that covers over half of the typical deep tarsal. Trachomatous scarring (TS) is the presence of scarring in the tarsal conjunctiva; trachomatous trichiasis (TT), in which at least one eyelash rubs on the eyeball or there is evidence of recent removal of in-turned eyelashes; Corneal opacity (CO) is an easily visible corneal opacity over the pupil. TF is often asymptomatic; it is used as a proxy to estimate the population burden of ocular infection [7,8,10,11].

To eradicate trachoma, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends using the SAFE strategy, which consists of surgery for trichiasis, antibiotics for current infections, facial hygiene to stop the spread of illness, and environmental improvements to improve access to water and sanitation [12,13]. The district-level prevalence of TF determines how the A-F-E intervention guidelines are implemented [14].

Decisions to start and stop these interventions are based on whether the prevalence of TF is ≥ 5%. TF is the primary indicator used to determine the need for antibiotics for trachoma. It is a key sign for assessing the need for intervention [10,15–17].

The WHO endorses population-based prevalence surveys (PBPS) for trachoma, which are designed to calculate the prevalence of TF in children aged 1–9 years with an expected prevalence of 10%. This method assumes that children aged 1–9 years are the reservoirs of TF, and the results can be generalized to the entire population. WHO regards trachoma as a significant public health problem and suggests the community-wide implementation of interventions A, F, and E if the prevalence of TF in children aged one to nine years is greater than 10% [18]. The A, F, and E components of intervention recommendations are based on the district level of TF prevalence [19].

Spatial pattern analysis provides powerful methods to understand the spatial distribution of TF.

The spatial distribution of TF defined over space is termed spatial dependence. This is measured as the existence of statistical association (dependence) between TF and a given geographical area. To explore spatial dependence, measures of spatial autocorrelation are used. Spatial autocorrelation assumes that near objects are more related than distant objects. Spatial mapping is a useful method for analyzing the presence of trachomatous inflammation–follicular [20].

There has been no study conducted on the spatial distribution of TF in the study area. No previous study determined the prevalence of TF, and it had not been determined for the study area to satisfy adequate geospatial representation/spatial distribution of TF among children 1–9 years old. These study findings can help programmers understand the prevalence of TF and identify the villages in the study area where TF will be clustered to implement appropriate intervention strategies to support the current trachoma control and elimination program and to help achieve SDG Goal 3 target 3.3 and Goal 6. Therefore, this study addressed those gaps by identifying TF’s prevalence and spatial distribution using spatial analytical techniques and models. This study aimed to assess the prevalence and spatial distribution of trachomatous inflammation–follicular (TF) among children aged 1–9 years in rural areas of Yilmana Densa and Gonji Kolela Districts, West Gojjam Zone, Northwestern Ethiopia.

The study was conducted in Yilmana Densa and Gonji Kolela Districts. Yilmana Densa District is found in the West Gojjam Zone in northwest Ethiopia, which is located 43 km south of Bahir Dar. According to the 2007 census projected population size, the population of Yilmana Densa District was 214,852, of whom 107,010 were men and 107,842 were women; 19,169 were urban inhabitants; the population was projected to be 287,791 in 2020–2023. Gonji Kolela District is located 72 km southwest of Bahir Dar, the capital city of the Amhara Region. The total population of the district was 129,237, of which 64,767 were males and 64,470 were females (according to the 2020 population projection for the district) (Fig.1).

A community-based cross-sectional study was conducted from February 15–April 15, 2024.

The source population of this study was all children aged 1–9 years found in Yilmana Densa and Gonji Kolela Districts. The study population was children aged 1–9 years found in the selected clusters.

All children 1–9 years old during the study period, as reported by the mother, father, or other family members of the children, and by using health extension, information, and reports, were included in the study.

The study used the assumption of five people per household with ~ 30% of the population aged 1–9 years as a general approximation size to estimate the sample size [21].

Since this study was to determine the prevalence and spatial distribution of TF among children 1–9 years old, the sample size was determined by using a single population proportion formula at a 95% confidence level. The prevalence was taken as 25.1% of the rural prevalence of TF from a community-based cross-sectional study among children aged 1–9 years that was conducted in the Amhara Region, using data from 152 multi-stage cluster random surveys to estimate the sample size [22].

By taking the design effect of 2,n= 902, and considering a 10% non-response rate ton= 1003.

Across the two districts, there were 171 clusters, or villages, in the selected kebeles. From this, 30% of clusters (or 51 villages) were taken as a study unit with 1534 households. One thousand children aged 1–9 years were examined, giving a response rate of 100%.

A two-stage cluster random sampling (CRS) technique was applied to select study clusters and villages. Clusters based on geographical or political boundaries were selected, and then eligible households were selected in the selected clusters or villages in the two districts.

In the first stage, 18 kebeles were selected randomly and proportionally from the two districts. In the second stage, 51 villages (clusters) were selected randomly in the two districts. A proportion-to-size allocation was made to determine the appropriate sample size from each selected kebele of the two districts.

Finally, those households in the selected clusters or villages having children aged 1–9 years old were visited, and all children between 1 and 9 years of age in the house were included in the study. The random walk method was used to reach households with children aged 1–9 years within the selected clusters or villages. Fortunately, the number of children included in the screening was 1000, whose age was between 1 and 9 years, as per the assumption of cluster sampling.

The WHO created the simple trachoma grading scale, which was the guide used for diagnosis and reporting of eye examination results in fieldwork [24]. The heads of households were interviewed for sociodemographic and economic information, housing, and environmental conditions. Children were examined for signs of TF in 51 villages accordingly.

TF [presence (yes) or absence (no)], and Distribution of TF Clustered, Dispersed, or Random.

Socio-demographic factorsage of child and caregiver, Sex of child and caregiver, Family size/persons, Education status of the caregiver, Marital status of the caregiver, Economical status.

GPS points/locationof the households: latitude of each household, longitude of each house hold.

Trachomatous inflammation-follicular (TF): The presence of 5 or more follicles that have at least 0.5 mm or greater diameter in the central upper tarsal conjunctiva as examined by health professionals previously selected for this purpose [7,8,11].

The presence of pronounced inflammatory thickening of the upper tarsal conjunctiva that obscures more than half of the normal deep tarsal vessels as examined by health professionals previously selected for this purpose [7,8,11].

Trachoma negative: children who did not have signs of active trachoma as examined by health professionals previously selected for this purpose [19].

Blinding trachoma: The indicators for blinding trachoma being eliminated as a public health problem are when TF is sustained at < 5% in children aged 1–9 years and the prevalence of trichiasis is < 0.1% in a community where management for trichiasis is in place [19].

Global moran’sIstatistic: A statistical ArcGIS tool to measure spatial autocorrelation, determining whether spatial distributions are dispersed, clustered, or randomly distributed [20].

Hot spot analysis (Getis-Ord Gi*statistic): A statistical ArcGIS tool for identifying the locations of statistically significant hot spots (high values) and cold spots (low values) by aggregating points of occurrence into polygons or converging points that are in proximity to one another based on the Euclidean distance method [20].

Part I: Socio-demographic variables of the study participants, which included age of child and caregiver, sex of child and caregiver, family size or persons, educational status of caregiver, marital status of caregiver, wealth index, and GPS point for each house.

Part II: Outcome variable, presence or absence of TF, which included the variables used in clinical examination of the study participants, was determined using four Integrated Eye Care Workers (nurses who were trained by the Carter Center in identifying trachoma using a grading scheme) and one health officer, who participated as data collectors and supervisors, respectively.

To ensure the quality of the data before the actual data collection, data collectors and supervisors were trained by the principal investigator for about one day on the objectives of the study, the content of the questionnaire, data collection procedures, how to collect GPS points using a hand-held GPS mobile application, how to help study participants, modes of communication, and various ethical issues. Then, the questionnaire was pre-tested on 5% of the sample size in non-selected kebeles with similar socio-demographic characteristics. After data collection, questionnaires were reviewed and checked for completeness by the supervisors and principal investigator, and necessary feedback was offered to the data collectors the next morning.

The collected data were entered into EpiInfo.exe, version 7.2. Then, it was exported into SPSS version 25.0 software for analysis. Descriptive statistics, including frequencies, percentages, mean/SD, and prevalence of TF, were computed.

The relationship among values of TF distribution according to their spatial arrangement was measured using the spatial autocorrelation (Moran’s I) tool in the ArcGIS 10.8 environment [26]. Global Moran’s I was used to quantify spatial autocorrelation, showing the clustering of similar values or outliers of TF within geographic space [27]. The relationship was considered highly correlated if like values were spatially close to each other, and independent (random) if no pattern was discerned from the arrangement of values. Therefore, to detect whether the spatial pattern of TF was clustered, dispersed, or random, the researcher examined Moran’s index, the p-value, and the z-score. A Moran’s Index of 0 indicated a random spatial pattern. Otherwise, a higher positive or negative Z-score with a lower P-value reflected clustering or dispersion of TF spatial distribution, respectively [28].

As Moran’s I can only detect the presence of clustering in the TF distribution, the Getis-Ord Gi local statistic (here after G-statistics) was applied to identify statistically significant spatial clusters of high values (hot spots) and low values (cold spots) by examining a Z-score,p-value, and confidence level bin (Gi_Bin) in both districts. The Gi Bin field was calculated to identify significant hot and cold spots regardless of whether or not the FDR correction was applied. Bins of +/−3, +/−2, and +/−1 indicated statistical significance clustering of TF distribution with 99%, 95%, and 90% confidence levels, respectively, whereas non-significant TF clustering was identified with a 0 bin (Mandal & Mondal, 2024).

Across the two districts, there were 171 clusters, or villages, in the selected kebeles. From this, 30% of clusters (or 51 villages) were taken as a study unit with 1534 households. One thousand children aged 1–9 years were examined, giving a response rate of 100%. The majority of primary caregivers were females, 927 (92.7%). The age of the majority of caregivers was between 30 and 44 years 678 (67.8%). The occupation of the majority of caregivers was housewife 529 (52.9%). Most caregivers, 431 (43.1%) were illiterate, and 7 (0.7%) had secondary education or above. The religious affiliation of caregivers included 965 (96.5%) Christians and 35 (3.5%) Muslims. The family size was less than five members for 267 (26.7%) participants and five or more for 733 (73.3%). The mean family size was 5.17, with a standard deviation of ± 1.45. The median family size was 5, and the most frequent family size was 5. The minimum and maximum family sizes were 3 and 10, respectively (Table1).

The prevalence of TF was 17.6% (95% CI: 14.5–20.8%) in the rural communities of Yilmana Densa District and 18.0% (95% CI: 14.3–21.8%) in Gonji Kolela District. The total prevalence of TF in the two districts was 17.8% (95% CI: 15.3–20.2%) (Fig.2).

A clustering pattern of TF among children aged 1–9 years was observed in Yilmana Densa, indicating that the distribution of TF among children aged 1–9 years was not random. Given the z-score of 2.08052815184, the pattern appears to be significantly clustered with Moran’s index of 0.2808226 and p-value of 0.037477). The p-value was less than 0.05, which indicates that it was significantly clustered.

The findings from ruralkebelesof Gonji Kolela District indicated that there was positive spatial auto-correlation of TF among children aged 1–9 years. This means that with the given z-score of 1.6949965778, there was less than10% likelihood that this clustered pattern could be the result of random chance, with Moran’s Index = 0.719133 and p-value = 0.090076. The Moran’s Index near + 1 indicated that there was significant distribution or clustered distribution of TF in ruralkebelesof Gonji Kolela District. Therefore, hotspot analysis was conducted to identify hotspot and cold spot areas at village levels at various confidence intervals.

This study revealed that there was a positive spatial auto-correlation of TF among children aged 1–9 years in rural kebeles of Yilmana Densa and Gonji Kolela Districts. There was clustering of TF with Moran’s index = 0.848751, Z-score = 4.310640, and p-value < 0.0001. This indicated that there was less than a 1% likelihood that these clustered patterns could be attributed to random chance. In other words, the output indicated significant clustering of TF at the village level in the two districts or areas of hotspots. Given the z-score of 4.31064019883, there was less than 1% likelihood that this clustered pattern could be the result of random chance (Table2; Fig.3).

TF among children aged 1–9 years in rural kebeles of Yilmana Densa and Gonji Kolela Districts was found clustered. The clustered villages were classified on a map as a high-high cluster (dark red colored), a high-low outlier (yellow colored), a low-high outlier (blue colored), and a low-low cluster (light green colored), as indicated in Fig.4.

The degree of clustering and the concentration of high or low values for the two districts were measured using High/Low Clustering (Getis-Ord General G). The Getis-Ord General G technique was integrated with the Global Moran’s Index, which measured the spatial association of an attribute and determined the degree of grouping for high and low values. As a result, since the p-value was small (p< 0.05) statistically significant, the z-score was positive, and the observed General G index was larger than the expected General G index, the high values for the attribute were clustered in the study area (Table3; Fig.5).

The results of our study from hotspot analysis (Getis Ord G*) showed that hotspot and coldspot Hotspot analysis (Getis Ord G*) indicates whether the observed spatial clustering of high or low values is more pronounced than one would expect in a random distribution. Statistical results for hotspots and cold spots explain that the hotspots of TF among children aged 1–9 years in rural kebeles of Yilmana Densa District were assessed with confidence intervals of 99%, 95%, and 90% at village levels. The degree of regional clustering of higher or lower values is explained by the confidence level. It was found that three villages or clusters (Dereqe, Debir, and Gotafengil) were significant hotspots of TF at 99% CL with (Z-score = 3.27,p< 0.01), (Z-score = 3.84,p< 0.01), and (Z-score = 2.77,p= 0.0056), respectively (Fig.6).

The results of our study from hotspot analysis (Getis Ord G*) in Gonji Kolela District showed that four village/clusters(Telle,Ketema,Kurfi,and Amel)were significant hotspots of TF at 95% CL with (Z-score = 2.16,p= 0.030), (Z-score = 2.16,p= 0.030), (Z-score = 2.16,p= 0.030), and (Z-score = 2.01,p= 0.045), respectively (Fig.7).

The hot spot spatial analysis detected a total of fourteen hot spot areas of TF, which means that the prevalence of TF was higher within those fourteen clusters compared to others. From those fourteen hot spot areas, twelve clusters are statistically significant hot spots with high TF coverage. The most hot spots clusters of high TF were found in Gonji Kolela District.

The most likely primary hot spot clusters of high TF significantly clustered at 99% confidence level were found in Kurfi, Barikua, Tele, Ketema, Washa, Amel, The Maryam, and Adafit with (Z-score = 3.96,p< 0.01), (Z-score = 3.70,p< 0.01), (Z-score = 3.38,p< 0.01), (Z-score = 3.36,p< 0.01), (Z-score = 3.10,p= 0.002), (Z-score = 3.06,p= 0.002), (Z-score = 3.06,p= 0.002), and (Z-score = 2.75,p= 0.005), respectively.

The most likely secondary hot spot clusters of high TF significantly clustered at 95% confidence level were detected in Megenagna, Debir, Zum, and Dereqie clusters with (Z-score = 2.48,p= 0.013), (Z-score = 2.48,p= 0.013), (Z-score = 2.43,p= 0.015), and (Z-score = 2.12,p= 0.033), respectively.

The third most likely spatial hot spot clusters of high TF clustered at 95% confidence level were detected in Gotafengil and Wegert clusters with (Z-score = 1.66,p= 0.097) and (Z-score = 1.65,p= 0.098), respectively (Table4; Fig.8).

The major objective of this study was to assess the prevalence of TF among children aged 1–9 years in rural communities of Yilmana Densa and Gonji Kolela districts, in which the overall prevalence of TF was 17.8%. The observed prevalence of TF is in line with a study conducted in Raya Kobo districts 16% [29], Gambella Regional State 17% [30], Sidama regional state 17% [31], Vanuatu 16.5% [32], Afar 17.1% [33]. The prevalence found by the current study is lower compared to a spatial analysis study conducted in the Amhara Region at 25.1% [34], a study conducted in Andabet district 31% [35], Merhabete District 46.6% [36], Negele Town, West Arsi Zone, Oromia 22% [37], Oromia Region 23% [38], Guji Zone in Oromia 29% [39], National Regional StateSouthern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ Region 28% [38], Tigray Region 36% [38], and Addis Ababa 23% [40]. Even if it is decreasing in absolute numbers compared to the above studies, the findings of this study confirmed that TF is still a disease of public health interest. The possible explanation for the decrease in TF could be an increase in mass antibiotic distribution coverage with weak integration of health promotion on primary eye care and health information on personal and environmental hygiene in the districts. However, The result is greater than findings done in Jamma district in South Wollo Zone of Amhara Regional State, in which the prevalence of TF among children 1–9 years old was 11% [41], Dangila district 6% [42], Metema District 12% [43], Debre Tabor Town 10% [44], Yirgalem town 12% [45], Harari Regional State 13% [46], Benishangul Gumuz Region 6% [47], Cote divoire 8% [48], Nigeria 6.4% [49], and Somali 13.7% [50]. The higher prevalence in the current study area might be due to differences in infrastructure and health service coverage, differences in the period of study, differences in socio-demographic, behavioral, and WASH factors, and geographical and cultural factors. It has been concluded that TF among children is still a public health problem in various districts of Ethiopia. The rates of prevalence found by almost all studies, together with the current study, are significantly higher than the WHO target for elimination (a prevalence of active trachoma (grade TF) in children aged 1–9 years of < 5%) [51]. These may make it difficult to help achieve SDG Goal 3 target 3.3 and Goal 6 and to meet VISION 2020, “The Right to Sight” (elimination of the major causes of avoidable blindness), an initiative launched in Ethiopia in September 2002.

Evidence indicates that countries could eliminate trachoma and other diseases of poverty by improving the socio-economic conditions of their citizens [52].

In this study, clustering was identified at the village level; that is, TF is a family-based disease that fully explains the spatial distribution in the observations. Village heterogeneity is the result of exposure to unobserved or unknown individual risk factors. The observed village clustering highlights the transmission of trachomatous infection between members of nearby households. The study revealed that 12 (23.5%) clusters were significantly clustered with a high TF (hot spot), and of these, 9 (75%) were in Gonji Kolela District. This finding was similar to previous studies that identified a clustering effect characterized by geographical proximity and provided an estimate of ‘‘explanatory’’ power associated with each level. Clustering of TF by household has been shown to occur in many communities, including [3].

TF spreads between households with children and nearby households that share the same risk factors for infection, which is similar to the findings of a study done in Tanzania [20] and in Amhara, Ethiopia [53]. This finding indicated that the high-load cluster and high-load outliers (HL) are geographically close to the non-significant clusters, and both exist within the village boundaries in this study. These data show that transmission occurs at the village level in this population; spread from an individual within a high-load outlier cluster to an individual in a non-significant cluster is also possible. This finding is similar to the spatial pattern analysis in Mali [54].

The possible reason for this significant spatial variation from village to village and district to district could be variations in socio-demographic factors, WaSH factors, and behavioral factors. The nonsignificant spatial correlation component means that individuals living in close villages are not more likely to have the same infection status than individuals living further apart, reinforcing the impact of environmental and social variables at the village level.

Spatial pattern analysis provides powerful methods to understand the spatial distribution of TF. Since TF prevalence is not uniformly distributed in the different geographical areas, it is used to identify the locations where TF will be clustered to implement appropriate intervention strategies. The questionnaire was pre-tested and modified based on the local context before data collection. Data collectors and supervisors were trained on data collection and interview techniques before data collection.

This study has several important limitations that should be considered when interpreting the results. First, the cross-sectional nature of the study design does not confirm a definitive cause-and-effect relationship. Furthermore, the study may be prone to reporting bias since some of the data was collected based on self-reported information, and data points are often clustered or have dependencies based on proximity due to spatial analysis of sampling data. We attempted to minimize the errors due to this by asking different individuals from households to answer the same question and taking the average value into account. The other limitation of this study was the lack of related kinds of literature on the spatial distribution of TF which might decrease the reliability of the discussion section. Seasonal variation of TF prevalence was not included. Due to resource shortage, the study areas are limited to two Districts, sample sizes were not much and more children were not addressed well. Finally, this study did not use the qualitative method.

TF was found to be higher than the WHO recommended threshold of 10% to say that trachoma is a severe public health problem, to conduct MDA and elimination of trachoma as a public health problem in a community when the prevalence of TF is less than 5% [51].

The study also found that the distribution of TF was not spatially random. It was clustered at the village level. Its distribution showed strong spatial patterns. It was affected by different locations based on sociodemographic, environmental, and behavioral factors. It was more clustered in Gonji Kolela District compared to Yilmana Densa District. This study showed that trachoma is a family-based disease.

Since children still suffer from active trachoma, specifically TF, the struggle to eliminate the problem should give special focus on TF. The WHO SAFE strategy approach should be strongly implemented in the study area. Further detailed studies are required to investigate the role of SAFE strategy activities that have contributed to decrease the transmission of trachoma. Directing interventions to areas with TF hotspots will likely accelerate the elimination of trachoma as a public health problem. The results of the study may be used to support the current trachoma control and elimination program, and to help achieve SDG Goal 3 target 3.3 and Goal 6. Intervention against TF may also have an impact on poverty (SDG1) and hunger (SDG2), may improve education (SDG4), work, and economic growth (SDG8). These will be helpful to decide whether the Yilmana Densa and Gonji Kolela Districts meet VISION 2020, “The Right to Sight” (elimination of the major causes of avoidable blindness), an initiative launched in Ethiopia in September 2002. It is recommended that coordinated work on implementing the WHO endorsed SAFE strategy, in particular, and enhancing the overall living conditions of the community be given a high priority.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.