Foetal sex determination of uniparous mammals with long gestation benefits the management of economically important domestic animals as well as captive wild populations, but the various methods currently available are limited to a few species. Based on the hypothesized presence of circulating cell‐free foetal DNA (ccff‐DNA) in the maternal circulation of relevant species, we aimed to develop a universal genetic assay that has the potential to determine foetal sex in a wide range of species. Highly conserved sequences on the Y chromosome and an autosome were identified and selected to serve as primer annealing sites for a male‐specific marker and a reaction control marker, respectively. Primers were designed to amplify short target sequences to a maximum of 300 base pairs (bp) to ensure high sensitivity when applied to degraded foetal DNA. Ultimately, instead of a single universal assay, two sets of primers were designed separately for two groups of the relevant species, resulting in two generalized, highly sensitive duplex PCR assays, each consisting of an SRY (sex‐determining region Y) and GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3‐phosphate dehydrogenase) marker. Following preliminary testing and PCR optimization, each assay provided nearly 100% specificity and sensitivity on genomic DNA samples of various species (20 species in total) and maternal plasma samples of an African elephant. Although further validation on maternal plasma samples is necessary, the developed assays have the potential to rapidly promote breeding‐related activities of a wide range of species by providing a generalized and therefore inexpensive, rapid and convenient method for foetal sex determination.

Foetal sex determination of uniparous mammals with long gestation benefits the management of economically important domestic animals as well as captive wild populations, but the various methods currently available are limited to a few species. Based on the hypothesized presence of circulating cell‐ free foetal DNA (ccff‐DNA) in the maternal circulation of relevant species, we aimed to develop a universal genetic assay that has the potential to determine foetal sex in a wide range of species. Highly conserved sequences on the Y chromosome and an autosome were identified and selected to serve as primer annealing sites for a male‐specific marker and a reaction control marker, respectively. Primers were designed to amplify short target sequences to a maximum of 300 base pairs (bp) to ensure high sensitivity when applied to degraded foetal DNA. Ultimately, instead of a single universal assay, two sets of primers were designed separately for two groups of the relevant species, resulting in two generalized, highly sensitive duplex PCR assays, each consisting of an SRY (sex‐determining region Y) and GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3‐phosphate dehydrogenase) marker. Following preliminary testing and PCR optimization, each assay provided nearly 100% specificity and sensitivity on genomic DNA samples of various species (20 species in total) and maternal plasma samples of an African elephant. Although further validation on maternal plasma samples is necessary, the developed assays have the potential to rapidly promote breeding‐related activities of a wide range of species by providing a generalized and therefore inexpensive, rapid and convenient method for foetal sex determination.

Prenatal sex determination of uniparous mammalian species in human care is of great importance, both from an economic and conservation perspective. The gestation period of these species is rather long, lasting even up to 22 months in the case of elephants; therefore, prenatal diagnostics have substantial benefits. In the case of farm animals, knowing the gender of the offspring to be born can facilitate advanced decision‐making in economically important questions such as sales and sales planning, culling and population management (Lansford et al.1998; Santos et al.2007; Kadivar et al.2013). In the case of captive wild species, it can promote the design and successful implementation of breeding and exchange programs with conservation purposes, as well as allow for appropriate veterinary care and pregnancy monitoring (Olson2002; Abelló et al.2017; Stoops et al.2018).

Despite the benefits, foetal sex determination is not routinely applied due to the limitations of available methods. Ultrasonographic foetal sexing in farm animals is feasible but requires great expertise and can only be applied during a specified, short period of pregnancy (Curran1992; Coubrough and Castell1998). Ultrasonographic techniques are used to a limited extent in larger zoo animal species since they must be performed under anaesthesia, putting significant stress on both mother and foetus and potentially increasing the risk of abortion (Taylor1997). In certain species, the foetus cannot be reached by ultrasound scanning due to the female's large internal organs (Pushpakumara et al.2019). While hormonal measurements are often used alternatively, the method is proven to be exact in a few species only (Duer et al.2002), and the procedure of repeated blood sample collection can be inconvenient for both staff and animals. The method of genetic foetal sexing based on circulating cell‐free foetal DNA (ccff‐DNA) of maternal plasma emerged from the discovery of extracellular DNA with foetal origin circulating freely in the maternal blood of pregnant women (Lo et al.1997). Cell free foetal DNA proved to be detectable from early stages of the pregnancy, typically as soon as 7 weeks in the case of humans (Lo et al.1998), but even prior to 7 weeks with certain technologies (D'Aversa et al.2018). Since its discovery, it has revolutionized the field of non‐invasive prenatal diagnostics (NIPD) primarily in the human field (Chiu et al.2011; Bianchi et al.2014; Jeon et al.2014; Tsui et al.2011; Finning et al.2008; Liao et al.2011; Akolekar et al.2010), but increasingly in the animal field as well. When applied to animals, the method has the advantage of being both non‐invasive to the foetus and easy to implement, requiring only a single blood sample, with no significant stress effect on either the mother or the foetus. The basis of the method for foetal sex determination is the detection of the male‐specific Y chromosome in the maternal blood by molecular techniques. Diverse genetic assays for foetal sex determination have been developed to date: initially for rhesus monkeys (Jimenez and Tarantal2003; Mitsunaga et al.2010) and Javan macaques (Yasmin et al.2015) as model animals in biomedical research; soon after for farm animal species including cattle (G. Wang et al.2010; da Cruz et al.2012; Davoudi et al.2012), horses (de Leon et al.2012; Kadivar et al.2016), sheep (Kadivar et al.2013; Kadivar et al.2015; Asadpour et al.2015; Saberivand and Ahsan2016) and the Arabian camel (Abdulla et al.2020); and more recently for two species of zoo animals, rhinos (Stoops et al.2018) and elephants (Vincze et al.2019). Besides the above mentioned ones, several other species, especially zoo animals, could also potentially benefit from genetic foetal sex determination. However, the species‐specific focus used so far in these studies and developing additional tests for species one by one seem to be a time‐ and money‐consuming process and result in slow expansion of usability of the method.

Based on all the significance and limitations of foetal sex determination (Koszegi et al.2020), with a different approach, the current study aimed to develop a universal genetic sex determination assay that, based on the hypothesized presence of ccff‐DNA in maternal plasma of relevant uniparous mammals, has the potential to determine foetal sex in a uniform, easily feasible way throughout the various species.

After a preliminary assessment, we selected the Y chromosome‐specific sex‐determining region Y gene (SRY) to detect the male sex and the autosomal glyceraldehyde‐3‐phosphate dehydrogenase gene (GAPDH) as a reaction control. We designed multiple primer pairs based on highly conserved regions of the target sequences and used a multiplex PCR system combined with agarose gel electrophoresis for detection. Ultimately, while a single universal assay could not be established, two sensitive generalized assays proved suitable for covering the majority of relevant uniparous species. Here we report the data obtained by analysis of 92 genomic samples of known sexes (female: 38, male: 54) from a total of 20 species and maternal plasma samples of an African elephant and provide an evaluation regarding the accuracy, specificity and sensitivity of the two assays.

Faeces, blood, hair, muscle and/or plasma samples from male and female individuals of 20 species were collected (Table1), provided by different institutions. All procedures were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations in force.

Genomic DNA was extracted from faeces (QIAamp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit, QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), hair, muscle and blood samples (QIAamp Mini Kit, QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Regarding the plasma samples, DNA was purified and concentrated as described previously (Vincze et al.2019). Extracted DNA quality was measured on 1% agarose gel using a GelRed Nucleic Acid Gel Stain (Biotium, Inc., Izinta Kereskedelmi Ltd., Budapest, Hungary), and concentration was measured by a Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies Corporation, Biocenter Ltd., Szeged, Hungary). Extracted DNA samples were stored at 4°C until subsequent analysis.

Several Y‐chromosomal genes (AMELY: amelogenin Y‐linked, TSPY: testis‐specific protein Y‐linked, ZFY: zinc finger protein Y‐linked and SRY: sex‐determining region Y) were examined in search of highly conserved sequences by aligning homologous sequences of various species available in the NCBI GenBank database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/) using MEGA version X (Kumar et al.2018). The SRY gene proved to be the most promising with sequences available from a great variety of species and highly similar regions. The remaining genes were neglected due to the scarcity and/or high variability of the available homologous sequences. SRY sequence data from a wide range of species (see GenBank accession numbers in TableS1included in theSupporting Information) was used to design multiple primer pairs for amplicons to a maximum of 150 bp. Considering the variable positions in the homologous sequences, degenerate bases were used in the primer sequences to generate generalized primers. However, multiple initially designed SRY primers either could not reach optimal sensitivity or gave stochastic results. Consequently, instead of aiming for a single universal primer pair covering all species, the species were divided into two groups based on the regional similarity of the SRY sequences. This approach allowed for the elimination of variations between the SRY sequences within the group and thus for designing a more precisely fitting primer pair for each group containing fewer degenerate bases, resulting in increased specificity and sensitivity. The primer pair for one group (SRY1) was designed to amplify a fragment size of 71 bp. The region amplified by SRY1 relates to positions 313–383 of theEquus grevyisequence (GenBank accession numberEU240941). The primer pair for the other group (SRY2) was designed to amplify a fragment size of 94 bp (Table2). The region amplified by SRY2 relates to positions 284–378 of theGorilla gorillasequence (GenBank accession numberX86382).

Details of the generalized markers designed for sex determination. Degenerate nucleotides are marked according to IUPAC codes (Y = C/T; D = G/A/T; S = C/G) and highlighted with red.

For positive inner control, the autosomal GAPDH gene was selected due to its highly conserved nature and abundant sequences available in the NCBI database. Sequence data from various species (see GenBank accession numbers in TableS1included in theSupporting Information) was aligned in MEGA for primer design. Two primer pairs were designed with the same reverse but different forward primers, resulting in fragments of 404 and 292 bp. After preliminary testing, the primer pair amplifying the shorter, 292 bp long fragment was applied in subsequent analyses (Table2). The region amplified using the GAPDH primer pairs relates to positions 698–989 of theEquus caballussequence (GenBank accession numberNM_001163856).

PCR conditions were optimized for each marker in simplex reactions. Subsequently, the amplification of SRY and GAPDH gene fragments was performed in duplex PCR reactions, separately for the two assays. In a total of 5.5 µL reaction volume, the reaction mix contained 1 µL DreamTaq Green DNA Polymerase (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bioscience, Budapest, Hungary), 1 µL of primer‐mix (10‐10 µM each), 1 µL of DNA template (concentration varying between approximately 0.1 and 10 ng), 0.5 µL (20 µM) bovine serum albumin (BSA) and ultrapure water to volume.

For the first assay, the primer mix contained the SRY1 and GAPDH primers in a ratio of 0.5:0.5. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried out on Mini PCR MP‐16 (Miulab) using the following conditions: an initial step at 94°C for 1 min, followed by 38 cycles of 15 s at 94°C, annealing of 20 s at 55°C and extension of 20 s at 72°C, followed by a final extension for 2 min at 72°C.

For the second assay, the primer mix contained the SRY2 and GAPDH primers in a ratio of 0.9:0.1, respectively. For PCR, an initial step at 94°C for 1 min was applied, followed by 38 cycles of 15 s at 94°C, annealing of 20 s at 46°C and extension of 20 s at 72°C. A final extension for 2 min at 72°C was applied. The amplified DNA fragments were separated and detected by electrophoresis on a 2% agarose gel containing DNA‐intercalating dye (GelRed Nucleic Acid Gel Stain (Biotium, Inc., Izinta Kereskedelmi Ltd., Budapest, Hungary).

Different ratios in the case of the two sets of primers were applied to account for the differences in the PCR yields and allow for balanced amplification of the gene segments.

For sequence analysis, all markers were amplified in simplex PCR reactions in a total of 30 µL reaction volume. Amplified PCR fragments were purified from the reaction mixture using the GenElute PCR Clean‐Up Kit (Sigma‐Aldrich Co., St. Louis, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. To reveal overlapping nucleotide sequences, both strands were sequenced two times using the BigDye Terminator v.1.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bioscience, Budapest, Hungary) in the manner recommended by the manufacturer. For sequence detection, an ABI Prism 3130XL Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Life Technologies Corp. Co., Budapest, Hungary) was applied, according to the manufacturer's guidelines. Sequence analyses were performed using Sequencing Analysis Software 5.1 (Applied Biosystems, Life Technologies Corp. Co., Budapest, Hungary); a homology search of the resulting sequences was accomplished using the GenBank (BLAST, Basic Local Alignment Search Tool).

For assessing the specificity of the primers and the developed assays, a total of 92 samples (female: 38, male: 54) were tested throughout the research. Regarding the SRY markers, 82 samples (female: 35, male: 47) belonged to the first group (SRY1) and 10 samples (female: 3, male: 7) belonged to the second group (SRY2). The samples were tested in simplex and/or duplex PCR reactions, with the conditions described below.

Sensitivity evaluations of the two developed male‐specific analysis assays were performed using male DNA (1 ng/µL) serially diluted in female DNA (1 ng/µL) in a concentration of 5%, 3%, 2% and 1%. The PCR conditions described below were applied with an increased number of cycles (46 cycles), combined with agarose gel electrophoresis.

Maternal plasma samples of an African elephant from the last stage of the pregnancy—4/3/1 week before delivery—were examined with the assay developed for the second group (using fluorescently labelled primers for both markers), with subsequent capillary electrophoresis detection.

After the optimization process, the targeted sequences were individually successfully amplified and detected in nearly all relevant samples: the GAPDH marker was detected in both male and female samples, resulting in 98% sensitivity (90/92 samples), while both the SRY1 and SRY2 markers were detected exclusively in male samples, resulting in 100% sensitivity and specificity (the SRY1 marker was detected in four female DNA samples; however, sequencing analysis showed complete similarity to the SRY sequence, indicating contamination). Due to the low sample size in the second group, the testing was repeated multiple times on each sample and provided the same results.

DNA sequences of all three markers obtained by sequencing and sequence analysis matched the respective sequences in the NCBI GenBank database. These sequence data have been submitted to the GenBank database under the accession numbers listed in Table3.

DNA sequences obtained by sequencing and sequence analysis submitted to NCBI GenBank.

Out of the overall 92 samples, 55 samples were tested in duplex reactions for the SRY and GAPDH markers, 45 (female: 17, male: 28) out of 82 samples with the first assay (SRY1 and GAPDH) and all 10 samples (female: 3, male: 7) with the second assay (SRY2 and GAPDH). The first assay provided 100% specificity and sensitivity regarding the SRY marker, while the GAPDH marker was detected with a 95.5% sensitivity (43/45). The second assay resulted in a 100% overall efficiency.

Serially diluted DNA in a concentration of 5% and 3% provided visible GAPDH and SRY‐specific DNA bands on the agarose gel, but samples in a concentration of 2% and 1% resulted in vaguely visible DNA bands regarding the SRY marker. Neither SRY1 nor SRY2 markers were detectable in the female DNA used as a negative control (Figure1).

Male‐specific sensitivity assessment of the first (left side) and the second (right side) two‐marker assay on agarose gel, using a serial dilution of 1 ng/µL male genomic DNA in 1 ng/µL female genomic DNA (Horse—left side, Asian elephant—right side). L: molecular ladder, ♂: male genomic DNA sample, 5%: mixed sample containing 5% male genomic DNA, 3%: mixed sample containing 3% male genomic DNA, 2%: mixed sample containing 2% male genomic DNA, 1%: mixed sample containing 1% male genomic DNA, ♀: female genomic DNA sample, RC: reagent control without DNA.

Both the SRY2 and the GAPDH marker were detected in all three maternal plasma samples of a pregnant African elephant examined (Figure2). The male sex of the offspring predicted by the assay was confirmed after delivery. In the case of the SRY2 marker, the fluorescent peak was obtained at just under 110 bp, due to the 15 bp‐long tail sequence with a fluorescent label added to the reverse primer. Regarding the GAPDH marker, the fluorescent peak was observed at around 210 bp, shorter than the originally expected 292 bp length but similar to the DNA bands observed in elephants on agarose gel, suggesting deletion in the amplified target sequence.

Results of elephant maternal plasma samples and genomic control samples, obtained by capillary electrophoresis (GAPDH amplified with direct fluorescent primer, SRY2 amplified by tailed fluorescent primer). (A): Negative control sample from a female Asian elephant; (B–D): Maternal plasma samples from a pregnant female African elephant; (E): Positive control sample from a male African elephant.

The selected SRY target sequences are part of the only highly conserved region of the SRY gene, the HMG box (high‐mobility group box) (Whitfield et al.1993), that is very similar to an HMG box occurring in several SOX (SRY‐related HMG‐box) genes (Bowles et al.2000), which are not Y chromosome‐specific. This caused difficulty in designing SRY primers that are highly universal but also highly specific to the SRY gene. In order to tackle this problem, sequences of SOX genes were also included in the MEGA analysis and compared to the Y chromosome‐specific SRY gene sequences to detect regions that have a full overlap and to prevent using these regions as primer annealing sites. Consequently, the primer annealing sites selected have sequence divergence from the SOX genes that allows for selective amplification of the male‐specific SRY gene. Regarding the GAPDH marker, designing universal primers was much easier due to the more highly conserved nature of the gene, and the sequence data used at the time of primer design showed no differences in the length of the targeted sequence. Nevertheless, in the case of the elephant samples, a consistent difference was visible on the agarose gel as well as following capillary electrophoresis in the length of the amplified GAPDH segment, which implies the occurrence of deletion in the targeted region. Further examination of this segment by DNA sequencing could verify the above assumption.

Overall, the two developed assays proved to be highly efficient in not producing false positive results, yet successfully detecting SRY in a wide range of species (20 species in total) as well as in small quantities. Though it could vary significantly between individuals (E. Wang et al.2013) as well as species, ccff‐DNA in humans accounts for, on average, 3%–6% of the total cell‐free DNA present in the maternal blood, increasing continuously over time during pregnancy (Lo et al.1998). The above concentrations were detectable on agarose gel in the sensitivity test; by using fluorescently labelled primers and capillary electrophoresis detection, even lower concentrations could most likely be successfully detected. The fraction of cff‐DNA in maternal plasma could, however, even reach up to 10%–20% in the final stage of pregnancy (Lun et al.2008). Foetal DNA in maternal circulation is highly degraded; the vast majority of ccff‐DNA segments are under 300 bp in length, with an even greater portion of them being sub‐100 bp (Li et al.2004). Therefore, the selected SRY markers, with the sizes of 71 and 95 bp, should be optimal for PCR amplification when applied in foetal sex determination using maternal plasma. Indeed, the assay successfully predicted the sex of the foetus from plasma samples of a pregnant African elephant. In humans, foetal sex determination based on the ccff‐DNA proved to be reliable from the 7th week of the pregnancy (Devaney et al.2011). Information on the presence of cff‐DNA in maternal circulation of different animal species is limited and based on the experience of the previous studies aiming to develop species‐specific tests for foetal sex determination (Stoops et al.2018; Jimenez and Tarantal2003; Mitsunaga et al.2010; Yasmin et al.2015; G. Wang et al.2010; da Cruz et al.2012; Davoudi et al.2012; de Leon et al.2012; Kadivar et al.2016; Kadivar et al.2013; Kadivar et al.2015; Asadpour et al.2015; Saberivand and Ahsan2016; Abdulla et al.2020; Vincze et al.2019). Typically, maternal plasma samples used in these studies were examined, and foetal sex was successfully predicted starting from Week 7 and 8 of the gestation period. However, in the case of rhinoceros, the samples were collected only after Day 200 (Stoops et al.2018), while in the case of elephants, after Week 80 of pregnancy (Vincze et al.2019). In theory, a ccff‐DNA‐based genetic sexing could be feasible in any of the relevant uniparous species; however, in practice, the anatomical structure of the placenta (such as the type of foetal implantation, the number of tissue layers separating maternal and foetal blood circulation and the location of chorion villi and connecting points on the surface of the chorion) shows a significant difference between groups of mammalian species (Chavatte‐Palmer and Tarrade2016) and may strongly affect the extent to which ccff‐DNA enters the maternal blood. Species examined in previous studies however, represent all four basic types of foetal placentation (epitheliochorial placenta in horses and rhinos; syndesmochorial placenta in cattle and sheep; haemochoric placenta in macaque and monkey; endotheliochorial placenta in elephants) (Wooding and Flint1994), allowing us to assume that ccff‐DNA could likely be detected in the relevant, not yet examined species as well.

While a single universal assay for sex detection of uniparous mammals could not be established with adequate specificity and sensitivity, the two sets of primers ultimately designed separately for the two groups of relevant species resulted in two generalized, highly sensitive duplex PCR assays, together covering the majority of relevant species. While both assays use the same reaction control marker (GAPDH), the Y‐specific marker is different; the first assay involves a marker referred to as SRY1 and the second assay involves the marker SRY2. The developed assays proved to be highly effective in detecting sex in the various species representing several major groups of uniparous mammals examined. Based on DNA sequence data available in the GenBank database, the first assay should also be highly efficient in cetaceans (due to the fully complementary nature of target sequences to primer sequences). In tapirs, camelids, anteaters and sloths, the target sequences show minor differences from the primer sequences; therefore, adjustments in the PCR protocol might be needed to reach optimal efficiency. Neither DNA sequences nor genomic samples were available in this study from giraffes and hippos. However, since both belong to even‐toed ungulates, we can assume that the first assay should be applicable to these species as well.

The second assay was also tested and proved to be effective in detecting foetal sex in African elephants. Apart from the plasma samples obtained from a pregnant African elephant, however, the scope of the current study could not cover extensive examination of maternal plasma samples. Nevertheless, the characteristics of the developed assays are suitable in all respects for further application in foetal sex determination. Although the empirical evidence available is limited, the developed assays could presumably be applied to foetal sex determination from an early age of the pregnancy.

By overcoming the limitations of the currently applied ultrasound and hormone level measurement, these generalized genetic assays could both replace the various, currently available methods that are often difficult to implement, as well as provide a solution in case of several species not currently possible to examine. Zoos and livestock farms could benefit significantly from the advantages of such a method, both in terms of usability, simplicity, time and cost‐efficiency. Results deriving from testing maternal plasma samples of various species with the developed assays could—for the first time—provide information on the presence and amount of ccff‐DNA in the maternal circulation of several species not examined before. Moreover, it could contribute to further development of prenatal diagnostics (such as early detection of genetic disorders) in the animal kingdom. Apart from foetal sex determination, the developed assays are suitable for the sex determination of individuals in many other areas of research, for instance, in forensic animal research, population and conservation genetics.

For this method to provide reliable results, however, avoiding cross‐contamination (and thus false positives) by maintaining a careful attitude throughout the full process of sample collection, handling and laboratory testing is especially important due to the generalized nature of the assays.