Pseudomonas aeruginosa(P. aeruginosa) is an important zoonotic pathogen. It is also the primary causative agent of systemic infections in the endangeredMoschus berezovskii. The emergence of multidrug-resistant strains ofP. aeruginosahas made these infections increasingly difficult to control, and bacteriophages are considered important alternatives or adjuncts to antibiotic therapy. This study isolatedP. aeruginosastrains that induce suppurative infections inMoschus berezovskiifrom a farm in Shaanxi Province, China. The bacteriophages vB_PaeP_FMD5 (FMD5) and vB_PaeM_H24-1 (H24-1) were isolated using these bacteria as hosts. The safety and practicality of the two phages were analyzed through methods such as biological characteristic assessment, whole genome sequencing analysis, and animal experiments. FMD5 is classified within the Podoviridae family, whereas H24-1 belongs to Myxoviridae. Biological characterization revealed that both FMD5 and H24-1 exhibit tolerance to temperature, pH, chloroform, and Ultraviolet(UV) exposure. The optimal multiplicity of infection (OMOI) for FMD5 and H24-1 were 0.01 and 0.1, respectively, and the burst sizes from the one-step growth curve were 200 PFU/cell and 150 PFU/cell, respectively. In vitro inhibitory assays demonstrated that FMD5, H24-1, and their cocktail exerted a favorable inhibitory effect for up to 11 hours. Whole genome sequencing confirmed that both phages possess double-stranded DNA genomes, with FMD5 having a length of 72,254 bp and a G+C content of 55.16%, containing 91 ORFs(Open Reading Frame)​, whereas H24-1 has a genome length of 66,281 bp, a G+C content of 56.26%, and encompasses 94 ORFs. No drug-resistance genes, virulence factors, or lysogenic genes were identified in either phage. Phylogenetic analysis of conserved genes revealed that FMD5 is closely related to the previously publishedPseudomonasphage LP14 (LP14), while H24-1 is closely related to the previously publishedPseudomonasphage vB_PaeM_LS1(LS1), but both are newly discovered bacteriophages. In a mouse model of bacteremia treated with bacteriophages, both individual phages and the cocktail exhibited favorable therapeutic effects. The two novel bacteriophages isolated in this study exhibit efficient and stable characteristics. They demonstrate sound therapeutic effects against bacteremia in mice caused by multidrug-resistantP. aeruginosa, suggesting their great potential as alternatives or adjuncts to antibiotic therapy for treating infection.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12985-025-02715-9.

The forest musk deer (Moschus berezovskii) is a first-class protected animal species in China with significant ecological and economic value, is increasingly threatened by bacterial infections. Epidemiological studies have identifiedPseudomonas aeruginosa(P. aeruginosa) as a predominant pathogen responsible for hemorrhagic suppurative pneumonia and systemic pyogenic infections in captive populations [1]. The escalating misuse of broad-spectrum antibiotics has accelerated the emergence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR)P. aeruginosastrains, leads to a decrease in the effectiveness of conventional treatments [2]. As a ubiquitous opportunistic pathogen,P. aeruginosaexhibits remarkable environmental adaptability owing to its large genome (5.5–7.0 Mb) and diverse virulence arsenal [3]. Despite concerted efforts to combat resistance—such as antibiotic combination therapies and novel drug development—progress remains hampered by limited antibiotic and rapid bacterial evolution [4]. This crisis underscores the urgent need for alternative therapeutic strategies.

Bacteriophages, natural predators of bacteria, have re-emerged as promising candidates due to their host-specific lytic activity and favorable biosafety profiles. Phages achieve specificity through molecular recognition of bacterial surface receptors (e.g., outer membrane proteins, LPS, flagella), enabling precise targeting of multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens [5]. In recent years, numerous clinical studies on bacteriophage therapy forP. aeruginosahave validated the safety and efficacy ofP. aeruginosabacteriophages [6–11]. With the emergence of numerous drug-resistant bacteria, bacteriophages and their derivatives have become one of the best therapies for treating resistant infections [12]. However, bacterial countermeasures—including adsorption blocking, CRISPR-Cas systems, and abortive infection mechanisms—pose challenges to phage therapy [13]. Strategic approaches like phage-antibiotic synergy and adaptive evolution of phages can mitigate resistance development [14], positioning phages as viable alternatives or adjuncts to antibiotics [15].

In this study, a multidrug-resistantPseudomonas aeruginosastrain was isolated from a forest musk deer (Moschus berezovskii) with purulent infections. Using this strain as the host bacterium, lytic bacteriophages were isolated and purified. Comprehensive assessments, including biological characterization and whole-genome analysis, were conducted. Furthermore, the therapeutic potential and biosafety of these phages were systematically evaluated in a murine bacteremia model. This work establishes a foundational framework for developing phage-based therapeutics targeting wildlife-derived antibiotic-resistant pathogens.

Sixty-five female SPF Kunming (KM) mice, aged 6 weeks and weighing approximately 22 g, were purchased from Dashuo Laboratory Animal Co., Ltd. in Chengdu, Sichuan, China. They were subjected to a 12-h light/dark cycle for one week prior to the experiment and were provided with clean, adequate feed, drinking water, and bedding, and were housed for 7 days. All animal experiments conducted in this study complied with the guidelines set forth by the Chinese Animal Welfare Committee and received approval from the Animal Welfare and Research Ethics Committee of Northwest A & F University, located in Shaanxi Province, China (approval number DY2022009).

A total of 167P. aeruginosastrains and six different strains, includingKlebsiella pneumoniae,Escherichia coli,Streptococcus,Pasteurella,Staphylococcus aureus,andSalmonella, were used in this study. All strains were isolated, characterized, and preserved in the Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, School of Animal Medicine, Northwest A&F University. Among them, PAf5, the host bacterium isolated from the lungs of deadMoschus berezovskii(Eartag: 64,675), exhibited significant drug resistance (Additional file1). In the double-layer plate method, FMD5 and H24 - 1 formed visible phage plaques in combination with the host bacterium PAf5. Moreover, we used PAf5 as the host bacterium to determine the biological characteristics of the two phages. Therefore, PAf5 was also selected as the mice’s bacterial infection model strain. All strains were identified via cetrimide agar (Qingdao Haibo Biological Company; China) as the identification medium and confirmed via 16S rDNA sequencing. After enrichment and amplification in an LB liquid medium, the bacterial suspension was mixed at a 1:1 ratio with 75% glycerol and stored at − 20 °C and − 80 °C.

The isolation and purification of bacteriophages were performed via the double-layer plate method [16]. Numerous mixed faecal effluent samples were collected from different farms in Shaanxi Province and immersed in the saline solution overnight. The next day, the samples were filtered through three layers of gauze and centrifuged (Centrifuge: China Changsha Yingtai TGL16) at 12,000 rpm for 20 min. The supernatant was extracted and passed through a 0.22 μm filter. 3 mL of the filtered supernatant was blended with 1 mL of host bacteria (PAf5) in 10 mL of LB broth, incubated overnight at 37 °C (Constant-temperature shaking incubator: (China Shanghai Nenggong Industrial Co., Ltd), and then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was passed through a 0.22 m filter to obtain the phage enrichment solution. Subsequently, 100 μL of the phage enrichment solution diluted tenfold was mixed with 100 μL of the host bacteria solution and incubated at 37 °C for 10 min. The mixture was combined with the non-solidified upper medium and poured onto the lower culture plate. After solidification, the mixture was incubated at 37 ℃ for 12 h (Constant-temperature incubator:Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Once plaque appeared, the single plaque was dissolved in LB broth, incubated at 37 ℃ for 30 min, centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min, and diluted with the supernatant at a ratio of tenfold, and the above operations were repeated purify the phage. This process was repeated three times to generate a single spot phage isolate.

The morphological characteristics of phages FMD5 and H24 - 1 were observed by Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) [17]. The specific operation was as follows: 20 μL of phage-enriched droplets with a concentration of 10^8 PFU/mL were placed on copper mesh and incubated for 10 min. The samples were subsequently stained with 2% (w/v) phosphotungstate (Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Ltd) for 5 min and air-dried. Finally, the morphology of the phage was observed via an HT7700 Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM, Hitachi, Japan), and the images were preserved.

Phage host profiles were determined via the dot-matrix method [18]. In addition to determining the lysing ability of FMD5 and H24 - 1 against 167 strains ofP. aeruginosafrom different sources, the specificity of FMD5 and H24 - 1 against different species of bacteria such asKlebsiella pneumoniae,Escherichia coli,Streptococcus, Pasteurella, Staphylococcus aureus, andSalmonella, was also determined. The specific methods were as follows: A uniform 100 μL bacterial mixture containing 1 × 10^8 CFU/mL was spread over LB solid medium (Qingdao Haibo Biological Company; China). Next, 3 μL of phage-rich droplets were added to the medium surface, and the mixture was incubated for 12 h at 37 °C. Observe whether bacterial spots appear on the medium to preliminarily assess the range of phage lysis.

The multiplicity of infection (MOI) is the ratio of phage to host bacteria. The protocol as follows: the host bacterial suspension was cultivated at the logarithmic phase, and seven groups were designed with MOIs of 100, 10, 1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, and 0.0001. One milliliter of phage and one milliliter of host bacteria were added to 10 mL of LB liquid culture medium and incubated at 37 °C in a constant-temperature water bath shaker for 4 h. The mixture was centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 10 min, and the supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 μm filter. The filtrate was collected, and its titer was determined via the double-layer plate method. Each dilution was replicated three times for each sample, and the results were recorded. The one-step growth curve enabled the observation of the growth law of the phage and the calculation of its incubation period and burst quantity. The measurement of the one-step growth curve was based on a modification of previous test methods [19]. The specific procedure was as follows: the ratio of phage to host bacteria was set as OMOI, 1 mL of each to 10 mL of LB liquid culture medium was added, the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 5 min, and the mixture was centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was retained. Subsequently, 10 mL of liquid LB culture medium was added to resuspend the mixture, which was subsequently placed in a 37 °C constant-temperature water bath shaker incubator for cultivation. Samples were taken every 5 min within the first 30 min, and then every 10 min until the phage titer stabilized. After each sampling, the samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant was collected, and a tenfold dilution was performed. The phage titer of each sample was subsequently determined via the double-layer plate method. There groups of parallel samples were prepared for each dilution, and the results were recorded. A one-step growth curve graph was drawn with time on the horizontal axis and the logarithm of the phage titer on the vertical axis.

To explore the influences of diverse conditions on the titer of phages, the stability of phages under various unfavourable conditions was assessed to facilitate better preservation and application of phages. 500 μL of the phage-rich solution with a known titer was extracted from a centrifuge tube, and the phages were exposed to 1 h of treatment at temperatures of − 20 ℃, 4 ℃, 37 ℃, 50 ℃, 60 ℃, and 70 ℃ before being restored to room temperature (Constant Temperature Water Bath: Gongyi Yuhua Instrument Co., Ltd., China). The titer was calculated by employing the double-layer plate culture method to determine the tolerance of the phages to different temperatures. Similarly, 5 mL of the known titer phage enrichment solution was obtained from each sample and placed in 10 mL centrifuge tubes. The pH of the phage enrichment mixture was adjusted to 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 14 by employing hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide, and the mixture was placed in a water bath at 37 °C for 1 h. After this procedure, the pH was changed back to neutral, and the double-layer plate method was used to calculate the titer.

Furthermore, 500 μL of the known titer phage enrichment solution was mixed with 500 μL of chloroform. After 2 min of vigorous reaction, the mixture was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min. The phage count in the supernatant was determined via the double-layer plate culture method. In the control group, a sterile equivalent amount of Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) was used to treat the phage. The differences in the phage titer after chloroform or PBS treatment were compared. Finally, 5 mL of the known titer phage enrichment solution was placed in a 60 mm culture dish and uniformly exposed to ultraviolet light. The phage titer was calculated every 20 min within 2 h via the double-layer plate culture method. The phage titer was recorded every 20 min. Each experiment was replicated three times.

The phage was concentrated via the Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) precipitation approach. DNaseI and RNaseA were added to the phage enrichment solution to reach a final concentration of 1 μg/mL and incubated in a 37 °C water bath for 30 min. Thereupon, 1.76 g of NaCl was added, thoroughly mixed and dissolved, followed by incubation in an ice bath for 1 h. Centrifugation was performed at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Subsequently, 3 g of PEG8000 was added to the supernatant, thoroughly mixed and dissolved, followed by incubation in an ice bath overnight. The next day, the phage concentrate was acquired through centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, elimination of the supernatant, and resuspension of the precipitate in 500 μL of SM buffer. The genome of the phage-concentrated solution was extracted via the TIANamp Virus DNA/RNA Kit (China Tiangen Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd.). The phage DNA bands were detected by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis at 120 V for 30 min (Electrophoresis Apparatus: Beijing Junyi Dongfang Electrophoresis Equipment Co., Ltd., China), and then sent to MeiGe Gene Technology Co., Ltd. in Guangdong, China, for second-generation sequencing on the Illumina Nova Seq PE150 platform.

The genome sequences of the phages were assembled using Megahit v1.1.2 [20] software, and gene prediction for the phage genome was performed using Prokka [21] software. The number and length of the predicted genes were subsequently statistically analyzed. Rapid Annotations using Subsystems Technology (RAST) software was used for the rapid annotation of all potential open reading frames (ORFs) within the phage genome, and the BlastP program was utilized on National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) to compare the annotated amino acid sequences and predict their possible functions. tRNAscan-SE software was used to search for tRNAs within the genome. The Phage Scope online tool was utilized for whole-genome comparative analysis and to search for potential toxin genes and resistance genes. On the basis of the results of protein function annotation, CGview online software was used to generate a full genomic map of the phage. MEGA X was used to construct a phylogenetic tree of the conserved genes of the FMD5 and H24 - 1 phages [22].

To explore the bactericidal efficacy of the phages in vitro, the inhibitory bactericidal curve of the phages was determined through shaking culture at 37 °C. The MOIs of the phage were set at 10, 1, 0.1, 0.01, and 0.001. One milliliter of the phage enrichment mixture and the host bacteria were added to 10 mL of LB liquid culture medium. In the control group, one mL of the phage liquid was replaced with 1 mL of LB mixture culture medium, while the other conditions remained unchanged. The mixture was incubated at 37 °C under shaking conditions. Three samples were taken from each tube at 0 h, and then samples were collected every hour for 15 h, after which the OD630 (Optical Density at 630 nm) variation of the host bacteria was measured, and an LB liquid culture medium was used as the blank control. The in vitro inhibitory curve of the phage was plotted on a graph with time on the horizontal axis and OD630 on the vertical axis. The experiment was replicated three times.

To assess the therapeutic efficacy of the two phages againstP. aeruginosainfection in mice, a mouse sepsis model was established via intraperitoneal injection of the host bacteria. First, the half-lethal dose (LD50) of the host bacterium PAf5 was determined. Thirty mice were randomly divided into six groups, one of which received 100 μL of PBS as a control. The remaining five groups were injected intraperitoneally with 100 μL of PAf5 bacterial suspensions at concentrations of 5 × 10^6 CFU/mL, 5 × 10^7 CFU/mL, 5 × 10^8 CFU/mL, 5 × 10^9 CFU/mL, and 5 × 10^10 CFU/mL. The mice were continuously monitored for 7 days, and the mortality of the mice was documented.

Before conducting the formal phage therapy trial, the safety of the phages was evaluated by dividing 10 mice into two groups, with each group receiving intraperitoneal injections of FMD5 and H24 - 1 phages for 7 consecutive days. In the course of the formal treatment, the mice were randomly allocated into 5 groups, each consisting of 5 mice. Among these groups, 4 groups were intraperitoneally administered 100 μL of PAf5 bacterial suspension at the LD50 concentration as the experimental group, while 1 group was designated the blank control group. Two hours after bacterial colonization, phage therapy was initiated. Within the experimental group, two subgroups were intraperitoneally inoculated with 100 μL of FMD5 (10^9 PFU/mL) or H24 - 1 (10^9 PFU/mL) phages.Moreover, one subgroup was administered 100 μL of an equiproportional mixture of the two phages. Another subgroup was injected with 100 μL of PBS as the control group. After 24 h of phage therapy, blood samples were collected from each group, and the experiment was terminated via isoflurane anesthesia. The bacterial load in the blood was determined, and a Mouse TNF-α ELISA Kit (Qianzhou City Ruixin Biotechnology Co., Ltd., China) alongbwith a Mouse IL- 1β ELISA Kit (Shanghai Yuanju Bio-Tech Center, China) were used to measure the contents of the inflammatory factors TNF-α and IL- 1β in 1 mL of blood from each group of mice. In each group of mice, approximately 0.1 g of each of the lungs, kidneys, livers, and spleens was obtained and ground by adding 1 mL of sterile saline(Grinding instrument: MP Biomedicals, USA). The samples were subsequently spread on NAC plates via the dilution smear plate method. The bacterial load and phage load of each organ were calculated. Pathological tissue sections were taken from the lungs, kidneys, livers, and spleens. HE staining was employed to observe the tissue lesions under a microscope (Microscope: Motic China Group CO., LTD).

All the experiments were replicated three times to ensure the reproducibility of the results. The data presented in this study were statistically analyzed via Microsoft Excel 2021 and GraphPad Prism 8.0 software. Comparison of all the columns was done through t-tests, and P values less than 0.05 were considered astatistically significant (*p< 0.05, **p< 0.01, ***p< 0.001, ns: no significant difference).

The phage spots of FMD5 and H24 - 1 obtained by isolation and purification are shown in Fig.1A and B. The plaques of FMD5 are homogeneous, large, transparent, and lack a halo around the edge, with a diameter of approximately 2 ± 2 mm and a titer of 1.5 × 10^9 PFU/mL. The plaques of H24 - 1 are homogeneous, small, transparent, and possess a halo around the edge, with a diameter of approximately 0.5 mm and a titer of 8.8 × 10^8 PFU/mL. The TEM images revealed that phages FMD5 (Fig.1C) and H24 - 1 (Fig.1D) both fall under the order Caudovirales. FMD5 is classified as belonging to the familyPodoviridae, featuring a head diameter of 56.8 ± 2 nm and a tail length of 30.2 ± 2 nm; H24 - 1 is categorized as belonging to the familyMyxoviridae, with a head diameter of 63.2 ± 2 nm and a tail length of 120.0 ± 2 nm. The phages were named vB_PaeP_FMD5 and vB_PaeM_H24 - 1 in compliance with the guidelines of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV). The host range of phages FMD5 and H24 - 1 was ascertained via a spot assay against 167 strains ofP. aeruginosaand 6 additional strains of diverse bacteria (Additional file2). The results indicated that the lysis rates of FMD5 and H24 - 1 against 18 strains ofP. aeruginosaderived from theMoschus berezovskiisource were 61.11% (11/18) and 83.33% (15/18), respectively. The lysis rates of FMD5 and H24 - 1 against 167 strains ofP. aeruginosawere 36.53% (61/167) and 56.29% (94/167), respectively. The overall lysis rate of the mixture of the two phages against 18 strains ofP. aeruginosaisolated from theMoschus berezovskiisource was 88.89% (16/18), and the overall lysis rate against 167 strains ofP. aeruginosawas 68.26% (114/167). Nevertheless, they demonstrated no lysis activity against the other 6 strains of different bacterial species.

In the determination of the biological characteristics of the FMD5 and H24 - 1 phages, the OMOI values of FMD5 and H24 - 1 were 0.01 and 0.1, respectively (Fig.2A). Under OMOI conditions, the one-step growth curves of FMD5 and H24 - 1 were determined, and the results indicated that the latent periods of FMD5 and H24 - 1 were 5 min and 10 min, respectively, while the outbreak periods were 55 min and 50 min, respectively; the outbreak magnitudes were 200 PFU/min and 150 PFU/min, respectively (Fig.2B).The results of the temperature stability assays indicated that the titers of phages FMD5 and H24 - 1 were capable of remaining above 10^8 PFU/mL at 50 °C and 70 °C, respectively, as depicted in Fig.2C. Phages FMD5 and H24 - 1 exhibited high activity within the pH range of 4–10; however, their titers started to decline sharply beyond this range until they became inactive (Fig.2D). The results of the chloroform sensitivity assay demonstrated that both FMD5 and H24 - 1 were capable of maintaining high activity, and FMD5 exhibited superior tolerance to chloroform compared with H24 - 1 (Fig.2E). It indicates that there are little to no lipid components in the two phage capsid. The results of the UV sensitivity assay indicated that the activities of both FMD5 and H24 - 1 gradually declined within 2 h of UV exposure; however, overall, FMD5 demonstrated greater tolerance to UV than H24 - 1 did (Fig.2F).

Following confirmation of the phage DNA extraction accuracy by nucleic acid electrophoresis, whole-genome sequencing was performed to determine the general characteristics of FMD5 (Genebank:PP107937) and H24 - 1 (Genebank:PP504668) (Table1). The whole genome sequence of FMD5 was submitted to NCBI for comparison, and the results showed that it was 96.7% similar to YH6 (GCA_001041435.1) and LP14 (MH356729.1), while H24 - 1 was 96.18% similar to V523 (GCA_017348065.1) and FBPa12 (GCA_024828175.1).

The annotated amino acid sequences were subjected to comparison via the BlastP program on NCBI to predict the purpose of predicting the possible functions of all potential ORFs. Both FMD5 and H24 - 1 are dsDNA phages, and whole-genome maps of FMD5 (Fig.3A) and H24 - 1 (Fig.3B) were generated through the online software CGview, which possesses a similar structure to that of dsDNA phages, encompassing several modules including structural and packaging proteins, host cleavage proteins, DNA replication/modification-related proteins, and metabolism-related proteins.

To explore the evolutionary relationships of phages FMD5 and H24 - 1 with other phages, we constructed phylogenetic trees for theterminal large subunit(Fig.4A) andDNA polymerase(Fig.4B) of FMD5, and a tree for the evolution of theterminal large subunit(Fig.4C) and themajor head protein(Fig.4D) of H24 - 1. Both theterminal large subunitandDNA polymeraseof FMD5 are more closely related to the published phage LP14 (MH356729.1); both theterminal large subunitand themajor head proteinof H24 - 1 are associated with the published phage LS1 (GCA_002997435.1). Therefore, based on morphological structure, sequence comparison, protein annotation, and phylogenetic relationships, both FMD5 and H24 - 1 belong toCaudovirales, with FMD5 belonging toPodoviridaeand H24 - 1 belonging toMyxoviridae.

As shown in Fig.5, the results of the determination of the bactericidal curve in vitro indicate that the OD630 of the positive control continued to rise steadily for 11 h and then entered a stable period, whereas the OD630 of the negative control remained constant. The OD630 values of the bacteriophages FMD5 (Fig.5A), H24 - 1 (Fig.5B), and the cocktail (Fig.5C) remained approximately invariant throughout the period ranging from 0 to 11 h, indicating that they were all capable of effectively suppressing bacterial growth before 11 h. However, between 11 and 15 h, the OD630 value gradually increased. The differences in the MOIs are not significant. Both single phages and phage mixtures can effectively suppress the growth of host bacteria within a defined period. Furthermore, the antibacterial efficacy of the phage mixture is more similar to that of the superior FMD5, and no significant synergistic or antagonistic effect is observable on the host bacteria.

The experiment was conducted to determine the optimal concentration of the host bacteria for constructing a mouse bacteremia model through the measurement of the LD50 of the host bacteria (Fig.6A). The LD50 was computed via the Reed-Muench formula, which revealed that the bacterial concentration corresponding to the LD50 was 3 × 10^9 CFU/mL. The control group of healthy mice was infected with bacteria at a concentration twice the LD50 for 2 h and subsequently treated with the phages FMD5, H24 - 1, cocktail, and PBS. The blood levels of the inflammatory factors TNF-α (Fig.6B) and IL- 1β (Fig.6C) were detected 24 h later. The results indicated that the levels of TNF-α and IL- 1β in the PBS treatment group were significantly different from those in the FMD5, H24 - 1, and cocktail treatment groups, suggesting that phage FMD5, H24 - 1, and their cocktail treatment effectively lowered the levels of inflammatory factors in the blood of the mice after treatment.

Healthy control mice were permitted to colonize for 2 h, after which the mice were treated with phage FMD5, H24 - 1, Cocktail, or PBS. To ascertain the therapeutic effectiveness of phages FMD5 and H24 - 1 against bacteremia in mice, we determined the bacterial load in the blood and organs (Fig.7A) as well as the phage titer (Fig.7B) 24 h after phage treatment. The results regarding bacterial load demonstrated significant differences between the PBS treatment group and the phage treatment groups in the lungs, kidneys, and spleen and highly significant differences in the blood and liver. Compared with the PBS treatment group, the bacterial load in the FMD5, H24 - 1, and Cocktail treatment groups was 3–4 log values lower. The findings of the phage titer determination indicated that a significant difference existed between the single phage and the Cocktail treatment groups in the blood, liver, and spleen; however, the difference in the lungs and kidneys was insignificant, and the phage titer was approximately 1 × 10^5 PFU/g in both groups. Overall, the titers of bacteria and phages in the lungs, kidneys, liver, and spleen are higher than those in the blood.

After the mice in each group were euthanized, the pathological changes in their internal organs are shown in Fig.8, where only partial results are presented. Using the internal organs of healthy mice (Fig.8A) as a reference, in the PBS-treated group (Fig.8B), the lungs exhibited more severe haemorrhage and oedema with a fragile texture. The entire lungs appeared dark red, whereas the lungs of healthy mice were pink. In contrast, in the phage treatment groups, including FMD5 (Fig.8C), H24 - 1 (Fig.8D), and Cocktail (Fig.8E), the degree of pulmonary haemorrhage was relatively mild, the inflammatory response was reduced, but hemorrhagic spots were still visible. In the PBS treatment group (Fig.8B), severe liver haemorrhage and marginal hemorrhagic infarcts were observed, whereas, in the phage treatment groups (Fig.8C–E), the severity of the liver injury was reduced, with small hemorrhagic spots visible to the naked eye. Additionally, in the PBS-treated group (Fig.8B), the kidneys and spleen were darker in colour with surface hemorrhagic spots, and the spleen was more atrophied compared to the healthy group (Fig.8A). In the phage treatment groups (Fig.8C–E), the spleen atrophy was less pronounced.

The HE-stained visceral pathology sections are shown in Fig.9, and only some of the experimental results are shown here. Groups A–E are, in sequence, the control group, the PBS group, the FMD5 group, the H24 - 1 group, and the Cocktail group. Lung: In group A, the alveolar structure is intact, with no significant pathological changes observed. In group B, the lungs show prominent congestion and thickened alveolar walls, and most alveolar spaces are occupied by inflammatory cells. Some alveolar walls are thickened in groups C, D, and E, but the inflammatory cell infiltration is milder compared to group B, with reduced congestion and haemorrhage. Kidney: In group A, the renal tubules and glomeruli structures are clear, with no significant lesions. In group B, there is hyperplasia of cells in the glomeruli, disappearance of the Bowman’s capsule, congestion in the renal interstitium, and unclear structure. In groups C, D, and E, the lesions are milder than in group B, with cell hyperplasia still visible in the glomeruli, the Bowman’s capsule not entirely disappeared, and reduced congestion in the renal interstitium compared to group B. Liver: In group A, the central veins, hepatocytes, and liver sinusoids are structured with no significant pathological changes. In group B, hepatocyte oedema, disorganized arrangement, and unclear structure are present, with almost complete disappearance of the liver sinusoids. The lesions in groups C, D, and E are less severe than in group B. However, the disorganized arrangement of hepatocytes, unclear structure of liver sinusoids, and increased inflammatory cells are still observed. Spleen: In group A, the white pulp (splenic nodules) and red pulp structures are transparent. In group B, there is lymphocytic infiltration in the white pulp and congestion with expansion in the red pulp. In groups C, D, and E, the lesions are milder than in group B, with reduced haemorrhage in the red pulp, and the structures of the splenic nodules remain clear.

The spread ofP. aeruginosastrains has caused an enormous burden in some regions. Most infections caused by these strains are treated with antibiotics, leading to the emergence of many multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR)P. aeruginosa[23]. Among these infections, the multidrug-resistant (MDR)P. aeruginosais one of the major pathogens of septic disease inMoschus berezovskii. The host bacterium in this study was isolated from a rare animal,Moschus berezovskii, and this strain is resistant to antibiotics such as penicillin, kanamycin, and erythromycin. Due to the growing problem of antibiotic resistance, it is essential to find alternative treatments. As natural antimicrobial agents, phages can target lysis of bacteria by phage itself or phage derivatives, and are expected to become new types of antimicrobial drugs because of their specificity, replicability, safety, self-limitation, and evolvability relative to antibiotics.

In this study, two potent phages, FMD5 and H24 - 1, were isolated from the sewage-feces mixture of forest musk farms located in the Shaanxi region, with multidrug-resistantP. aeruginosaof forest musk origin serving as the host. Following preliminary identification, the FMD5 phage was determined to belong to thePodoviridaefamily, featuring a head diameter of 56.8 ± 2 nm, a tail length of 30.2 ± 2 nm, and a phage spot diameter of approximately 2 ± 2 mm. However, throughout the purification process of several passages, spots of varying sizes were still detected, and it was hypothesized that the small spots might be deletion strains [24]. H24 - 1 belongs to theMyxoviridaefamily and features a head diameter of 63.2 ± 2 nm, a tail length of 120.0 ± 2 nm, and a phage spot diameter of approximately 0.5 mm. One-step growth curves revealed that the burst periods of FMD5 and H24 - 1 were 55 min and 50 min, respectively; the bursts were 200 PFU/min and 150 PFU/min, respectively, and both were potent high-efficiency phages H24 - 1 belongs to theMyxoviridaefamily and features a head diameter of 63.2 ± 2 nm, a tail length of 120.0 ± 2 nm, and a phage spot diameter of approximately 0.5 mm. One-step growth curves revealed that the burst periods of FMD5 and H24 - 1 were 55 min and 50 min, respectively; the bursts were 200 PFU/min and 150 PFU/min, respectively, and both were potent high-efficiency phages [25]. The results (Fig.2) revealed that both phages FMD5 and H24 - 1 exhibited tolerance to temperature, pH, chloroform, and UV light; however, their potency can be inactivated under more extreme conditions. The results (Additional file2) demonstrated that FMD5 and H24 - 1 lysed 36.53% (61/167) and 56.29% (94/167) of the 167P. aeruginosastrains, respectively, whereas Cocktail lysed 68.26% (114/167). The phage cocktail composed of these two phages has excellent potential in treatingP. aeruginosainfections because it reduces bacterial drug resistance and dramatically broadens the host spectrum in clinical applications. During passaging and host range assays, we discovered that the host range tended to expand. It has been postulated that the host range of phages is a highly evolvable characteristic. Host density, diversity, and nature are key parameters determining the host range and can result in its expansion or contraction [26]. The key parameters leading to host range expansion or contraction, which might be associated with phage coevolution, remain to be further investigated.

The whole genome sequencing results indicated that the maximal similarity between FMD5 and YH6 was 96.7% and that between H24 - 1 and FBPa12 was 97.85%. In the ORF of FMD5, 28 known functional proteins exist, and the remaining 63 are hypothetical proteins; in the ORF of H24 - 1, 40 known functional proteins are present, and the remaining 54 are hypothetical proteins. Through comprehensive whole-genome comparisons, FMD5 and H24 - 1 were shown to possess certain specific conserved regions, such as theterminal large subunit,DNA polymerase, andmajor head protein. Consequently, by establishing a phylogenetic tree of the conserved genes, FMD5 and H24 - 1 were confirmed to have close evolutionary relationships with previously published phages and fall within the category of newly discovered lyticP. aeruginosaphages, which is worthy of further research. In other studies, virulence and resistance genes the phage carries may be transferred laterally, as it replicates within the bacterial entity [27,28]. However, we did not detect virulence genes or resistance genes in known functional proteins, thus demonstrating that FMD5 and H24 - 1 are efficient and safe phages.

We ascertained the in vitro inhibition curves of FMD5 and H24 - 1 and its Cocktails. The results indicated that the phage could effectively suppress the growth of bacteria within 11 h of rapid proliferation. Nevertheless, the OD630 value of the phage group gradually increased after 11 h, which might be attributed to the emergence of resistant bacteria [29]. Concerning the selection of animal research models, numerous studies have been conducted onP. aeruginosaphage treatment in mouse hemorrhagic pneumonia models [30–32]. Systemic infections caused by multidrug-resistantP. aeruginosaare relatively prevalent, and some studies have demonstrated that intraperitoneal injection of phage is more efficacious than intramuscular or subcutaneous injection of phages [33]. Therefore, we chose a mouse bacteremia model forP. aeruginosaphage treatment for this study. The outcomes of the animal studies revealed that FMD5 and H24 - 1 phages resembled the RLP phage in treating bacteremia in mice. Mice treated with FMD5 and H24 - 1 presented a 100% survival rate, whereas those treated with the RLP phage presented a 92% survival rate [34]. Both were efficacious at reducing the bacterial load in the blood and internal organs of the mice within 24 h, and the phages were still detectable in the blood and internal organs of the mice within 24 h. Both the bacterial and phage titers in the viscera were higher than those in the blood, which is similar to the therapeutic efficacy of a single phage reported for the treatment of a mouse model of bacteremia withP. aeruginosainfection [35]. At the same time, it was verified through the observation of visceral pathological anatomies and tissue sections that the lesions in the phage FMD5 and H24 - 1-treated groups were noticeably alleviated compared with those in the PBS-treated group. In addition, studies have reported using antibiotics in combination with phages to controlP. aeruginosainfections, which not only improved bacterial control but also reduced bacterial density and resistance to antibiotics or phages [36]. For example, the combination of phages with streptomycin, ceftazidime, etc., can be helpful in the treatment of bacterial infections caused byP. aeruginosa[36,37]. However, this study lacks direct comparative experiments between phage therapy and antibiotic treatment and has not explored the combined use of phages and antibiotics. Therefore, future research should focus on comparing the therapeutic effects of phage therapy and antibiotic treatment and exploring the combined therapeutic effects of phages and antibiotics. Regarding animal experiments, the therapeutic impact of phages onP. aeruginosainfection inMoschus berezovskiihas not been verified. Since theMoschus berezovskiiis a protected species, phage therapy can be used to treatP. aeruginosainfections inMoschus berezovskii, gradually accumulating clinical data to verify the efficacy of phages.

In this study, we successfully isolated two novel strains ofP. aeruginosaphages derived from Lin musk, namely FMD5 and H24 - 1. Among them, FMD5 belongs toPodoviridae, and H24 - 1 pertains toMyxoviridae, both tolerant of temperature, pH, and ultraviolet light. The lysis rates of FMD5 and H24 - 1 against 167 strains ofP. aeruginosawere 36.53% (61/167) and 56.29% (94/167), respectively. The whole genome analysis revealed neither phage contained pathogenicity, drug resistance, or lysogenic genes suitable for clinical treatment. The outcomes of the mouse bacteraemia model indicated that phage therapy could effectively reduce the bacterial load and alleviate the symptoms of bacterial infection in mice. Thus, FMD5 and H24 - 1 phages can treat systemic infections caused by multidrug-resistantPseudomonas aeruginosain mice and are potential antibiotic alternatives.