Wastewater surveillance presents a novel data stream for local health departments to understand infectious disease risk in their communities. We conducted a survey of local health departments in New York State regarding their knowledge, attitudes, and practices toward wastewater surveillance of SARS-CoV-2. We further conducted in-depth interviews with a number of local health departments to identify specific use cases of wastewater surveillance data. Almost all survey respondents used wastewater surveillance data and reported advantages to wastewater surveillance data, with the most common use being the tracking of disease trends, followed by monitoring variants, detecting diseases early, and assessing public health interventions. Some counties were sharing wastewater surveillance data with hospitals, which use the data for planning purposes. Public health communication was the most commonly reported action taken from wastewater surveillance data. These findings highlight that local health departments generally have favorable attitudes toward wastewater surveillance. However, there is a need for continued training and support for local health departments to apply these data in their practice.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12889-025-24250-6.

The discovery that SARS-CoV-2 could be isolated from wastewater [1] resulted in rapid expansion of wastewater surveillance systems for SARS-CoV-2 [2] with the potential to expand into many other infectious diseases [3]. The expansion of wastewater surveillance signifies a novel method of disease surveillance for most public health agencies and local health departments (LHD). Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, routine wastewater surveillance was only used for illicit drug use in Australia [4] and Europe [5], and globally for polio eradication [6]. Polio only causes paralysis in 1 out of 200–2,000 infections in unvaccinated people, and otherwise cases are not typically identified. In a number of instances wastewater surveillance has provided early indication of polio transmission in the absence of paralytic cases allowing local health departments to issue vaccine campaigns to prevent any paralytic cases [7–9]. The novel application of wastewater surveillance to COVID-19 and other seasonal respiratory pathogens and in communities where polio has long been eliminated raises the questions of how useful the data will be. Many LHDs have yet to fully embrace the capabilities of wastewater surveillance due to various reasons, including concerns regarding data reliability, privacy protection, and the interpretation of reports [10], despite studies consistently showing that SARS-CoV-2 wastewater surveillance data are well correlated with clinical COVID-19 data [11].

In NYS, the establishment of a wastewater surveillance network was aimed at improving infectious disease surveillance for the benefit of LHDs [15]. As part of the NYS program, county health officials receive customized weekly reports on various metrics derived from wastewater surveillance including the amount of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in wastewater, the level of transmission (low, moderate, high), circulating variants, and forecasted hospitalizations [16]. Because the network lacks a clear understanding of how local health departments are using the weekly wastewater surveillance reports, we initiated this study to explore whether and how the data were interpreted and used to inform public health decisions.

As of October 2024, all counties in New York were participating within the NYS Wastewater Surveillance Network. The network provided coverage with at least one participating wastewater treatment plant per county. The number of people served by a participating wastewater treatment plant varies by location, ranging from a few thousand to more than 1 million (mean of 74,000).

The research team distributed a survey about wastewater surveillance to every local (county) health department through the NYS Department of Health and the NYS Association of County Health Officials (NYSACHO) during January to February of 2024. Based on how LHDs reported using their data in the survey, we selected 10 counties for in-depth interviews, conducted over a two-month period, to further explore how LHDs interpret and apply wastewater surveillance data. The selection of counties for the in-depth interviews was intended to further understand how LHDs use their wastewater surveillance data and was thus drawn from survey respondents who had indicated they had used wastewater data for decision-making.

We developed the survey based on two frameworks: the knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAP) framework and our own infectious disease surveillance framework presented in Fig.1. The first section focused on knowledge, aiming to understand where health departments are retrieving COVID-19 data and their perceptions of the advantages and disadvantages of wastewater data, using an open-ended format to gather information. The next section addressed attitudes, assessing how useful they believe wastewater data are; its importance in informing COVID-19 transmission and their preferred sources of data through Likert scales, choose all that apply, and open-ended responses. Section three explored practice, investigating how health departments use wastewater data and the frequency and ease of understanding the data. Response options included multiple-choice and open-ended answers. In the fourth section, we evaluated their understanding of risk by gauging their confidence in interpreting wastewater surveillance data from weekly memos and their views on the accuracy of wastewater data in representing COVID-19 trends using Likert scales and open-ended responses. The sixth section was about planning and focused on how LHDs use the data for future decision-making and communication within the department as well as communicating the data externally to other community organizations. Section seven examined advocacy, exploring how health department staff communicate the data to others and identify their target audiences. These questions were answered through open-ended responses. Further, we assessed how LHDs intervene in the eighth section of the survey. In the evaluation section (section nine), we determined whether they use the data to assess public health interventions. Finally, the future development section (section ten) asked respondents about their future expectations for wastewater surveillance data, including other diseases and substances they want to test and potential challenges in disseminating information on substances like opioids. The survey is available in supplementary material 1.

In-depth interviews consisted of open-ended questions (supplementary material 1) from which we sought to better understand the key themes and patterns from LHDs on their utilization of wastewater surveillance data and how they compare to survey data responses (Table1). We used manual coding to define themes from specific phrases from the transcripts.

Counties were selected to participate in follow-up interviews based on their response to use wastewater data for their decision making from the survey and whether they indicated that they had used wastewater data to make some kind of intervention or action related to public health. The goal of the interviews was to collect case-studies of how wastewater data were used to respond to COVID-19 and provide more detailed perspectives from LHD officials. We used thematic comparative and narrative analysis to analyze the in-depth interview responses focusing our interview coding on the research questions listed in Table1. Thematic coding was conducted by three of the researchers (SR, DTH, JM). A codebook was developed after each researcher reviewed the same interview and developed codes and then the researchers linked the codes to each theme. Each interview transcript was reviewed by at least two researchers with a shared review to compile a final list of codes and themes from each interview. Themes were then matched with the research questions in Table1. We provide tables that collect counts of the themes and codes from the transcripts for each research question in supplementary material 2. Comparative analysis was used to further understand if different themes emerged from interviews based on the position of the interviewee (i.e., if they were a director/supervisor v. a staff position). Last, narrative analysis was used to collect descriptions of how LHDs used the wastewater data in their interactions with local stakeholders like schools, hospitals, and businesses. We report a summary of the comparative and narrative analysis in the results with more details in supplemental material 2.

Surveys were conducted in spring of 2024 when at least one wastewater treatment plant in every New York County was participating in the wastewater surveillance network, and the network consisted of more than 200 wastewater treatment plants. Out of the 62 counties in NYS, 38 (61.29%) responded to the survey while the remaining 24 (38.71%) did not participate. In ten counties, multiple individuals responded to the survey: 6 counties (15.79%) had two respondents, and 4 counties (10.53%) had three respondents (Fig.2). In total, 51 individuals submitted surveys. The number of responses varies across the survey based on the number of times respondents may have answered yes or provided additional information to a question based on what is applicable to the respondent.

Almost all survey respondents used wastewater surveillance data (49/51) and reported advantages to wastewater surveillance data (48/51), with the most common use being the tracking disease trends. Monitoring variants, detecting diseases early, and assessing public health interventions were the next most common uses reported. (Fig.3). More than half of the respondents considered wastewater surveillance data to be either very or extremely useful and most respondents had experience interacting with wastewater surveillance data in some forms. The two most common ways interacting with the wastewater surveillance data were reviewing/interpreting the data (n= 48, 94%) and communicating the data within their health departments (n= 40, 78%). Disseminating the results to external stakeholders or the public and making decisions based on wastewater surveillance data were less common but were still reported by more than half of the respondents. When asked what tools the respondents used to understand COVID-19 risk, wastewater surveillance data was the top choice (n= 49, 96%), followed by hospitalization (n= 45, 88%) and case data (n= 32, 63%). The importance of wastewater surveillance data was also emphasized by the respondents as 22 (43%) and 26 (51%) of the respondents found wastewater surveillance data either very or extremely important in understanding COVID-19 risk and transmission, respectively.

Most respondents (n= 39, 76%) reported having “no difficulties” using wastewater surveillance data while 12 respondents (24%) said there was “some level of difficulty”. Regarding how often wastewater surveillance data were checked, the majority of respondents (n= 37, 73%) only examined the data when it was reported each week and not more frequently.

While 27 respondents (53%) reported that they were “very confident” or “extremely confident” in interpreting wastewater surveillance data, 7 respondents (14%) reported that they were either “slightly confident” or “not at all confident”. Accuracy and reliance-wise, most respondents (n= 38, 75%) found wastewater surveillance data to “probably” or “definitely” be an accurate representation of the COVID-19 situation; about half of respondents (n= 24, 47%) reported “often” or “always” relying on wastewater surveillance data to understand the COVID-19 situation. The majority of respondents (n= 32, 63%) also reported that their understanding of wastewater surveillance data has changed since COVID-19.

The majority of the respondents (n= 44, 86%) use wastewater surveillance data in public health communication. More than half of the departments that use the wastewater data to communicate share this information with government agencies (n= 29, 66%) and healthcare workers (n= 23, 52%). The next most reported group is the public, which half of the respondents (n= 22, 50%) report wastewater data and results to, followed by schools (n= 17, 39%). This information was reported to county officials and staff (n= 4, 9%) and boards of health (n= 2, 5%). To communicate the data, the respondents used email the most (n= 16, 36%) followed by reports (n= 11, 25%). The next most used communication methods were websites and meetings, which 10 respondents reported (23%). These are followed by social media and verbal communication, which are used by six of the respondents (14%). Lastly, only four of the respondents (9%) use multimedia as a means of communication.

Only a limited number of respondents indicated having made decisions using wastewater surveillance data alone or alongside other data (n= 13, 25%) or taking action in response to wastewater surveillance data (n= 12, 24%). Survey respondents reported a number of different uses and actions related to the wastewater surveillance data. A common action was communicating results, including transmission risk, to their stakeholders. Another common action was using the data to understand their supply needs in terms of personal protective equipment, rapid diagnostic tests, COVID-19 treatments, and vaccines. A few respondents also used the data for implementing targeted testing and vaccination locations, for education and awareness campaigns, and to inform hospital regulations with regard to face masks and other policies.

Beyond COVID-19, the majority of respondents (n= 45, 88%) foresee wastewater data of opioid use as valuable to understand opioid-related health trends and crises. About one third of respondents (n= 17, 33%) did not foresee challenges to translating and communicating these data, though most respondents (n= 34, 67%) did anticipate challenges. Respondents identified lack of knowledge for interpreting the data as the highest concern followed by limited sewer coverage in rural areas, concerns about privacy, and concern about the differences between medical and illicit drug use. Respondents who felt confident they could use data on opioids from wastewater reported using the data to provide harm reduction services, as well as in funding, interventions, identifying hot spots, informing education and programming activities, and communication.

Respondents also identified many other diseases and substances they would be interested in seeing wastewater results on including influenza, polio, RSV, hepatitis, vaccine preventable diseases, STIs/STDs, and other drugs (e.g., cannabis).

We conducted in-depth interviews with 21 participants from 11 counties. The positions of the participants included department or environmental health directors, epidemiologists, sanitarians, and emergency preparedness coordinators.

The results of the interviews are guided by the research questions and analysis methods outlined in Table1. Each section of the results corresponds to a specific question and draws on thematic, comparative, or narrative analysis, depending on the nature of the data. For example, themes around the utilization of wastewater data and its perceived utility were identified using thematic analysis, while comparative analysis helped explore whether responses differed by the role of the interviewee (e.g., director vs. epidemiologist). Narrative analysis was used to capture how health departments described their collaborations with stakeholders such as hospitals and schools.

LHDs use the data to evaluate trends and compare it to other sources such as hospitalizations and case data. Wastewater surveillance data provides an early warning tool that they can compare to other regions. Some LHDs reported wastewater data allowing them to more precisely locate testing and vaccination sites to areas of high risk.

Others reported recommending guidelines and masking advisories through their community organization partners.

LHDs typically share the data either internally or on their websites via dashboards to keep the public informed on trending COVID-19 risk. They reported sharing instructions with their community organization partners on how to interpret the data.

Most found the wastewater data to be more reliable than clinical data because it is unbiased, provides anonymity, brings awareness to areas that may be missed or overlooked and is a steady data source. When compared to survey responses, interview answers were similar but more in-depth.

Overall, the health departments reported the wastewater data to be reliable; all LHDs interviewed appreciated the weekly memos and discussed how the data was useful.

LHDs also considered the data to be timely and consistent, making it easier to use the data to respond to surges and target outbreak areas (Fig.4).

LHDs also felt the data were better than clinical data for understanding disease burden when they shared with community organization partners (Fig.4). LHDs largely found the wastewater surveillance data useful because the data correlated with case data and provided real-time information.

No differences in the opinions about wastewater were observed based on the position of the respondent (i.e., health directors v. staff epidemiologist/sanitarian).

LHDs reported sharing the data with hospitals and schools, but not businesses, although during the interviews some reflected on how and why they might share the data with business owners in the future. Another use was the coordination with hospitals for staffing decisions, ordering supplies, and preparing for surges.

LHDs reported using the data in weekly meetings and sending out weekly or monthly notices about the wastewater results for SARS-CoV-2 to the stakeholders in their counties. These reports were not exclusively about wastewater, but combined wastewater data with other disease and mortality information that hospitals and healthcare facilities need to know.

Also, respondents identified meetings with local school superintendents as a setting where the wastewater data were frequently discussed.

LHDs expressed their desire for the wastewater surveillance network to continue to sample and expand funding opportunities and highlighting recent funding program provided by the state network for samplers given out to smaller treatment plants.

Further, LHDs want the network to add new targets including opioids and influenza (Fig.5), and to add more sampling locations in rural areas. Opioids were the most requested and discussed potential new target that LHDs mentioned and several had ideas on how they would use that data for overdose mapping, identifying hot spots, and providing a baseline of opioid use to track over time.

LHDs also expressed interest in being involved in the decision-making process related to the statewide program rather than just having state-level officials determine wastewater surveillance priorities. Lastly, LHDs expressed a desire for more outreach programs for LHD officials like conferences and training.

LHDs in NYS report a high level of respect and utilization of wastewater surveillance data, and regularly use these data in their public health practice. Common uses include tracking trends and communicating risk levels to external stakeholders and the public. LHDs considered wastewater surveillance data as one more tool available to them in their efforts to reduce the burden of COVID-19. Most LHDs would like to see wastewater surveillance continue, and even expand to other public health threats including opioids.

While the benefits of wastewater surveillance data in helping to understand the risk and transmission of COVID-19 were well appreciated by the LHDs, as it has been seen elsewhere [14], some level of hesitancy remains when converting the wastewater surveillance data into public health actions. Wastewater surveillance has proven effective in small-scale campaigns, such as campus-wide targeted testing [12], but actions imposed on larger communities, especially restrictive ones, are rare due to concerns on data reliability and public opposition to such measures. Despite providing an alternative way to evaluate the transmission risk, the nature of wastewater surveillance as an indirect and independent surveillance approach means its data not only require additional knowledge and training to properly interpret, but also come with inherent uncertainties and limitations different from that of conventional surveillance tools based on clinical cases. For example, the amount of a pathogen isolated from wastewater can be influenced by sample variability due to weather conditions or shifts in population size [17,18]. Accurate estimation of the population contributing to the sample can be challenging as these numbers fluctuate due to commuting, tourism, or other movement patterns [17]. The various ways samples are collected, e.g. grab versus composite camping, can impact pathogen detection in wastewater [19,20]. And inherently, wastewater samples are an ecological indicator – the individual infected with a pathogen is not identified which precludes any case investigation or contact tracing. Since wide implementation of wastewater surveillance only started during the COVID-19 pandemic, local public health authorities may not have fully adopted it as a routine and dependable community health status indicator, but as we saw in the survey, this may have changed over time. It is critical to further build confidence in using wastewater surveillance data, not only as a complementary data source, but also as an independent infectious disease indicator. In addition, since successful wastewater surveillance implementation requires local resources, such as logistic support, the LHDs’ acceptance and utilization of wastewater surveillance data will play a key role in ensuring continued support. This highlights the importance of training and education provided by wastewater surveillance projects.

A more notable use case for wastewater surveillance reported by LHDs is using the hospitalization forecasts derived from wastewater data to support hospital staffing and equipment needs forecasting. As one participant explained, “.mainly through sending [the wastewater data] to the … health network and …to the hospital administration, who then can kind of work on staffing or ordering and that was a lot more helpful. You know, during our big hospitalization peaks that we were seeing where there would be, you know, for our small county, if we had a dozen people in the hospital in one week, that was a lot for us. So it was just, I think, very useful on that front for staff purposes.” Another county noted that the disease surveillance reports shared with hospitals and providers included wastewater data along with interpretation guidance to support testing and vaccination decisions. Beyond that use case, and similar to what has been found in other studies [21], LHDs used the wastewater surveillance data to alert partner community organizations and the public about the threat of COVID-19 in the area. Given that the emergency phase of the COVID-19 pandemic has passed, these results are not unexpected. Public health intervention based upon infectious disease surveillance data is rare in itself, and typically limited to outbreaks. Wastewater surveillance has already proved itself to be a useful tool for LHDs in the response to polio outbreaks [22], and we suspect that this type of use case will become even more relevant as vaccine hesitancy increases and more outbreaks occur. Additionally, during the emergency phase of the pandemic, wastewater surveillance was often used to guide testing interventions on college campuses [23], and among vulnerable populations [24]. Despite the growing number of use cases, tying the value of wastewater surveillance data to specific public health actions is problematic – LHDs reported significant value in using wastewater surveillance data to simply understand the risk to the communities that they serve.

LHDs in NYS identified opioids as the number one public health threat that they would like to see surveilled in wastewater. Opioid overdoses have been implicated as one of the specific drivers of the downturn observed in US life expectancy [25], and is one of the most pressing public health needs affecting LHDs. A recent survey of LHDs across the US concluded that LHDs must increase their data collection regarding opioid use to better inform their efforts [26]. Wastewater surveillance of opioid use would provide LHDs with an unbiased measure that they could track over time to understand the effectiveness of their prevention and intervention efforts.

Our study has limitations that should be considered when interpreting the results. First, the study was only conducted in NYS, which means that the results may not reflect the values and attitudes of health officials in other jurisdictions. Second, respondents for in-depth interviews were purposefully selected based upon a survey response that indicated the county had used wastewater surveillance data for decision making. This was done to optimize the results for case-studies of how wastewater data are used, but it also means that we did not gather results from health officials on why they did not use the data. This would be an interesting question for future research. Third, non-response bias might have impacted some of our findings if non-response was linked with the attitude of the survey recipient about the program. We do not think this bias was very large because NYS has wastewater surveillance sites in every county covering all LHDs and sites were set up with the coordination of local officials. Further, a number of LHDs that we know are strong advocates of wastewater surveillance did not respond to the survey. Therefore, this bias should be low given that there is participation in the program in every county, however, engagement in the data use and interpretation does vary between counties as we found in the survey results.

In conclusion, LHDs in NYS appreciate and regularly use wastewater surveillance data. This type of infectious disease surveillance should be routinely established with the number of pathogenic and chemical targets expanded.

This work was supported by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) of the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) as part of the ELC Program, New York State unique federal award number NU50CK000516 (NYS Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Prevention and Control of Emerging Infectious Diseases). The contents are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of, nor an endorsement by, CDC/HHS, or the US Government or the CDC Foundation.

Conceptualization: DALData curation: N/AFormal analysis: SR, MN, DTH, AM, JM, MM, NP, BW, NY, YZ, YZFunding acquisition: DALInvestigation: AM, JM, MM, NP, NYMethodology: DAL, BWProject administration: MN, DALSoftware: N/AResources: N/ASupervision: MN, DTH, DALValidation: DTH, YZVisualization: SR, MN, DTH, NPWriting - original draft: SR, MN, DTH, DALWriting - review & editing: SR, MN, DTH, AM, JM, MM, NP, BW, NY, YZ, YZ, DAL.

This work was supported by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) of the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) as part of the ELC Program, New York State unique federal award number NU50CK000516 (NYS Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Prevention and Control of Emerging Infectious Diseases). The contents are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of, nor an endorsement by, CDC/HHS, or the US Government or the CDC Foundation.