Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs) are among the most promising cell types for the treatment of spinal cord injury (SCI) and other neural traumas. However, primary OECs cultured in vitro are constrained by their inherent “Hayflick limit,” resulting in poor proliferative and passaging capacities, which restricts their large-scale application in both basic and clinical research. Conditional immortalization technology provides an excellent solution for rapid, large-scale, and controllable proliferation of primary OECs. However, few studies have applied this approach to the controlled passaging of OECs. Here, we used the tetracycline-controlled system (Tet-On system) to introduce the HBLV-TetOn-SV40Tag-PURO constructed into the primary OECs via lentiviral transfection, establishing a conditionally immortalized OEC line. We comprehensively investigated its functional characteristics with or without tetracycline conditions by using immunofluorescence, qPCR, CCK-8, Scratch assay, and Transwell migration experiment. Our results demonstrated that this cell line could rapidly proliferate under tetracycline and quickly recover to proliferation and migration levels similar to primary OECs after tetracycline removal following multiple passages. This approach ensures obtaining a suitable quantity of OECs with specific functional characteristics while avoiding the malignant proliferation risks associated with traditional cell line establishment, thus offering higher safety. Moreover, the method is simple to operate, cost-effective, possessing excellent potential for basic and clinical translational applications.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-15144-z.

Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs), a type of neuroglial cell originating from the neural crest, play a crucial role in the olfactory system. During their development, epithelial cells from the upper layer of the olfactory placode migrate alongside the growing olfactory axons within the lamina propria from the olfactory mucosal epithelium. They traverse the cribriform plate, move toward the olfactory bulb, and eventually form the olfactory nerve layer, a key structural component of the olfactory system1,2. OECs are primarily classified into olfactory mucosa-derived OECs (OM-OECs) and olfactory bulb-derived OECs (OB-OECs), which differ in antigen expression, growth potential, and therapeutic efficacy when transplanted into injured tissues3–5. OECs are widely used in cell therapy for spinal cord injury (SCI). As a seed cell for transplantation therapy, it can reduce apoptosis of neurons and other cells, alleviate local inflammatory responses, decrease the size of glial scars and lesion cavities formed in the injury, and promote axonal growth and myelin regeneration6–9. In previous studies, OECs transplantation has been proven to have certain safety and feasibility in large animals and multiple clinical pilot studies10–13. In addition, in a clinical trial project for a male patient with chronic thoracic injury, OECs also showed excellent neurorepair effects, which illustrating that OECs have good clinical application prospects14.

However, there are still some critical challenges to be solved in the research on OECs, such as the yield and culture duration of OECs. In primary cell cultures, the longer the culture duration, the greater the likelihood of changes in cell morphology, phenotype, or function15,16. Moreover, primary OECs extracted for in vitro culture often encounter the “Hayflick limit,” characterized by limited proliferative capacity in vitro17,18. Therefore, it is necessary to optimize the OECs’ production protocols to reduce the time required to culture sufficient cell quantities and to enhance their proliferation and passaging potential19.

Immortalization technology encompasses a range of techniques that introduce exogenous immortalizing gene fragments (SV40 Tag, TERT, c-MYC) into target cells to establish proliferative cell lines. These cell lines can bypass the normal cell division cycle, thus obtaining the capacity for unlimited division and proliferation20,21.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) is a polyomavirus originating from rhesus monkeys. The SV40 large T antigen (SV40 Tag), an early non-structural protein encoded by the SV40 genome, can regulate cell proliferation and mediate cell immortalization. Its mechanism may be related to interactions with intracellular pRb and p53 proteins20,22. Previous studies have demonstrated the successful application of the SV40 Tag gene in generating various immortalized cell lines, such as mouse optic nerve astrocyte cell lines23and mouse hypothalamic (AMH) cell lines24. Additionally, previous research has indicated that SV40 Tag can be utilized to establish OEC line while preserving their neural regeneration capabilities. However, the integration of viral oncogenes and the irreversible nature of the transfection process present a potential risk of malignant proliferation, thereby limiting its potential for clinical applications25,26.

Conditional immortalization technology is a specialized type of immortalization technique designed to prevent the overexpression of pro-proliferative genes. Its fundamental principle is to add conditional control elements upstream of the target gene, then introduce them into the target cells to construct conditionally immortalized cell lines27,28. These cell lines remain in an immortalized state under specific conditions, such as sustained proliferation and extended lifespan, but revert to their original post-mitotic state once these conditions are removed. Reversible immortalized cell lines prepared by using this technology effectively mitigate the risk of malignant transformation associated with excessive proliferation, thereby enhancing its safety for clinical applications29.

Common methods for conditional immortalization include tetracycline-dependent, temperature-dependent, and tamoxifen-dependent reversible immortalization30. Among these, the tetracycline-dependent conditional immortalization technique is widely used in the gene regulation of eukaryotic cells due to its simplicity, high efficiency, controllable induction, and relatively low technical complexity31,32. Compared to the Cre-loxP technique, it effectively prevents the rapid aging and apoptosis of OEC line following de-immortalization33. This technique primarily relies on two core components: the TET promoter fused with the tetO sequence, which regulates target gene expression, and a transcription factor activation domain fused with tetR. It is primarily divided into two systems: the tetracycline-activated system (Tet-On) and the tetracycline-repressed system (Tet-Off). In the Tet-On system, the target gene is expressed in the presence of tetracycline or its derivatives and ceases expression upon their removal. Conversely, the Tet-Off system regulates target gene expression in the absence of tetracycline34. Among the two, the Tet-On system is more suitable for constructing conditionally immortalized cell lines, as it eliminates the need to maintain tetracycline conditions to prevent cell division, offers greater safety, and shows potential for in vivo therapeutic applications35.

In this study, we developed a conditionally immortalized olfactory ensheathing cell (OEC) line by introducing the HBLV-TetOn-SV40Tag-PURO lentivirus into primary OECs. This approach significantly enhanced the proliferation capacity of OECs within a controllable range, facilitating the rapid production of a large number of highly purified cells. Moreover, the proliferative ability could be reversibly deactivated, allowing the cells to revert to a functional state comparable to that of primary OECs. Overall, this protocol is straightforward, cost-effective, safe, and efficient, making it ideal for large-scale applications in basic research and offering potential for clinical translation.

The cell morphology and quantity of OECs were observed immediately after adhesion and on days 3, 6, 9, 12, and 14. As shown in Fig.1a, primary OECs were almost fully adherent by day 3 after seeding. However, at this time, the cell quantity was low, the distribution was uneven, and the extended processes were short. By day 9 of culture, the number of OECs had significantly increased and achieved an appropriate degree of cell confluence, showing a clear numerical advantage over other contaminating cells. The cell bodies appeared spindle-shaped, highly refractive, and actively proliferating. The OECs were evenly distributed, with cells spreading out and forming long, extended processes that interlaced to create a network structure. By days 12–14, some OECs exhibited signs of cell body shrinkage and thinning of processes, indicating signs of aging.

Morphology and proliferation activity of primary OECs at different time points after planting. (a) Morphological images of primary OECs at 0 h, 3, 6, 9, 12, and 14 days after adhesion culture. Scale bar: 10X: 200um; 20X: 100um. (b) Proliferation activity of primary OECs at 0 h, 3, 6, 9, 12, and 14 days after planting (n = 3). **p< 0.01; ***p< 0.001.

Furthermore, we used the CCK-8 assay to detect the proliferation activity of OECs at different time points. As shown in Fig.1b, from day 6 to day 9, the ratio of viable cells increased significantly, indicating enhanced cell proliferation activity, which corresponds to the trend observed in the number of cells under the light microscope, reaching a proliferation peak on day 9. Compared to D9, there was no significant change in cell survival rate observed on day 12 and day 14.

We chose OECs on the 9th day after adhesion for subsequent experiments, because their confluence and cell activity are both appropriate. We then identified OECs from the olfactory bulb by using immunofluorescence staining for P75NTR marker. As shown in Fig.2a, b and c, P75NTR+ cells were labeled in red. Quantitative analysis (Fig.2d) indicates that the purity of our primary OECs extracted was 90.777 ± 1.671%, which is high enough to be used for subsequent experimental operations.

Immunofluorescence identification of OECs by using P75NTR marker. (a) P75NTR staining (red). (b) DAPI staining (blue; nuclei). (c) Merged image. Scale bar: 50um. (d) Percentage of P75NTR-positive cells (n = 3).

In this work, we successfully constructing the conditionally immortalized OEC line by usingHBLV-TetOn-SV40Tag-PURO lentivirus. After that, we conducted continuous passaging and checked the cell morphology and purity of them every three passages. As shown in Fig.3a, with the increase of passage number (P0-P4), the morphology of transfected cells gradually changed, predominantly exhibiting a spindle-like shape, and the proliferation and passage rate of these cells were relatively fast at this stage. During subsequent passages (P4-P7), cells gradually transitioned into two main morphologies: flattened (astrocyte-like) and short spindle-shaped (Schwann cell-like), with a gradual slowdown in proliferation. In the later passages (P7–P10), the cell morphology remained well-maintained as long-process short spindle-shaped and flattened forms. However, in this stage, the proliferation rate gradually slowed down, with much more increased spacing between cells, larger cell spreading.

Morphological comparison and purity identification of conditionally immortalized OECs across P0, P4, P7, P10 passages. (a) The morphology of OEC lines was recorded every three passages to observe the cell morphological transformation at different passages. Scale bar: 20X: 100um; 40X: 50um. (b) Immunofluorescence staining was performed every three passages to determine the purity of OEC lines. Scale bar: 50um. (c) Quantitative analysis of P75NTR positive cells in P0, P4, P7, and P10 passages. (n = 3).

To determine whether the OEC line established by this method can maintain a certain level of purity after multiple passages, P75NTR fluorescence identification was performed on the virus-transfected OECs at passages P0, P4, P7, and P10. Figure3b shows the immunofluorescence images of OECs at different passages. Quantitative analysis results (Fig.3c) indicated that the purity of the OEC line was 90.777 ± 1.671% at P0, 93.968 ± 1.402% at P4, 94.593 ± 0.851% at P7, and 93.693 ± 1.413% at P10. The ratio of P75NTR-positive cells to total cells at all passages was greater than 90%, suggesting that the purity of OECs remained stable during the passage process, with essentially no loss of purity observed.

We finally chose P10 cells for subsequent operations, because the cells of this generation were abundant in number and could maintain the morphology and proliferation performance of transfected cells. The differences in proliferative capacity between the 10th passage (P10) OECs under the conditions of retaining / removing tetracycline stimulation and primary OECs were compared. qPCR was used to detect the expression levels of SV40 Tag mRNA in these three groups: the primary OECs group, the P10 OECs with tetracycline group (P10tet+), and the P10 OECs without tetracycline group (P10tet-). Figure4a shows the semi-quantitative analysis results of SV40 Tag mRNA expression in each group. Compared to the primary OECs group, the expression of SV40 Tag mRNA in the P10tet+ group was significantly upregulated (P< 0.05); compared to the P10tet+ group, the expression level of SV40 Tag mRNA in the P10tet- group was significantly downregulated after 72 h of tetracycline removal (P< 0.05). This indicates that tetracycline effectively regulates the expression of the SV40 Tag gene in these P10 OECs. Specifically, the removal of tetracycline suppressed the expression of the SV40 Tag gene in this OEC line, which indirectly reflects the successful construction of this conditionally immortalized OEC line.

The expression and proliferation activity of SV40 Tag gene in OECs, P10tet+, and P10tet-group. (a) Semi-quantitative analysis results of SV40 Tag gene expression levels in each group (n = 3). ****p< 0.0001. (b) Comparison of proliferation activity among the groups by using CCK-8 method (n = 3). ****p< 0.0001.

The proliferative capacity of each group was evaluated by using the CCK-8 proliferation assay. As shown in Fig.4b, after 36 h of adherent culture, the cell survival rates of the three groups were compared: the P10tet+group had the highest survival rate at 185 ± 1.500%, followed by the P10tet-group at 119 ± 0.427%, and the primary OECs had the lowest survival rate at 100 ± 0.220%. This indicates that after the removal of tetracycline, the OEC line can partially recover to a proliferation level similar to that of primary OECs, although there was still a certain degree of difference between the two groups (P< 0.05).

The migratory ability of the three groups was evaluated by using scratch assay and Transwell migration assay. Figure5a shows images of the scratch areas for the three groups at 0 h, 48 h, and 96 h. As shown, the scratch areas in all three groups gradually decreased. The migration rates of each group were statistically calculated, and the quantitative results (Fig.5b, c) showed that the migration rates of the primary OECs group, the P10tet+group, and the P10tet-group after 48 h of culture were 22.649 ± 6.922%, 25.823 ± 2.763%, and 20.465 ± 1.367%, respectively. After 96 h of culture, the migration rates were 41.451 ± 2.093%, 44.269 ± 2.803%, and 36.948 ± 0.599%, respectively. Among these, there was no statistically significant difference in migration rates between the P10tet+group and the primary OECs group, indicating that the SV40 Tag gene has no significant effect on the migratory ability of OECs. Additionally, no statistically significant difference in migration rates was observed between the P10tet-group and the primary OECs group. This suggests that after the removal of tetracycline induction, the OEC line can essentially recover to a migratory level similar to that of primary OECs.

Comparison of migration abilities among OECs, P10tet+, and P10tet-groups. (a) Scratch assay images of OECs, P10tet+, and P10tet-group. Scale bar: 500um. (b) Comparison of migration rates among different groups of cells at 48 and 96 h after scratching (n = 3). *p< 0.05. (c) Comparison of migration rates at different time points within each group of cells (n = 3). *p< 0.05; **p< 0.01. (d) Recording the Transwell migration images of each group to compare their migration abilities. Scale bar: 100um. (e) Semi-quantitative analysis of the relative number of migrating cells in each group (n = 3).

We further compared the migration abilities of these three groups by using the Transwell migration assay. Figure5d shows the migrating cells (marked in purple) in three groups after 24 h of migration. Under the field of view, the P10tet+ group showed darker staining after crystal violet staining, while there was almost no difference in staining between the other two groups. Additionally, we conducted a semi-quantitative analysis of the number of migrating cells in each group (Fig.5e), and the results were consistent with the staining differences observed under light microscopy and those results of the scratch assay, showing no statistically significant differences in the number of migrating cells among the three groups.

Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs) possess unique functional advantages, such as directional migration, secretion of various neurotrophic factors, promotion of axonal growth, myelin regeneration, and immune regulation. These characteristics have made them widely utilized in basic and clinical research on nerve injuries and neurodegenerative diseases, positioning them as one of the most promising cell types for nerve repair37. However, compared to other transplanted cells, primary OECs suffer from limitations such as low yield and poor proliferative capacity19, which significantly restrict their research and application potential and hinder their clinical translation. In this study, we used the exogenous proliferative gene SV40 Tag as the target gene to construct an OEC line. A tetracycline-inducible promoter was used to establish the HBLV-TetOn-SV40Tag-Puro conditional expression system, successfully generating a conditionally immortalized OEC line through lentiviral transfection.

Two-step differential adhesion method is a classical strategy to purify primary OECs36. Its basic principle is to gradually separate the target cells harvested from the outer two layers of the olfactory bulb based on the different attachment rates to various substrates, which is widely used for the purification of OECs. The purity of OECs harvested by using this method can reach over 90%. In this study, we obtained OECs with a purity of over 90% through this method, which is sufficient to meet our further experimental requirements.

SV40 Tag gene promotes cell proliferation by disrupting cell cycle regulatory mechanisms and is widely used in the establishment of cell lines38. Previous research has successfully established an OEC cell line by using a single SV40 Tag gene, The cell line could continuously proliferate and effectively maintain its neural regeneration potential26. Consistent with these findings, our proliferation experiments revealed that the introduction of SV40 Tag gene significantly enhanced the proliferative capacity of this cell line, and the constructed OEC line could be stably passaged up to 10 generations. Our findings fully demonstrated that it was feasible to improve the proliferation ability of OECs by using SV40 Tag gene.

Tet-On system is a classic conditional control system that enables the expression of target gene in the presence of tetracycline, while its expression is turned off in the absence of tetracycline, functioning as a ‘switch’ to artificially regulate gene expression35,39. In previous studies, Lim et al. successfully introduced the proliferation-related genes Bmi-1 and TERT into human primary OECs through the means of Cre-Lox reversible editing technology to construct reversibly immortalized OEC line, and the cell line was able to induce axonal regeneration in human CNS neurons in vitro. However, the cell line constructed by this method also present a shortcoming of slower proliferation and the risk ofin-vivotoxicity of gancyclovir (GCV) phosphorylation mediated by HSV-1 thymidine kinase (TK) gene40. Compared to the reversible excision of the SV40 Tag fragment in OECs by using Cre recombinase, this conditional induction strategy is simpler and milder and prevents rapid senescence and apoptosis of cells following the removal of the immortalizing gene fragment33. Moreover, in foreseeable clinical applications, the Tet-On system offers precise control of SV40 Tag gene expression in OECs through the administration of drugs. When gene expression needs to be turned off, discontinuation of drug administration is sufficient32.

In our study, we used the Tet-On system to achieve intelligent and controllable regulation of the proliferative capacity of the OEC line. Under continuous tetracycline exposure, the OEC line could be stably and quickly passaged. However, morphological observations at different generations revealed changes in cell morphology and proliferation rate during passaging. As we saw under a light microscope, in the early passages (P0–P4), OECs primarily exhibited a spindle-shaped morphology and rapid growth. Then, they gradually transitioned to a mixed morphology, consisting of short spindle-shaped cells with long processes and flattened cells (P4–P7). In the late passages (P4–P10), the growth rate gradually declined. Although the cell line did not lose the two morphological features unique to primary OECs (short spine shape with long processes and flattened shape) during passages, we were still concerned about this phenomenon of morphological changes. As reported in previous studies, these morphological changes of the cell line might be influenced by the SV40 Tag gene. Price et al. found that the proliferation efficiency of cells transfected by SV40 Tag gene was regulated by T antigen levels. As T antigen levels decreased, cell morphology and contact inhibition gradually recovered41. Additionally, cell density may also play a role in altering cell morphology42,43. The rapid proliferation of OECs in the early stages after transfection may contribute to the spindle-shaped morphology once a certain density is reached. At the late passages, the proliferation of high-passage OECs slowed, maintaining two cell morphologies, flat and short spindle-shaped.

P75NTR, as a classical marker of OECs, is widely used to differentiate OECs from other cell types42,44–46. In particular, OECs derived from the olfactory bulb could be well recognized by using it47. Here, we conducted P75NTR immunofluorescence staining on OECs at 3-generation intervals to assess possible loss of purity due to successive passaging. The results revealed that the proportion of P75NTR-positive cells consistently exceeded 90% across all examined passages (P0, P4, P7, P10). Indicating that the established OEC line could maintain a high level of purity during multiple passages. These findings have given us a peace of mind, cause primary stem cells of high generation were often accompanied with the phenotype loss in previous studies48,49.

The construction of conditionally immortalized cell lines aims to enable continuous proliferation under specific stimuli until a desired cell quantity is achieved. Once this goal is reached, the removal of the stimulating factors allows the cells to revert to their original state29. Here, the conditionally immortalized OECs reached sufficient cell numbers by the 10th passage, and at this point, their proliferative capacity had weakened, making it appropriate to discontinue tetracycline induction. qPCR results showed that after tetracycline removal, the expression level of the SV40 Tag gene in P10tet−cells was significantly lower compared to OECs with continued tetracycline stimulation (P10tet+group). Their proliferative capacity also decreased markedly, approaching the level of primary OECs. These findings were similar to those in previous researches40. Although we used the Tet-On system instead of Cre-Lox editing technology, we were still able to successfully interrupt the expression of SV40 Tag gene in OEC line rapidly after removing the influence of tetracycline, thereby reducing their proliferative capacity and restoring proliferation levels similar to those of primary OECs.

The migratory ability of OECs is a crucial function that facilitates their role in overcoming the glial scar barrier formed after neural injury, thereby serving as a bridge to guide axonal directional growth50,51. Additionally, active migratory ability is an important indicator for assessing the tumorigenic risk of cell lines52,53. This is an important reason why we considered evaluating this functional characteristic of the cells. We used both the scratch assay and the Transwell assay to assess whether the migratory ability of OECs after tetracycline removal differed from that of primary OECs. Our findings showed that there were nearly no differences in migratory ability among the three groups, which indicated that while the SV40 Tag gene promotes the rapid proliferation of P10 OECs, it did not significantly interfere their migratory ability. Additionally, the transfected cells could still maintain their migratory ability to a level comparable to that of primary OECs following the removal of tetracycline induction, making them safe and clinically valuable.

In conclusion, this study demonstrates that constructing a conditionally immortalized OEC line by using the exogenous gene SV40 Tag combined with the Tet-On conditional control system is feasible. This approach not only ensures that OECs can reach the required quantity within a short period to meet the needs of experimental research and clinical applications but also allows for the controlled removal of tetracycline once the target quantity is achieved, enabling the cells to gradually restore functional phenotypes similar to those of primary OECs. All in all, this approach offers an economical, efficient, safe, and convenient solution to the challenge of limited availability of primary OECs.

A total of 54 Sprague-Dawley (SD) neonatal rats, aged 3–5 days (regardless of sex), were used in this experiment for the extraction of primary OECs. All animals used in this experiment were provided by the Experimental Animal Center of Xi’an Jiaotong University (Production License: No. SCXK [Shaanxi] 2007-001). This study was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Xi’an Jiaotong University (Approval: No.: XJTUAE2023-2221).

After intraperitoneal injection of 1% pentobarbital sodium solution (40 mg/kg) for deep anesthesia, the olfactory bulb tissue in the anterior cranial fossa of the rats was dissected following whole-body sterilization with 75% ethanol. The surface meninges of the bulb were removed. And then the tissue was minced by using curved scissors before being digested in 0.25% trypsin solution at 37 °C in a water bath for 3 mins. The digestion was terminated, Centrifugation (1200rpm; 5min), and then the tissue was resuspended in complete medium containing 90% DMEM/F12, 1% penicillin-streptomycin, and 10% fetal bovine serum. The cell suspension was then purified and cultured in an incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2. In this experiment, we used the classical two-step differential adhesion method to purify primary OECs36. The purified OECs were transferred to a PLL-precoated culture dish and cultured in an incubator, with the medium changed every 2–3 days (Fig.6).

Conditional immortalization workflow for olfactory ensheathing cells. Briefly, in this work, we used classical two-step differential adhesion method to purify the OECs derived from olfactory bulb and successfully constructed a conditionally immortalized OEC line by transfecting the cells withHBLV-TetOn-SV40Tag-PURO lentivirus. Further studies showed that this cell line could stably proliferate up to the tenth generation under tetracycline control and partially restore its proliferation ability similar to primary OECs after removal of tetracycline. In addition, the introduction of SV40 Tag gene did not significantly affect the migration ability of OECs, indicating potential safety for in vivo applications.

OECs from each group were seeded onto the coverslips in 24-well plate at a density of 5×104cells for each well and cultured until reaching 80% confluency. Then, the cells were fixed with 4% PFA at room temperature for 15 mins, followed by blocking with 10% goat serum at 37 °C for 60 mins. Primary antibody (rabbit anti-rat P75NTR monoclonal antibody; 1:100; Abcam) was then added and incubated overnight at 4 °C. After washing off the primary antibody with PBS for 3 times, the cells were incubated with the secondary antibody (goat anti-rabbit Cy3-conjugated antibody; 1:200; Bioss) in the dark for 1 h. Nuclei were then stained with DAPI after PBS washing. The coverslip was inverted onto a clean glass slide with anti-fade mounting medium, and then it was fixed at the corners with nail polish. The slide was then transferred to a fluorescence microscope in a darkroom for observation. Randomly selected 3–6 fields of view were photographed, and the percentage of P75NTR-positive cells was analyzed statistically.

Total RNA was extracted by using the classic Trizol extraction method. According to the manufacturer’s instructions, total RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA by using a reverse transcription kit (Novoprotein; China), with the reverse transcription parameters set as follows: 50 °C for 15 mins, 75 °C for 5 mins. Subsequently, qPCR amplification was performed using a qPCR kit (Novoprotein; China). The prepared reaction system was placed in the PCR instrument’s tube slots, with the reaction conditions as follows: 95 °C for 60 s, 40 cycles at 95 °C for 20 s, and 60 °C for 1 min. The qPCR primer sequences are listed in Table1.

The lentiviral vector used in this experiment was provided by Hanbio Biotechnology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. The construction process is briefly described as follows: selecting the corresponding vector and designing PCR primers for the target fragment (SV40 Tag) (Table2). Digesting the vector with appropriate restriction endonucleases and recovering the purified linearized vector through agarose gel electrophoresis. Amplifying the target fragment by using the designed primers via PCR, followed by agarose gel recovery to obtain the correctly sized target fragment. Ligating the linearized vector and the target fragment by using homologous recombination or T4 ligation methods and then transforming the ligation product into the DH5α or Stbl3 competent cells. Plating the bacterial solution and incubating for 12–16 h. Picking single colonies for colony verification. Selecting positive clones verified to be correct for sequencing and then extracting plasmids from correctly sequenced clone samples.

OECs were seeded at a density of 5 × 105cells per well in 6-well plates pre-coated with PLL and incubated at 37 °C until the cell confluence reached 60–70%. The culture plates were then taken out, and the medium was discarded. The cells were gently washed three times with pre-warmed PBS solution. Before that, we pre-transfected OECs with different concentration gradients ofHBLV-ZsGreen-PURO lentivirus(Hanbio Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Shanghai) to screen for the optimal MOI value (Supplementary Fig. 1). Based on the selected MOI value, a virus-containing medium was prepared by using complete medium. The cells were incubated with the virus-containing medium for 4 h, after which the complete medium was replenished to the full volume and the cells were cultured for an additional 20 h. Subsequently, the medium was replaced with fresh medium, completing the lentiviral transduction process (Fig.6).

In this experiment, cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 1 × 104cells per well and cultured for 24 h after adhesion. The required volume of CCK-8 working solution was prepared at a ratio of medium to CCK-8 solution = 10:1. The 96-well plate was taken out, and the medium in each well was removed. The prepared CCK-8 mixture was added to each well and incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. The absorbance of the liquid in each well at 450 nm was measured and recorded by using a microplate reader. Then the cell proliferation rate for each well was calculated.

Three groups were set up in this experiment: primary OECs group, P10 cell group cultured with tetracycline, and P10 cell group cultured without tetracycline. Cells were plated in 6-well plates at a density of 1 × 106cells per well. Once the cells in each group reached confluence at the bottom of the wells, three vertical lines were scratched by using a 200 µL pipette tip perpendicular to pre-drawn horizontal lines on the outer surface of the plate bottom. After scratching, the cells were washed three times with PBS. Images of different scratch areas were taken under an inverted microscope, recorded as the migration state at 0 h. Subsequent observations and image recordings were performed at 48 and 96 h.

Transwell migration assay was also used to evaluate the migration ability of cells in each group. Briefly, 100 µL of DMEM/F12 cell suspension containing 1 × 105cells per well was seeded in the upper chamber of the 24-well plate, while 600 µL of DMEM/F12 medium containing 20% FBS was added to the lower chamber. After 24 h of cultivation, move out the plate, discard the liquid, and then rinse for three times with PBS. The cells were fixed at room temperature with 4% PFA solution for 15 mins. After air-drying, they were stained with 0.1% crystal violet solution for 30 mins. Then gently wiped off the non-migrated cells on the upper chamber with a damp cotton swab. After further air-drying, place the inserts on clean glass slides and observed under an inverted microscope. Four random fields of view were selected for imaging in each insert. Data analysis was performed by using ImageJ 1.53t (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij).

All results in this study are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis was performed by using GraphPad Prism 9.0 software. An unpaired independent sample t-test was used to compare two independent samples, while one-way ANOVA was used for comparisons among more than two groups. P-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.