Zeolites are among the most widely employed catalysts
in the (petro-)­chemical
industry. However, due to their elaborate microporous network, they
are prone to diffusion limitations and deactivation. Several modification
methods have been proposed to overcome these limitations, each exhibiting
their benefits. In this work, two of the most promising strategies
were combined, i.e., limiting the length of one of the crystal axes
during synthesis to achieve a platelike morphology and introducing
mesoporosity, creating a hierarchical platelike H-ZSM-5. The platelike
morphology was obtained by adding urea as a growth modifier to the
synthesis mixture, and mesopores were introduced in the platelike
H-ZSM-5 through etching with a NaOH/TPAOH mixture. As a benchmark,
the same etching procedure was applied to a commercial ZSM-5 counterpart.
These materials were tested in the n-butanol dehydration, where the
platelike morphology exhibited an improved catalytic performance,
significantly increasing the activity per acid site and stability,
and slightly increasing the selectivity toward the butenes. The generation
of mesopores in commercial ZSM-5 also increased the activity per acid
site but reduced the catalyst’s stability, likely due to an
increased amount of Lewis acid sites upon etching. When applying the
same modification method to the platelike H-ZSM-5, much larger mesopores
and some macropores were observed. These further increased the stability
of the catalyst but barely affected the activity per acid site, presumably
due to the already optimized catalytic performance of the platelike
H-ZSM-5.

Since fossil fuels are
finite and harm the environment, it is important
to find alternative sustainable and renewable resources. A widely
investigated and already implemented sustainable production route
is the fermentation of biomass to bioalcohols.,These
bioalcohols, including n-butanol, are already used as sustainable
fuels, and due to their increasing importance, biobutanol production
rises and a surplus is created. This makes
biobutanol an interesting green resource for several platform chemicals
such as butenes, which can be formed through catalytic dehydration
of n-butanol using H-ZSM-5 as a catalyst.

In 2009, Ryoo et al. pioneered
by
synthesizing nanosheet ZSM-5 with ab-axis length
limited to 2 nm, i.e., the dimension of theb-axis
in one single unit cell. These zeolites had a large number of acid
sites on the external surface, resulting in a highly active catalyst,
especially for reactions involving large organic molecules such as
the methanol-to-gasoline reaction. Since then, several other synthesis
methods for nanosheet ZSM-5 have been proposed, but they often require
complex, expensive, and environmentally unfriendly structure-directing
agents and/or a long synthesis procedure, rendering them undesirable
for upscaling as it would encounter high energy and product costs.,,The synthesis process can be
significantly simplified by limiting the length of theb-axis to 10–100 nm instead of the dimensions of the unit cell.
Recently, a synthesis method using NH4F has been developed
to synthesize platelike ZSM-5 with ab-axis of ca.
100 nm.,,This catalyst
exhibited excellent results in the methanol-to-hydrocarbons reaction,
increasing its activity and extending its lifetime. However, due to
the health, safety and environmental issues concerning fluoride streams,
scale-up could be limited. A greener alternative is adding a growth
modifier to the synthesis gel. These
growth modifiers can interact with a specific facet of the zeolite
crystal and/or interact with amorphous precursors, regulating the
growth kinetics to change the crystal size and morphology. Among them,
urea is often used as it is green, cheap and effective.,Urea spontaneously adsorbs on zeolite surfaces,,preferentially on the ac-plane, therefore hindering the growth along
theb-axis.

Hierarchization is performed during
or after synthesis, referred
to as bottom-up or top-down approaches, respectively. The former generally
makes use of additional templates to form the secondary porosity,
i.e., the meso- or macropores, and removal of these templates upon
calcination or dissolution after crystallization is required.−Top-down approaches consist of dealumination and desilication or
a combination of both. During dealumination Al–O–Si
bonds are broken through acid, steam or heat treatments, releasing
Al and creating mesopores. However, the formed pores tend to have
a wide pore size distribution and are not interconnected with one
another, limiting their benefits. Furthermore, due to the selective
extraction of Al, the acidity of the catalyst decreases.,Desilication, also known as base-leaching, with NaOH, is the most
well-known hierarchization method for ZSM-5 as it is a simple, effective,
and economical strategy. Here, Si–O–Si bonds are hydrolyzed,
releasing preferentially Si from the zeolite framework to create mesopores.,Nevertheless, to obtain a successful hierarchization, Si/Al ratios
of the parent material have to be limited within the 25–50
range. When using lower Si/Al ratios,
hydrolysis of the Si-atoms will be prevented by the surrounding Al-atoms
in the framework, creating only a limited amount of mesopores. For
higher Si/Al ratios, on the other hand, desilication will be uncontrollable,
forming large pores or even fully dissolving the zeolite framework.
To enable desilication on a wider range of zeolites, several variations
have been proposed.

Qin et al. used
an HF solution to
retain the initial Si/Al ratio and microporous structure since HF
is known to react with both Si and Al. However, the concentration
of the solution must be sufficiently high because a diluted solution
primarily extracts Al. Adding NH4F to the HF etching solution
allows more diluted solutions to create hierarchical ZSM-5 with large
meso- and macropores and with the intrinsic micropores preserved.,However, due to the dangerous nature of HF, an etching method with
solely NH4F was created.−Here, HF is formed in situ, reducing
the HF-concentration and making it a safer method. In addition, the
method was more efficient and controllable than the one using HF or
an HF/NH4F mixture. Earlier research within our group demonstrated the positive effects of the mesopores
generated by NH4F-etching on the n-butanol dehydration.
The etching targeted intergrowths in aggregates, cutting these aggregated
crystals from the edge toward the center and creating intercrystalline
mesoporosity. When using parent zeolites with a less aggregated structure,
defective sites within the zeolites are attacked, etching rectangular
nanodomains, thus creating intracrystalline mesoporosity. Catalytic
testing in the n-butanol dehydration revealed an increased activity
and selectivity for the etched materials, overcoming an activity-stability
trade-off where a material typically becomes less stable when the
activity increases.

Although this method presents interesting
perspectives, it still
relies on fluoride components, with their inherent safety issues for
scale-up. However, the standard NaOH desilication mixture can also
be modified to overcome the Si/Al ratio limits. Pérez-Ramírez
et al. created a modification method
where tetrapropylammonium hydroxide (TPAOH) is used as a pore-growth
moderator in the desilication with NaOH. During modification, both
Na+and TPA+competitively adsorb on the zeolite
surface to balance the negative charges. The large size and branched
structure of the TPA+ion protects the neighboring Si,
preventing its extraction. Since Na+does not have this
protective effect, desilication mainly occurs near Na+cations.
This protective effect of TPA+makes it a highly controllable
desilication method, as changing the concentration of the two cations
in the mixture can change the desilication severity and makes it possible
to create a hierarchical zeolite with small, uniformly distributed
mesopores throughout the whole crystal.,These uniformly
distributed mesopores have shown great results in several reactions,
including the benzene alkylation, the
catalytic upgrading of bio-oil, and the
methanol-to-hydrocarbon process. The
secondary porosity improves the molecular transport to and from the
active sites, thus enhancing the catalyst’s activity. Furthermore,
there is a higher coke tolerance, and the removal of coke precursors
from the zeolite channels is enhanced, decreasing the coking rate.

Despite the extensive research on ZSM-5, the comparative analysis
of the different structural modifications of ZSM-5 under identical
reaction conditions remains scarce. Additionally, research on the
application of the combination of both modification methods, i.e.,
hierarchical platelike H-ZSM-5, which combines the advantageous properties
of both the shortb-axis and the secondary porosity,
is limited. In our present work, at first the effect of the H-ZSM-5
morphology on its performance in the n-butanol dehydration is examined.
Platelike H-ZSM-5 with Si/Al of 25 is synthesized through hydrothermal
synthesis, adding urea to inhibit the growth along theb-axis. Subsequently, an assessment is done of the effect of the catalyst’s
morphology on the hierarchization severity of the desilication with
a NaOH and TPAOH mixture. This modification method is applied to commercial
H-ZSM-5 with a Si/Al of 25 and the self-synthesized platelike H-ZSM-5,
also with Si/Al of 25. All zeolites are fully characterized by XRD,
SEM, TEM, ICP-OES, N2sorption, FTIR, NH3-TPD,
and27Al NMR, and tested in the n-butanol dehydration reaction
on a high-throughput kinetics screening setup at temperatures between
483 and 513 K to enable a comprehensive understanding of the effects
of the morphology and mesopores on the catalyst’s activity,
selectivity and stability.

Platelike H-ZSM-5
with a Si/Al ratio of 25 (referred to as PL-ZSM-5) is synthesized
using a modified method from Qureshi et al. and Li et al. First, tetraethyl orthosilicate
(TEOS, >97.0%, TCI) is added dropwise to H2O under continuous
stirring at room temperature. This is followed by the dropwise addition
of the structure directing agent tetrapropylammonium hydroxide (TPAOH,
1.0 M in water, Sigma-Aldrich). When a clear solution is obtained,
the Al source (Al­(NO3)3·9H2O,
≥98.5%, ChemLab) is added, followed by NaOH (≥99%, ChemLab)
and isopropyl alcohol (99.8%). Lastly, urea (≥99.5%, Merck)
is added to limit the growth along theb-axis, forming
a platelike morphology. The synthesis mixture with a molar ratio of
472 H2O: 25 Si: 7.55 TPAOH: 1 Al: 1.18 NaOH: 0.75 IPA:
14.15 urea is hydrolyzed at room temperature for 6 h under continuous
stirring at 500 rpm. Afterward, the mixture is transferred into a
Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave for hydrothermal reaction at
453 K for 48 h. After crystallization, the solid product is recovered
by centrifugation and washed with deionized water until the pH of
the washing water becomes neutral. Finally, the synthesized zeolite
is dried at 373 K for 24 h followed by calcination in air at 823 K
for 5 h with a temperature ramp of 1 K min–1to
remove the template.

To bring the synthesized zeolite to its
acid form, it is ion-exchanged in a 1 M solution of NH4NO3(≥98%, Sigma-Aldrich) in water under continuous
stirring at 323 K for 2 h. Next, the zeolite is separated from the
liquid by centrifugation, followed by a washing step with deionized
water at room temperature. The ion-exchange is repeated three times
to obtain the NH4+-form of the zeolite. The
H+-form is then obtained upon calcination at 823 K for
4 h with a temperature ramp of 1 K min–1.

Both commercial (Zeolyst, CBV 5524 G, Si/Al ratio = 25, referred
to as c-ZSM-5) and platelike H-ZSM-5 zeolites are modified through
desilication in an aqueous base solution of 0.2 M NaOH and 0.25 M
TPAOH, based on a method described by Chaihad et al. For this, 2 g parent zeolite is added to a flask of DURAN
borosilicate glassware together with 10 mL 0.2 M NaOH and 10 mL 0.25
M TPAOH and placed in a preheated oil bath at 353 K, where it is continuously
stirred for 1 h under reflux conditions. Subsequently, the desilication
is stopped by immediately quenching the mixture in an ice–water
bath, after which the catalyst is separated from the liquid by centrifugation.
This is followed by washing with deionized water at room temperature
until the washing water is neutral, and finally dried at 373 K overnight.
After desilication, a mass loss of 13% was observed for c-ZSM-5 and
14% for PL-ZSM-5. This includes both framework extraction and minor
losses during washing and handling. The hierarchical zeolites are
transformed into their NH4+-form by three ion-exchanges
in a 1 M solution of NH4NO3in water under continuous
stirring for 2 h at 323 K. This is followed by a drying step at 373
K for 24 h and calcination at 823 K for 4 h with a temperature ramp
of 1 K min–1to obtain its H+-form.

X-ray diffraction
(XRD) assesses the zeolite structure and whether structural changes
occur after desilication. For this, diffraction patterns with 2θ
between 5° and 60° are collected (Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer
with Cu Kα radiation). The zeolites’ surface areas and
pore volumes are obtained through N2sorption at 77 K (Micromeritics
Tristar). Before the measurements, the catalysts are pretreated under
continuous N2flow at 573 K for 4 h to remove moisture
and adsorbed species. The BET method is used to determine the surface
area (SBET), the t-plot method for the
external surface area (Sext), micropore
surface area (Smicro) and micropore volume
(Vmicro), and the total pore volume (Vtot) is obtained through single point adsorption.
To increase the accuracy of the BET surface area, Rouquerol’s
criteria are applied. Pore size distributions
are calculated using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH)
method on the adsorption branch.

More insight into morphology, crystal size and crystal size distribution
is obtained through transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-2200FS),
using Cu and Ni supports, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI
Quanta 200 F). Furthermore, inductively coupled plasma optical emission
spectroscopy (ICP-OES) is used to verify the Si/Al ratio of the zeolites.
Before analysis, the sample is prepared by destruction in an HF solution,
which is analyzed using a Thermo Scientific IcaP 7400 ICP-OES.

Solid state27Al MAS NMR is performed on a Bruker AVANCE
500 NB spectrometer, using a rotational speed of 12 kHz. The experiments
are performed at 130.30 MHz with a 4 mm probe head, and Al­(NO3)3as a reference for the chemical shift. A total
of 2048 scans are collected, using a π/6 pulse with a radiofrequency
field strength of 107 kHz and a recycle delay of 1 s. Prior to the
measurements, the samples are kept overnight at a relative humidity
of 75% using a saturated NaCl solution. Silanol groups and acid sites
are assessed through Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) using a Nicolet
Magna 550-FT-IR in transmission mode. Before analysis, the samples
are pressed in self-supported discs with a diameter of 16 mm and in
situ degassed for 4 h at room temperature under vacuum. Quantification
of the Brønsted and Lewis acid sites is done by in situ monitoring
of pyridine adsorption and desorption at 473 K. The FTIR results are
normalized to a pellet density of 10 mg/cm2and the amount
of Brønsted acid sites (BAS) is calculated from the area of the
band at 1545 cm–1, using an extinction coefficient
ε­(B)1545= 1.67 cm/μmol, and
for the Lewis acid sites (LAS) from the band at 1454 cm–1with the extinction coefficient ε­(L)1454= 2.22 cm/μmol. The
strength of the acid sites was also determined using NH3-temperature-programmed desorption (NH3-TPD, Micromeritics
Autochem). The sample is saturated with NH3by flowing
a 4 mol % NH3/He-flow at 423 K and unbound and/or physisorbed
NH3is removed by flushing He over the sample. The NH3is desorbed by heating the sample to 923 K at a rate of 10
K min–1, the amount of NH3that desorbs
is tracked with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and mass spectrometer
(MS). Afterward, the NH3-TPD profiles are deconvoluted
into three peaks corresponding to weak (423–523 K), medium
(523–623 K), and strong (>623 K) acid sites. More details
about
the deconvolution can be found in theSupporting Information.

The catalyst samples
are prepared by pelletizing and sequential sieving until particle
sizes within a 75–100 μm range are obtained, followed
by drying for 24 h to remove adsorbed water. The dried catalyst is
weighted (mass range of 0.010–0.050 g) and diluted with inert
α-Al2O3until 10 mass% to avoid temperature
deviations across the catalyst bed. The catalytic experiments are
performed in a high-throughput kinetics screening setup comprising four reactor blocks, each containing
four tubular reactors with a length of 80 cm and an inner diameter
of 2.1 mm. The catalyst is packed in the center of the reactor between
layers of inert α-Al2O3. Liquid n-butanol
(>99.5%, Merck, referred to as BuOH) is used as feedstock and nitrogen
(Air Liquide) as an inert carrier gas to regulate the partial pressure
of the feed to 29 kPa at reactor inlet, similar to previous research.,,−Before each experiment, the catalyst bed is heated
under an N2flow for at least 4 h to ensure stable reaction
temperatures. To avoid the condensation of heavier products in the
effluent, all lining downstream the reactor section is heated to 443
K. Online analysis of the effluent is performed with a GC-FID (Thermo
Fisher Scientific Trace 1310 with an HP-PONA column) with ethane as
internal standard to calculate the flows and product distributions,
and to verify the mass balances. Although the FID-detector cannot
detect water, the amount of water that is formed during the reaction
is calculated using the reaction stoichiometry since no oxygenated
hydrocarbons apart from butanol and dibutyl ether are detected, indicating
all oxygen is removed in the form of water. A time on stream (TOS)
of zero is defined as the start of the butanol feed. All measurements
in this work are performed between one and 10 h TOS to ensure a stable
operating regime. Lastly, deactivation tests are performed for 60
h time on stream. All experiments show a closed carbon balance within
5%. Error bars depicted in the data correspond to the 95% confidence
intervals, which are derived from repeating experiments under identical
conditions.

wherebiis the number of carbon atoms present in componenti,Fithe molar
flow of componentiat the reactor outlet [mol s–1] andcBuOHthe number
of carbon atoms in the butanol feed (= 4).

The XRD patterns
of the commercial and synthesized catalysts and their modified versions
are shown inFigureand exhibit the characteristic peaks of the MFI topology between
7.5 and 9.5° and between 22.5 and 25° for all samples, confirming
the successful synthesis of the MFI structure in platelike ZSM-5 (PL-ZSM-5).
Furthermore, it illustrates that no structural changes occur upon
modification of the commercial ZSM-5 (m-ZSM-5) or platelike ZSM-5
(m-PL-ZSM-5), as no signals associated with impurities are detected.
The relative crystallinity of the hierarchical and platelike samples
with respect to the commercial one is determined by comparing the
sum of the areas of the XRD patterns between 2θ = 7.5–9.5°
and 22.5–25° to those areas in c-ZSM-5.,,−Both m-ZSM-5 and PL-ZSM-5 have
a relative crystallinity of 85%, and m-PL-ZSM-5 has one of 91%, indicating
only a minor impact on the crystallinity.

XRD
patterns of c-ZSM-5 (a), m-ZSM-5 (b), PL-ZSM-5 (c), and m-PL-ZSM-5
(d).

Catalyst morphology, particle size and aggregation
of crystals
are assessed through SEM. The commercially available H-ZSM-5 (c-ZSM-5)
has small, irregularly shaped crystals that aggregate into larger
structures as shown inFigurea. Furthermore, they exhibit a wide particle size distribution,
extending from about 60 to 600 nm. The self-synthesized PL-ZSM-5,
seeFiguree, has
coffin-shaped crystals with reducedb-axes of approximately
70 nm andc-axes between 700 and 1400 nm. Some smaller
crystals have a nicely finished hexagonal coffin shape on one side
but a rough edge on the other, indicating that some crystals are broken
in half with resultingc-axes between 400 and 700
nm. The SEM images of m-ZSM-5 and m-PL-ZSM-5 are similar to those
of their parent materials (Figure S1),
as expected that the addition of secondary porosity does not alter
the shape and size of the crystals.

SEM of c-ZSM-5 (a), TEM of c-ZSM-5 (b),
TEM of m-ZSM-5 (c, d),
SEM of PL-ZSM-5 (e), TEM of PL-ZSM-5 (f), and TEM of m-PL-ZSM-5 (g,
h). The crack-like features observed on the crystal surfaces in the
SEM images are attributed to the gold coating applied to discharge
the sample and enhance the resolution.

To assess the mesoporosity, N2sorption
is performed,
and the isotherms are presented inFigure(andFigure S2). The c-ZSM-5 isotherm is of the type I­(a) according to the IUPAC
classification, which is characteristic of microporous materials. Furthermore, the isotherm has a small hysteresis
of type H4, which can be ascribed to the presence of a small amount
of intercrystalline mesopores and/or crystal aggregates.,Due to the pelletizing of the catalyst particles, some minor intercrystalline
and/or interparticle macroporosity is noticeable. For m-ZSM-5, the
isotherm can be classified as a type IV­(a) with a hysteresis with
type H2 and H4 characteristics. The pronounced hysteresis at lower
relative pressures, resembling type H2, indicates the generation of
intracrystalline ink bottle-shaped mesopores after modification, whereas
the H4 type hysteresis at higher relative pressures resembles slit-shaped
meso- and macropores.,,−Similarly to c-ZSM-5, PL-ZSM-5 shows an I­(a) type isotherm, with
a smaller type H4 hysteresis, which is mainly present at higher partial
pressures, indicating that the meso- and/or macropores formed between
the crystals are larger. Desilication
of PL-ZSM-5 also results in a type IV­(a) isotherm with a type H2 and
H4 hysteresis, similar to m-ZSM-5. Nevertheless, the hysteresis of
m-PL-ZSM-5 is more open toward higher relative pressures (P/P0> 0.8), indicating larger mesopores than m-ZSM-5.

N2sorption isotherms for c-ZSM-5 (a, red), m-ZSM-5
(a, dashed red), PL-ZSM-5 (b, blue), and m-PL-ZSM-5 (b, dashed blue).

Specific surface areas and pore volumes are shown
inTable. Both parent
zeolites exhibit
similar micropore surface areas (Smicro, 395 cm3g–1for c-ZSM-5 and 390 cm3g–1for PL-ZSM-5) and micropore volumes
(Vmicro, both 0.18 cm3g–1). However, the external surface area (Sext) and mesopore volume (Vmeso) are higher for c-ZSM-5, namely 46 m2g–1and 0.07 cm3g–1, compared to 25 m2g–1and 0.05 cm3g–1for PL-ZSM-5. The t-plot method, which is used to determine the
external surface area, does not differentiate between the external
surface area and mesopore surface area. This higher external surface
area is thus likely related to the presence of a small amount of intercrystalline
mesopores in c-ZSM-5.,The desilication of c-ZSM-5 results
in an increased BET surface area and total pore volume due to the
additional mesoporous surface area and volume, without compromising
its micropore surface area and volume. It can, therefore, be assumed
that there is no loss of microporosity after the modification of commercial
H-ZSM-5 with a mixture of NaOH and TPAOH, making it a mild etching
method compared to other desilication methods or dealumination. Similarly,
the hierarchization of PL-ZSM-5 increases the mesopore surface area
and volume. However, a decrease in BET surface area (8%), micropore
surface area (14%) and volume (13%) is observed, indicating a small
loss of microporosity.

The presence of larger pores in m-PL-ZSM-5 is corroborated
by the
BJH pore size distributions, as shown inFigure S3. The mesopores present in m-ZSM-5 vary between 5 and 25
nm with a modal diameter of 12 nm, whereas the secondary pore sizes
in m-PL-ZSM-5 have a much broader distribution and vary from 5 nm
to over 100 nm with a modal pore diameter of approximately 60 nm.
The BJH method loses its accuracy for macropores and is only depicted
until 100 nm.

Secondary porosity
can also be visualized through TEM analysis
for both hierarchical commercial H-ZSM-5 (m-ZSM-5) and hierarchical
platelike H-ZSM-5 (m-PL-ZSM-5), as shown inFigurec,dandFigureg,h respectively. Measurements of the pores
in all TEM images revealed small, intracrystalline mesopores between
approximately 5 and 28 nm for m-ZSM-5, similar to the BJH pore size
distribution (Figure S3). Whereas the secondary
porosity of m-PL-ZSM-5 varies from mesopores to macropores, with the
latter appearing to be formed by combining several smaller mesopores.
Here, pore sizes between 6 and 350 nm are measured, showing the presence
of very large cavities, which were not detected with the BJH pore
size distribution as this method is optimized to measure mesopores.

The increased effect of desilication can
not only be ascribed to
the platelike morphology but may also be due to differences in the
number of structural defects and the location of the Al sites in the
synthesized PL-ZSM-5. The presence of extra-framework aluminum (EFAl)
on the outer surface of the platelike crystals may prevent the leaching
of Si-atoms at its surface.,Normalized FTIR spectra
in the OH-stretching region inFigureshow the presence of the silanols in the different
samples. The peak at 3745 cm–1corresponds to isolated
silanols located on the external surface of the zeolite,and increases by approximately 15% and 50% upon desilication of
the commercial and platelike zeolite respectively, due to an increased
external surface. Internal silanols typically
show three different peaks at 3735, 3725, and 3700 cm–1, corresponding to internal silanols in different environments. It is also possible that some silanol groups
interact, forming silanol nests that show a broad band centered around
3500 cm–1.,Upon desilication of
both c-ZSM-5 and PL-ZSM-5, a decrease in the total amount of internal
silanols (70% and 30%, respectively) and silanol nests (67% and 54%,
respectively) is observed. This indicates that silicon extraction
preferably occurs at these defective Si-sites. However, even though the total amount of internal silanols
decreases, the peak around 3700 cm–1decreases the
most, followed by the peak around 3725 cm–1and
the peak around 3735 cm–1even slightly increases.
This suggests that there is a shift in the type of internal silanols
upon hierarchization, shifting from more constrained to more free. The band at 3665 cm–1can
be attributed to the presence of extra-framework aluminum (EFAl) creating
Lewis acidity, and the band at 3610 cm–1corresponds
to bridging Si–OH-Al groups, providing Brønsted acidity.,,These imply that the commercial
material has a larger amount of Brønsted acid sites than the
platelike ZSM-5 and that desilication affects the number of those
Brønsted acid sites, while increasing the amount of EFAl. Deconvolution
of the peaks shows that m-ZSM-5 has ca. 25% less BAS and 40% more
EFAl than c-ZSM-5. For the platelike zeolites on the other hand, the
number of BAS and EFAl increase with approximately 12% and 14%, respectively.

Normalized
FTIR in the OH-stretching region for c-ZSM-5 (red),
m-ZSM-5 (dashed red), PL-ZSM-5 (blue), and m-PL-ZSM-5 (dashed blue)
activated at 723 K. The peak at 3745 cm–1corresponds
to the external silanols, the peaks at 3735, 3725 and 3700 cm–1correspond to the internal silanols, the peak at
3665 cm–1to the extra-framework aluminum, the peak
at 3610 cm–1to the Brønsted acid sites, and
the broad peak with a maximum around 3500 cm–1is
correlated to the internal silanol nests.

Quantification of these Brønsted and Lewis
acid sites through
pyridine FTIR (Py-FTIR) is shown inTabletogether with the Si/Al ratio and Al-concentration
obtained through ICP-OES. The Si/Al ratio of the synthesized PL-ZSM-5
of 29.2 is close to the desired ratio of 25.0, and after desilication,
the Si/Al ratio and concentration of Al remain almost completely preserved,
whereas, during conventional desilication processes, the Si/Al ratios
tends to decrease more substantially since NaOH is more selective
toward Si compared to TPAOH.,However, the number
of acid sites measured with Py-FTIR is considerably lower for PL-ZSM-5,
about half the amount as for the c/m-ZSM-5. Especially the Brønsted
acid sites seem to be inaccessible for the pyridine, as the platelike
exhibits less than half the amount of BAS compared to the commercial
one with a similar Si/Al ratio. Etching with NaOH and TPAOH results
in an increase in Lewis acidity for both parent catalysts, as already
indicated by the FTIR results in the OH-stretching region, whereas
the number of Brønsted acid sites decreases for m-ZSM-5 and remains
unaltered for m-PL-ZSM-5. During alkaline treatment, distorted tetrahedral
Al may leach out of the zeolite framework and form EFAl. This results in a decrease in Brønsted
acid and an increase in Lewis acid sites, as seen for the commercial
samples. However, for m-PL-ZSM-5, the amount of Brønsted acid
sites remains unaltered, thus increasing the total amount of acid
sites with more Lewis acid sites. This indicates that the additional
secondary porosity in m-PL-ZSM-5 increases the accessibility of pyridine
toward the Brønsted acid sites, which counteracts the decrease
due to Al extraction.

The NH3-TPD results are shown inTable(and their deconvoluted
profiles inFigure S4of the Supporting
Information) and
support the Py-FTIR results. Hierarchization of c-ZSM-5 results in
a decrease in the total amount of acid sites, which is in accordance
with literature and indicates the loss of some framework Al.,As observed with Py-FTIR, modification of PL-ZSM-5 leads to an increase
in the total amount of acid sites accessible to NH3, contrary
to what is expected from both literature and the m-ZSM-5 results.
The amount of acid sites accessible for NH3adsorption
is also significantly lower for the platelike materials than for the
conventional pair. This reduction of accessible acid sites is consistent
with observations by Qureshi et al. and
Li et al. in their platelike materials.
Vieira et al. reported a reduced acid
site accessibility in small ZSM-5 crystals compared to larger crystals
with a similar Si/Al ratio and ascribed it to the presence of structural
defects and/or amorphous domains. Interestingly, the desilication
of PL-ZSM-5 results in an increased relative crystallinity, suggesting
that some amorphous silica domains may be present in the parent PL-ZSM-5.
This could lead to an overestimation of catalyst mass, and the removal
of these amorphous domains during desilication could lead to an apparent
increase in acid site concentration and mesoporosity per gram of catalyst. However, this hypothesis is not supported by
the other characterization results. For instance, the XRD pattern
of PL-ZSM-5 (Figurec) does not show an elevated background, which would be expected
in the presence of significant amorphous content. Similarly, while
SEM and TEM images (Figuree,f andFigure S1) reveal small
particles in PL-ZSM-5 that could be amorphous, these domains persist
after desilication (Figureg,h), suggesting they are not removed. FTIR analysis of the
OH-stretching region (Figure) shows that the internal silanol nests, often associated
with structural defects or amorphous regions, are slightly more prominent
in PL-ZSM-5 than in c-ZSM-5. Upon desilication, these silanol nests
decrease for both materials, but the relative reduction is more pronounced
in c/m-ZSM-5 (67%) than in PL/m-PL-ZSM-5 (54%), further suggesting
that the amorphous domain removal is not the dominant factor in the
increased acid site concentration. Alternatively, the increase in
measured acid sites in m-PL-ZSM-5 could be due to the exposure of
previously inaccessible framework Al upon desilication. In PL-ZSM-5,
some Al atoms may be located in catalytically inaccessible T-sites, and desilication may enhance the accessibility
of these sites. This is further supported by the relative acid site
concentrations determined by each characterization method, i.e., the
ratio of acid sites in PL-ZSM-5 to those in c-ZSM-5. Since NH3is a smaller probe molecule than pyridine, it can access
more confined or partially obstructed sites. Accordingly, PL-ZSM-5
contains 56% of the acid sites of c-ZSM-5 when measured by NH3-TPD, but only 44% when measured by Py-FTIR, indicating that
a larger portion of the acid sites in PL-ZSM-5 are located in less
accessible environments.

The change in EFAl is further assessed
through27Al
NMR, as shown inFigure. All four catalysts exhibit the characteristic intense peak with
a maximum located around 55 ppm, attributed to the framework tetrahedral
Al.,−The minor differences
in the shape of the peak have been attributed to the different distribution
of Al atoms over the T-sites in the MFI structure.,,The peak can be deconvoluted into different
peaks with maxima between 45–50 ppm, 50–57 ppm and 57–65
ppm, as shown inFigure S5, each corresponding
to one or more T-sites. It is suggested that the peaks at lower chemical
shifts, with maxima between 45–50 ppm and 50–57 ppm,
are related to the aluminum located in the channel intersections,
whereas peaks with higher chemical shifts, with maxima between 57–65
ppm, are related to aluminum in the straight or sinusoidal channels.,−When comparing the c-ZSM-5 and PL-ZSM-5, the platelike material’s
peak maximum is located at 56 ppm compared to 55 ppm for c-ZSM-5.
Furthermore, the band of PL-ZSM-5 extends more toward the higher chemical
shifts, which can be deconvoluted into a peak with a maximum located
at 62 ppm (Figure S5). This could indicate
that most of the aluminum is situated inside the channels instead
of in the intersections. After modifications, the peak maximum moves
toward the lower chemical shifts (dashed lines inFigure). Furthermore, both hierarchical
zeolites show a broad signal ranging from 20 to 45 ppm, which has
been attributed to Al clusters in a less-organized extra-framework
phase and penta-coordinated Al,,and is more significant in m-ZSM-5 compared to m-PL-ZSM-5. The presence
of octahedrally coordinated EFAl is visible with a small peak at 0
ppm.,−Both c-ZSM-5 and PL-ZSM-5
contain this peak, but it is much more significant in the platelike
material. This corroborates the higher relative amount of Lewis acid
sites which was observed in Py-FTIR. After modification, this EFAl
peak almost completely disappears for the conventional pair, whereas
for the platelike material it increases. This octahedrally coordinated
EFAl may transform into clusters or penta-coordinated Al, causing
the broad band between 45 and 20 ppm in m-ZSM-5. After modifying the
platelike morphology, there is also an increase in the peaks associated
with EFAl, however this is mainly the octahedrally coordinated Al.
This indicates that the type of EFAl formed during modification slightly
differs depending on the morphology of the parent H-ZSM-5. This could
be due to the ease with which the etched Si and Al can diffuse out
of the zeolite framework.

27Al NMR for c-ZSM-5 (red), m-ZSM-5
(dashed red), PL-ZSM-5
(blue), and m-PL-ZSM-5 (dashed blue). To account for the differences
in material density, all peaks have been normalized to the peak at
55 ppm.

Activity
analysis is obtained at 483 and 513 K, and results are shown inFigurewhere the butanol
conversion is plotted as a function of the site time. The site time,
i.e., the number of BAS divided by the molar flow of the butanol feed,
is used to compensate for the different number of BAS per gram of
catalyst. The left graph compares c-ZSM-5 (filled symbols) to m-ZSM-5
(open symbols) with 483 K the light-colored symbols at the bottom,
and 513 K the darker-colored symbols at the top of the graph. Similarly
for the right graph, where PL-ZSM-5 (filled) and m-PL-ZSM-5 (open)
are compared. InFigure S6of the Supporting
Information c-ZSM-5 and PL-ZSM-5 are shown in the same graph. At both
temperatures, PL-ZSM-5 exhibits a higher conversion per active site
compared to c-ZSM-5, although much more pronounced at 513 K than at
483 K. Furthermore, temperature screening of the catalysts was performed
from 453 to 513 K and the turnover frequency (TOF) is plotted as a
function of the temperature inFigure S7. The activity of PL-ZSM-5 is more temperature dependent than that
of c-ZSM-5, resulting in a higher apparent activation energy for the
platelike variant. Until 473 K, PL-ZSM-5 is less active, and from
473 K it surpasses c-ZSM-5. As the difference in activity increases
with increasing temperature, the improved activity of PL-ZSM-5 is
much more pronounced at 513 K compared to 483 K.

Butanol conversion (XBuOH) as a function of the site
time for c-ZSM-5­(red filled circle), m-ZSM-5 (red open circle), PL-ZSM-5
(blue filled triangle), and m-PL-ZSM-5 (blue open triangle) atptot= 5 bar, pBuOH= 29 kPa and temperatures
483 K (light) and 513 K (dark). Error bars indicate the 95% confidence
interval.

As observed
in the FTIR and NH3-TPD results, the quantity
and type of acid sites of PL-ZSM-5 and c-ZSM-5 differ, which could
also affect their activity. Given that the activity is expressed as
a function of site time, the effect of the quantity of acid sites
is eliminated, indicating that the type of acid sites, and their accessibility,
might influence the activity. It has been reported that for the n-butanol
dehydration, a higher acidity, and more specifically more strong acid
sites, results in an increased activity per acid site.,However, here the opposite occurs as the platelike ZSM-5 with the
lowest amount of acid sites exhibits the highest activity per acid
site. This leads us to hypothesize that the platelike morphology significantly
affects the catalyst’s activity. To gain further insights,
the selectivity-vs-conversion profiles are assessed and shown inFigure(andFigure S8of the Supporting Information, where
c-ZSM-5 and PL-ZSM-5 are shown in the same graph).

Selectivity as a function
of conversion for c-ZSM-5­(red filled
circle), m-ZSM-5 (red open circle), PL-ZSM-5 (blue filled triangle),
and m-PL-ZSM-5 (blue open triangle) atptot= 5 bar, pBuOH= 29 kPa and temperatures 483 K (light)
and 513 K (dark). Error bars indicate the 95% confidence interval.

At both temperatures, the selectivity toward isobutene
is negligible,
and all samples exhibit a relatively stable selectivity to 1-butene
of about 0.2 mol mol–1, corresponding well with
the literature.−
,−Small differences in selectivity toward the 2-butenes and dibutyl
ether are observed, i.e., PL-ZSM-5 exhibits a slightly higher selectivity
toward the 2-butenes at the expense of dibutyl ether. N2sorption results showed the presence of a small amount of mesopores
in c-ZSM-5, allowing larger transition states and products, such as
dibutyl ether, to form more easily due to a reduced steric hindrance.
Furthermore, the bulkier DBE is probably less likely formed inside
the microporous zeolite channels due to confinement effects,,and since the27Al NMR results suggest that more Al is
located in the straight and sinusoidal channels in PL-ZSM-5, the direct
formation of butenes could be promoted in PL-ZSM-5. Consequently,
decreasing the selectivity toward DBE and increasing the importance
of the direct reaction mechanisms in the overall reaction rate. As
these direct reaction mechanisms become more important at temperatures
above 500 K, where the relative coverage of dibutyl ether on the catalyst’s
surface reduces,,,this
smaller confinement in PL-ZSM-5 has more effect on the activity of
the catalyst. Nevertheless, these selectivity differences are rather
small, and other factors, such as the earlier mentioned fast transport
toward and from the acid sites and the higher number of pore mouths
can also affect the activity.

Butanol conversion as a function of time
on stream (TOS) for c-ZSM-5­(red
filled circle), m-ZSM-5 (red open circle), PL-ZSM-5 (blue filled triangle),
and m-PL-ZSM-5 (blue open triangle) atptot= 5 bar, pBuOH= 29 kPa and 513 K. The relative loss
in conversion is indicated by the full lines for the parent zeolites
and the dashed lines for the hierarchical zeolites.

The performance of the two hierarchical
zeolites is assessed through activity analysis at 483 and 513 K, as
shown inFigure.
The small mesopores of m-ZSM-5 positively affect the catalyst’s
activity per active site at both 483 and 513 K. When comparing the
apparent activation energies, obtained from the temperature screening
measurements shown inFigure S6, no differences
are observed. This suggests that the dominant reaction mechanism is
unaltered after etching. The improved activity of the hierarchical
zeolites is therefore linked to an increased accessibility of the
active centers, allowing a more efficient catalytic cycle. Furthermore,
the mesopores likely facilitate the desorption of dibutyl ether from
the zeolite surface due to the reduced confinement within the zeolite.
This minimizes the DBE-inhibition effect and increases the activity.
The selectivity results (Figure) support this assumption, i.e., an increase in DBE
selectivity, at the expense of 2-butenes, is noticeable for m-ZSM-5
at 483 K compared to c-ZSM-5. As an increased coverage of the catalyst
surface with dibutyl ether, due to an increased DBE-formation, would
lead to a decrease in activity,,it is assumed that facilitated
desorption of dibutyl ether causes the higher selectivity toward dibutyl
ether. In addition, the mesopores could improve the diffusion of all
reactants and products toward and away from the active sites and expose
acid sites that were inaccessible before modification,,,,increasing the overall activity without affecting the selectivity.
Moreover, internal silanols and silanol nests are removed during the
modification of the zeolites. These have been known to trap molecules
that can block acid sites.

For
m-PL-ZSM-5, the large mesopores only slightly improve the activity
at 483 K and have no effect at 513 K (Figure). Furthermore, a small increase in selectivity
toward DBE at the expense of selectivity toward 2-butenes is observed
at both temperatures (Figure). It is assumed that two effects are occurring simultaneously.
First, the mesopores improve the desorption of dibutyl ether, as demonstrated
by its increased selectivity. As mentioned before, this has been shown
to positively affect the activity of the catalyst. On the other hand, the large mesopores result in a decreased
microporosity of m-PL-ZSM-5 compared to PL-ZSM-5 (Table), which has a negative impact
on the activity, as the confined environment and interactions with
the framework stabilize transition states, leading to efficient catalysis. Since the introduction of secondary porosity
in the platelike H-ZSM-5 barely affects the conversion per active
site, it indicates the importance of the zeolite microporosity for
the butanol dehydration reaction. This could also explain the high
activity of PL-ZSM-5, with its presumably higher amount of active
sites in the channels. The introduction of mesopores reduces microporosity
in the zeolite crystal, and as mentioned before, the ether-mediated
pathways may be less important in the platelike materials, thus reducing
the positive effect of the enhanced DBE desorption.

Stability
tests performed over 60 h of time on stream are shown
inFigureand indicate
that the mesopores in m-ZSM-5 have a negative effect on the catalyst’s
stability as they increase the relative loss of conversion over 60
h from 14% for c-ZSM-5 to 23% for m-ZSM-5. This is contrary to what
was expected, i.e., that the mesopores would improve the removal of
coke precursors out of the catalyst, thus decreasing their oligomerization
to cokes. This could indicate that the
diffusion of coke precursors is not the most important factor in the
deactivation of H-ZSM-5. When looking more closely at the type of
mesopores formed in m-ZSM-5, they connect the existing micropores,
but do not reduce the average diffusion distance from the surface
to the core. Thus, when one of the micropores in the crystal is blocked
close to the surface, all active sites further down the diffusion
pathway are no longer accessible. However, this could indicate a similar
deactivation rate as c-ZSM-5 but does not explain the reduced stability
of m-ZSM-5. The FTIR results showed a reduced amount of internal silanols,
which can trap coke precursors, but it also showed an increase in
the number of Lewis acid sites. The27Al MAS NMR results
showed that these Lewis acid sites are mainly penta-coordinated Al
and distorted Al, which could enhance the coke formation and the mesopores could facilitate their growth
as they provide extra space within the channels.

On the other
hand, hierarchical platelike H-ZSM-5 shows a further
improvement of the catalyst’s stability compared to the parent
material, i.e., a relative decrease in the conversion of 3% compared
to 6% over 60 h. The mesopores of m-PL-ZSM-5 are, however, much larger
than those of m-ZSM-5. Hence, substantially more coke can be formed
before pore blocking, further increasing the stability. Visual observations
of the catalyst after the reaction (Figure S10) show that the used platelike zeolites have a gray color, whereas
the color of the used conventional samples is rather yellow-brown,
which might be due to a different type of coke formed. The hierarchical
zeolites had a darker color for both sets, implying a larger amount
of coke present. Due to catalyst pretreatment and setup limitations,
characterization of these used catalysts is not possible, therefore,
no firm conclusions on the type of coke can be made.

In this work, platelike,
hierarchical, and hierarchical platelike
H-ZSM-5 are created and compared to a commercial H-ZSM-5. The platelike
zeolites significantly outperform the conventional ones in conversion
per acid site, selectivity toward the butenes, and stability. The
platelike morphology with its shortb-axis has a
reduced path length for the straight channels, which enhances the
transport toward and away from the active sites. Consequently, it
increases the catalyst’s activity and stability. Furthermore,
the crystals have a large smooth ac-plane, providing a large amount
of pore mouths to the straight channels, further promoting activity
and stability. The NMR results indicated that the platelike H-ZSM-5
presumably contains relatively more active sites inside the microporous
channels. This could enhance the participation of direct reaction
mechanisms, as confinement effects in these microporous channels promote
the formation of smaller molecules. By reducing the contribution of
the ether-mediated reaction paths, inhibition effects of dibutyl ether
are suppressed, and the activity and stability of the catalyst are
improved, accompanied by a reduced dibutyl ether selectivity.

The second strategy of improving the catalyst by adding secondary
porosity through base-leaching improves the catalyst’s performance,
although less pronounced than by changing the zeolite’s morphology.
The etching mixture of NaOH and TPAOH has proven to result in a mild
etching procedure, creating small intracrystalline mesopores without
losing the original microporosity of the commercial ZSM-5. These mesopores
improve the accessibility of the active sites and enhance the dibutyl
ether desorption of the zeolite surface, leading to an improved activity
per acid site. Nonetheless, these small mesopores do not improve the
stability, as the hierarchical H-ZSM-5 showed the highest deactivation
over time. This is ascribed to the formation of additional Lewis acid
sites upon modification, which has been known to enhance the deactivation
rate in zeolites.

The same etching procedure was used for platelike
ZSM-5, but resulted
in a different type of mesopores, and large mesopores and sometimes
even macropores were formed. Despite the formation of these large
secondary pores, the effect on the catalytic performance is limited,
only slightly improving the activity and stability of the platelike
H-ZSM-5. Since the platelike morphology already considerably optimizes
the catalyst’s performance, the mesopores only have a limited
effect. Furthermore, as it is assumed that the indirect reaction pathways
are less important in the platelike zeolite, an enhancement in the
dibutyl ether desorption has a smaller impact on the activity.

These results imply the importance of the microporous confinement
for the n-butanol dehydration, as the improved accessibility to the
microporous channels in the platelike H-ZSM-5 showed the best results.
Moreover, as the addition of mesopores did not show a significant
effect, it is suspected that these mesopores can only create molecular
highways, improving the transport to and from the acid sites, but
cannot change the dominant reaction path for the butanol dehydration.

P.L. is a doctoral fellow of the Research
Foundation Flanders
(FWO, grant 1SH5U24N). V.V. acknowledges partial financial support
from the European Union-NextGenerationEU through the National Recovery
and Resilience Plan of the Republic of Bulgaria project No. BG-RRP-
2.004-0008. The authors would like to acknowledge Olivier Janssens
(Department of Solid State Sciences, Ghent University) for performing
the XRD and SEM measurements, Lukas Buelens (Department of Materials,
Textiles and Chemical Engineering, Ghent University) for the TEM measurements,
and Pieter Vermeir (Department of Green Chemistry and Technology,
Ghent University) for the ICP-OES analysis.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsengineeringau.5c00033.

CRediT:Phebe Lemairedata curation, formal analysis, investigation,
validation, visualization, writing - original draft, writing - review
& editing;Arno de Reviereconceptualization, investigation,
methodology, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing;Dhanjay Sharmamethodology, writing - review & editing;Valerie Ruauxformal analysis, investigation, methodology;Jaouad Al Atrachformal analysis, investigation, methodology;Valentin Valtchevproject administration, resources, writing
- review & editing;Joris W. Thybautfunding acquisition,
resources, supervision, writing - review & editing;Maarten
K. Sabbeconceptualization, funding acquisition, project administration,
supervision, writing - review & editing;An Verberckmoesconceptualization, funding acquisition, project administration,
resources, supervision, writing - review & editing.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.