The 3-hydroxy-β-lactam (3-HβL) group derived
from the
natural product tabtoxinine-β-lactam (TβL), an inhibitor
of glutamine synthetase, was repurposed to develop an inhibitor of
dihydrofolate synthetase (DHFS). We show that replacement of the carboxyl
group ofp-amino-benzoic acid (PABA) with a 3-HβL
moiety on the chemical scaffold of a folate mimic results in a potent
inhibitor of DHFS. Using a combination ofin vitrosteady-state kinetics, enzyme-coupled assays, and molecular modeling,
we validate the essential role of the 3-HβL group in DHFS inhibition.
We provide an optimized synthesis of the 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL
component via a sequence of the C–C bond-forming Henry reaction
and a β-lactam ring-closing Grignard reaction. We demonstrate
full elaboration to an antifolate scaffold via chemical or chemoenzymatic
conjugation of the PABA analogue 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL
to a pterin mimic. In this proof-of-concept study, we provide the
first evidence that the 3-HβL group can be used as a general
pharmacophore for inhibitors of enzymes in the ATP-dependent carboxylate-amine
ligase superfamily through carboxylate replacement on substrate scaffolds,
which could have broad therapeutic applications.

Reactions
catalyzed by ATP-dependent carboxylate–amine ligase
enzymes. A) Glutamine synthetase (GS) catalyzed reaction and the mechanism
of inhibition by TβL. B) Dihydrofolate synthetase (DHFS) catalyzed
reaction and the mechanism of a proposed 3-HβL inhibitor.

One potential target for this type of mechanism-based
inhibition
is dihydrofolate synthetase (DHFS). DHFS is not endogenous to humans,
potentially reducing the off-target effects of DHFS inhibition. DHFS
catalyzes the conversion of 7,8-dihydropteroic acid (7,8-DHP) to 7,8-dihydrofolic
acid (7,8-DHF). DHFS acts between the two clinically relevant folate
biosynthesis enzymes, dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) and dihydrofolate
reductase (DHFR). While structurally distinct, DHFS and GS share mechanistic
similarities in the formation of a reactive acyl phosphate intermediate
that is derived from a phosphoryl group transfer from ATP to the carboxylic
acid substrate (Glu for GS; 7,8-DHP for DHFS). The acyl phosphate
is subsequently condensed with an amine nucleophile (NH3for GS;l-Glu for DHFS) to form an amide product with the
release of Pi(FigureB). The DHFS product 7,8-DHF
is subsequently reduced to tetrahydrofolic acid (THF) by DHFR. In , DHFS also catalyzes the conversion of THF
to poly-n-Glu-THF in the same ATP-dependent manner
(Figure S1).

DHFS has 9 crystal structures (PDB:1W78, 1W7K, 3N2A, 3NRS,
3PYZ, 3QCZ, 6K8C,
2VOR, 2VOS) reported in a variety of liganded states. The DHFS structure
is composed of two subunits that create a binding pocket, which accommodates
the 7,8-dihydropterin moiety of 7,8-dihydropteroic acid (7,8-DHP). While there are FDA-approved inhibitors of DHPS
(sulfamethoxazole) and DHFR (trimethoprim) used clinically to treat
bacterial infections (Figure S1), there
are no approved inhibitors of DHFS. A DHFS inhibitor could replace
commonly used DHPS inhibitors for combination therapy with DHFR inhibitors
to provide a synergistic drug pair. Two phosphinic acid-based folate
mimics have been reported to inhibit DHFS in an ATP-dependent manner
similar to glufosinate, a phosphinate inhibitor of GS.−There is one report of simple dihydropteroic acid derivatives with
variable pterin-PABA linkages that show weak inhibition of DHFS from . Hence,
we sought to demonstrate that the 3-HβL moiety from tabtoxin
could be similarly repurposed to inhibit DHFS through the incorporation
of this pharmacophore into an antifolate scaffold (FigureB).

If the unique 3-HβL
of TβL can be fitted to a molecule
that would bind DHFS, a potential mechanism-based DHFS inhibitor can
be synthesized. Given that there are multiple resistance genes to
DHPS and DHFR inhibitors circulating in clinics, attacking the folate
biosynthesis pathway using a less-targeted enzyme could prove fruitful
in combating clinical antibiotic resistance.−Therein lies the hypothesis of this study: a compound utilizing
the pterin-binding pocket of DHFS, suitably linked to a 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL, could produce a tight-binding
mechanism-based inhibitor of DHFS. The envisioned pterin-3-HβL
(1) underwent retrosynthetic analysis, with the pterin-portion
of the molecule to be either chemically or enzymatically ligated as
the final step and the 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL
(2) to be produced synthetically (FigureA). Once the forward synthesis of 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL (2) was completed,
it was ligated to natural pterin chemoenzymatically to provide inhibitor1and synthetically to two pterin mimics to provide inhibitors3,4. These compounds were tested and validated
as inhibitors of DHFSin vitro. The importance of
the 3-HβL pharmacophore was demonstrated through controlled
hydrolysis to the corresponding β-amino acid5,which showed reduced DHFS inhibitionin vitro.
We performed a variety of biochemical assays and molecular docking
to probe the mechanism of DHFS inhibition by the most potent inhibitor
(3).

A) Retrosynthetic analysis of a proposed DHFS inhibitor
(1) derived from an electrophilic pterin moiety and a
nucleophilic
3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL (2). B)
The three potential DHFS inhibitors (3–5) that were synthesized in this work.

All chemicals and solvents were purchased from
reputable vendors
(e.g., Sigma-Aldrich, Oakwood, Enamine, Thermo Fisher). Folate precursors
and metabolites were purchased from Schircks Laboratories. All prep-HPLC
was performed using an Agilent/HP 1050 quaternary pump module with
an Agilent/HP 1050 MWD module with a Phenomenex Luna 10 μm C18(2)
100 Å column, 250 × 21.20 mm, 10 μm fit with a guard
column. All LC-MS was performed on an Agilent 6130 quadrupole LC-MS
with a G1313 autosampler or G1367B autosampler, a G1315 diode array
detector, and a 1200 series solvent module. A Phenomenex Gemini C18
column, 50 × 2 mm, 5 μm fit with a guard column, was used
for all LC-MS separations. Mobile phases for prep-HPLC and LC-MS were
0.1% formic acid in (A) H2O and (B) CH3CN, and
data were processed using ChemStation software (Agilent). NMR was
performed on either an Agilent DD2 600 MHz, an Agilent DD2 500 MHz,
or a Varian Unity Plus 300 MHz instrument, and data were processed
using MestraNova. Protein concentrations were determined by optical
absorbance measurement (A280) using a NanoDrop 2000 UV–vis
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). All optical absorption plate
readings were performed on either a SpectraMax Plus 384 or a Fisher
AccuSkan Go. Data plots and curve fitting were generated by using
GraphPad Prism.

Synthetic methods and compound characterization
are provided in theSupporting Informationincluded with this publication.

7,8-Dihydro-6-hydroxymethylpterin-pyrophosphokinase
(HPPK;WP_000215139.1), DHPS (WP_000764731.1), DHFR (AAA87976.1),
and DHFS (WP_000584546.1) were cloned into a pET28 plasmid encoding
an N-terminal His6tag (Tables S1–S3). TheN-His6-tagged proteins were overexpressed
from BL21 and purified by Ni-NTA
affinity chromatography (Figure S2). The
purified enzymes were flash-frozen in liquid N2and stored
as aliquots at −80 °C for later use. Assay conditions
derived from a previous study on DHPS were adapted and used to investigate
if DHPS could use 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2as a substrate. Individual
stock solutions of MgCl2, β-mercaptoethanol (BME),
bovine serum albumin (BSA), 6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin,p-amino-benzoic acid (PABA), ATP, and NADPH were made using
100 mM Tris buffer (pH = 7.5) and then stored in the −80 °C
freezer until use. Wells of a 96-well plate were flushed with argon
and then filled with assay solution in triplicate and initiated by
the addition of an enzyme mixture containing HPPK and DHPS. Final
assay concentrations were as follows: 5 mM MgCl2, 20 mM
BME, 1 mg/mL BSA, 150 μM 6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin,
150 μM PABA, 300 μM ATP, 1.1 μM HPPK, and 0.65 μM
DHPS, with a total well volume of 150 μL. The plate was incubated
at 37 °C for 1 h, and then like wells were combined and centrifuge-filtered
through a 10K molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filter to remove any
enzyme. The solutions were then analyzed by LC-MS with single-ion
monitoring protocols to detect the various pteridine-oxidation states
of products. Once the PABA-derived product of DHPS (7,8-DHP) was detected
by LC-MS, the assay was run again with the addition of 150 μM
of NADPH and 1.1 μM of DHFR. The resulting fast reduction of
7,8-DHP creates a measurable reduction in optical absorbance at 340
nm (NADPH) that only occurs when 7,8-DHP is present (6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin
is not a substrate for DHFR). As such, the optical absorbance at 340
nm was read every 10 s for 1 h after initiation by addition of an
enzyme cocktail containing HPPK, DHPS, and DHFR. The steady state
rate of DHPS production of 7,8-dihydropteroic acid was calculated
from the slope of the linear absorbance decrease. Once steady state
kinetics of DHPS was established, the assay was rerun with 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2replacing the
PABA at the same concentration. The HPPK and DHPS assay was performed
using 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2as a substrate with LC-MS detection of the corresponding product1. Inclusion of NADPH and DHFR facilitated the measurement
of steady state kinetic data for the DHPS ligation of 6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin
pyrophosphate and 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2.

7,8-DHP is
not commercially available and is unsuitable as a substrate for steady
state DHFS kinetic experiments due to competing air oxidation. THF
was purchased in a sealed ampule and stored under an inert atmosphere
(drybox) until use as a DHFS substrate. To have an optical absorbance
signal from which to calculate DHFS steady state kinetics, a coupled
enzyme reaction with pyruvate kinase/lactate dehydrogenase (PK/LDH)
was chosen to quantify ADP from DHFS activity.,Individual
stock solutions of MgCl2, dithiothreitol (DTT), BSA, glycine,
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), NADH, ATP,l-Glu, and THF were
made using 100 mM Tris buffer (pH = 7.5) and then stored in the −80
°C freezer until use. PK/LDH was bought as a glycerol solution.
Wells of a 96-well plate were flushed with argon, then filled with
assay solution in triplicate, and initiated by the addition of DHFS.
Final assay concentrations were as follows: 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, 1 mg/mL BSA, 50 mM Gly, 150 μM PEP, 150 μM
NADH, 100 units/mL PK, 150 units/mL LDH, 150 μM ATP, 100 μM
Glu, 50 μM THFA, and 3 μM DHFS, with a final well volume
of 150 μL. The plate was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h with
the optical absorbance at 340 nm read every 10 s. Each like well was
combined, and the solutions were centrifuge-filtered through 10K MWCO
filters to remove any enzyme. The solutions were then analyzed by
LC-MS with single-ion monitoring protocols to detect the various pteridine-oxidation
states of products. Once steady state kinetics and product formation
were confirmed, the assay was run with varying concentrations of HβLs3,4, and β-amino acid5,
as well as varying amounts of the pterin-3-HβL (1) produced by DHPS. The steady state enzymatic rate was determined
for each concentration of compound, and IC50curves were
developed.

ATCC 25922 was grown in an overnight culture in Luria broth (LB)
and then diluted to a McFarland 0.5 standard (OD600= 0.05–0.1).
100 μL portion of this cell suspension was used to inoculate
35 mL of Mueller–Hinton No. 2 (MH II) agar melted and tempered
to 47 °C. The inoculated agar was poured into a sterile Petri
dish (145 mm × 20 mm; Greiner Bio-One), and once cooled to room
temperature, 9 mm wells were cut. Wells were filled with 50 μL
DMSO solutions of sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim, and pterin-3-HβL3, combinations thereof, as well as a pure DMSO control. The
plates were incubated at 37 °C for 18 h, and then, zones of inhibition
were measured for each well using an electronic caliper.

Stock solutions of MgCl2, dithiothreitol (DTT), BSA, glycine, ATP, andl-Glu
were made using 100 mM Tris buffer (pH = 7.5) and then stored in a
−80 °C freezer until use. Three independent solutions
were made with the following concentrations: 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, 1 mg/mL BSA, 50 mM glycine, 500 μM ATP, and 500
μM Glu. Each solution was then dosed to give 0 μM pterin-3-HβL3plus 20 μM DHFS, 40 μM pterin-3-HβL3plus 20 μM DHFS, or 400 μM pterin-3-HβL3plus 20 μM DHFS. A fourth solution was made using
100 mM Tris buffer (pH = 7.5) and 20 μM DHFS, lacking all cosubstrates
and additives. Each solution had a final volume of 200 μL. Each
vial was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h and then submitted for protein
mass spectrometry analysis.

Three μL of each sample (∼50
pmol of protein) was added to 45 μL of solvent (water with 0.1%
of formic acid) and loaded onto a C8 trap column to remove salts and
then eluted onto an ESI source with an 8 min acetonitrile gradient.
ESI-MS spectra were recorded in the positive-ion mode using a Bruker
Maxis II 4G with anm/zrange of
250–2900m/z. Each peak in
the LC-MS chromatogram was analyzed for mass spectra and deconvoluted
by using ProteinMetrics Intact software.

Stock solutions of MgCl2, dithiothreitol (DTT), BSA, glycine, ATP, ADP,l-Glu, and
THF were made using 100 mM Tris buffer (pH = 7.5) and then stored
in a −80 °C freezer until use. Individual standard solutions
containing 10% by volume of D2O were made of ATP, ADP,
and DHFS. A final solution containing 10% D2O by volume,
with 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, 1 mg/mL BSA, 50 mM Gly, 500
μM ATP, 500 μM Glu, and 250 μM 3-HβL3,was made, flushed with argon, and cooled. The standard
solutions were subjected to31P NMR conditions in an Agilent
DD2 500 MHz instrument at 37 °C. The final solution was initiated
with the addition of DHFS (final concentration 3 μM) and then
immediately subjected to31P NMR conditions in an Agilent
DD2 500 MHz instrument at 37 °C. Processing parameters for 31P
spectra can be found inTables S6–S9.

Molecular docking was performed using
AutoDock Vina (version 4).,The protein template
was the DHFS structure from (PDB:1W78). Twenty-six compounds were investigated
by docking using an AutoDock genetic algorithm against the active
site of DHFS with both ADP and ATP bound, and their potential poses
were investigated and compared to determine the feasibility of binding
and respective binding energies. Ligand interaction maps were assembled
using LigPlot+. Protein–ligand
complex structures were visualized using PyMOL version 3.0.3 (Schrödinger,
LLC).

Synthesis of 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2is shown inSchemeA and was initiated with copper­(I)- and TEMPO-mediated oxidation
of β-keto-ester6, followed by a Henry reaction
to add nitromethane to the α-keto-ester7. Hydrogenolysis under neutral conditions resulted
in a retro-Henry reaction with the elimination of nitromethane and
the formation of the reduced β-keto-ester. This problem was
solved by performing the hydrogenolysis under acidic conditions, resulting
in the reduction of the two nitro moieties simultaneously to yield9. Selective Boc protection of the aniline in the presence
of the primary amine was achieved using Boc2O in 10% AcOH/dioxane. The primary amine and the ester of10were condensed in atert-butyl magnesium chloride-mediated
ring closing, and subsequent deprotection of the aniline provided
3-HβL2as the corresponding TFA salt.

aA) The synthesis
of a 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL warhead2. B) Ligation
of pterin-mimic12to 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2to form 3-HβL inhibitor3. C) Ligation
of pterin-mimic13to 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2to form the 3-HβL inhibitor4. D) Acid-mediated
hydrolysis of the β-lactam ring of 3-HβL3to the corresponding β-amino acid5.

Biologically derived 7,8-dihydropteridines are unstable
in air,
undergoing oxidation to a fully oxidized form that DHFS will not take
as a substrate. As such, two stable pterin-mimic
electrophiles derived from DHFR inhibitors methotrexate and trimethoprim
were synthesized and ligated to 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2using SN2 displacement to form3and4(SchemeB,C). Finally, the β-lactam ring of3was
hydrolyzed under acidic conditions to yield a ring-opened version
of the potential inhibitor (5) as a negative control
to demonstrate the importance of the 3-HβL ring structure to
DHFS inhibition (SchemeD). Compounds3,4, and5were
purified by preparative RP-C18 HPLC and lyophilized to provide suitable
compounds for biochemical and whole cell assays. Two other synthetic
routes to 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2were attempted. The first route utilized a Norrish–Yang Type
II photocyclization of a precursor (p-Cl-phenyl)-β-keto-formamide
to create the 3-HβL ring. While
this photocyclization was successful, we were unable to convert 3-(p-Cl-phenyl)-3-HβL to the desired 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2via a Buchwald–Hartwig
cross-coupling strategy (Figure S3). The
second route attempted the addition of an aryl anion to an α-keto-β-lactam
to form the corresponding 3-HβL ring. This route required protection of the β-lactam nitrogen, which
proved to be difficult to remove (Figure S4).

With 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2and its three
pterin derivatives3,4, and5in hand, biochemical assays were developed to test their suitability
as DHFS inhibitors. Benchtop synthesis of 7,8-dihydropteroate derivatives
was not feasible due to rapid air oxidation during handling. Therefore,
we developed a chemoenzymatic route to rapidly prepare compound1and use this in DHFS inhibition assays (FigureA). Performing enzyme-catalyzed
reactions under an argon atmosphere enabled 6-hydroxymethyl-dihydropterin
to be used as an enzyme substrate for DHPS with minimal competing
air oxidation. DHPS is known to use sulfa-drugs as a competing substrate,
leading to the formation of product inhibitors. This known substrate promiscuity was leveraged to test
the ability of folate biosynthetic enzymes (HPPK and DHPS) to assemble
a pterin-3-HβL molecule1utilizing 6-hydroxymethyl-dihydropterin
and 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2as
substrates.

Chemoenzymatic preparation of pterin-3-HβL1and the initial validation of DHFS inhibition. A) Chemoenzymatic
route toward pterin-3-HβL1using HPPK/DHPS-catalyzed
reactions and its DHFR-reduced form14. B) LC-MS data
showing the appearance of the molecular ion corresponding to the pterin-3-HβL1[M + H]+ion (m/z= 356) when HPPK and DHPS are introduced. C) Steady-state enzyme
kinetics for the production of PABA-derived product 7,8-DHP versus
3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2derived
product pterin-3-HβL1. Plot represents the consumption
of NADPH as monitored by A340over time for the DHFR-catalyzed
reduction of the HPPK/DHPS-derived product. D) Use of chemoenzymatically
prepared pterin-3-HβL1as an inhibitor of DHFS-catalyzed
conversion of THF to THF-Glu. The graph represents the apparent enzyme
velocity for DHFS measured using a coupled enzyme assay for the conversion
of THF to THF-Glu with DHFS, PK, and LDH. PK and LDH convert the DHFS-produced
ADP to ATP with consumption of PEP and NADPH allowing for measurement
of steady-state kinetics by monitoring A340.

Reactions containing HPPK, DHPS, ATP, 6-hydroxymethyl-dihydropterin,
and 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2produced
a strong peak in the LC-MS chromatogram corresponding to the expected
molecular weight of the pterin-3-HβL1[M + H]+molecular ion (m/z356)
(FigureB). Control
reactions lacking HPPK and DHPS did not produce this unique metabolite.
We conclude from this result that 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2can serve as a substrate for DHPS similar to the misincorporation
of the sulfa drugs. To compare the relative rates of substrate-to-product
conversion for the natural substrate PABA and unnatural substrate
3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2, we
measured the apparent enzyme velocities of DHPS-catalyzed reactions
under steady-state conditions. We coupled product formation to DHFR-catalyzed
reduction of the products and monitored the decrease in optical absorbance
at 340 nm, corresponding to the consumption of NADPH. Consistent with
the results from the LC-MS analysis of HPPK/DHPS reactions, DHPS was
able to accept 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2as a substrate to produce the corresponding pterin-3-HβL1in significant quantities, although at a lower relative
rate of production as compared to the PABA-derived product 7,8-DHP
(FigureC).

We used anin vitroPK/LDH-coupled assay to quantify the ADP-production in DHFS-catalyzed
reactions. Because we could not purchase or make 7,8-DHP, we could
not directly assay against the initial glutamylation reaction forming
7,8-DHF. Instead, we used fully reduced THF as the substrate and assay
for poly glutamylation. First, we investigated DHFS inhibition by
chemoenzymatically generated compound1. We were unable
to accurately determine the concentration of compound1due to spontaneous air oxidation and the small analytical quantities
generated. However, we were still able to show dose dependent inhibition
of DHFS by varying volumes of unknown concentration from the same
stock solution, resulting in clear reductions in apparent enzyme velocity
corresponding to increased inhibitor concentrations (FigureD).

Next, we investigated
the dose-dependent inhibition of DHFS by synthetic 3-HβLs3and4and the control compound5. A dose-dependent inhibitory response was shown for pterin-3-HβL3with an apparent IC50of 2.6 ± 1.6 μM
(FigureA). We were
unable to accurately fit the kinetic data from HβL4and hydrolyzed β-lactam5 (the error associated
with calculated IC50values was higher than the values
themselves); however, we did observe a trend of decreasing enzyme
velocity with increasing concentrations of compounds4and5that is suggestive of weak inhibition (FigureB,C). Pterin-3-HβL3produced 107 ± 39% inhibition of DHFS at 56 μM,
while HβL4showed 34 ± 11% at 1024 μM,
and hydrolyzed compound5achieved 35 ± 13% inhibition
at 56 μM. Pterin-3-HβL3appears to be the
best DHFS inhibitor, suggesting that DHFS favors the pteridine mimic
from methotrexate over the 2,4-diaminopyrimidine from trimethoprim.

In vitroinhibition of DHFS using the DHFS/PK/LDH coupled assay monitoring for inhibition
of THF to Glu-THF. A) IC50curve for pterin-3-HβL3(apparent IC50of 2.6 ± 1.6 μM). B)
IC50curve for pterin-3-HβL4(no accurate
fit). C) IC50curve for hydrolyzed pterin-3-HβL5(no accurate fit). D) Relative % inhibition of compounds3(56 μM),4(1024 μM), and5(56 μM).

We validated the PK/LDH-coupled DHFS inhibition
assay using LC-MS
to detect the product formation from inhibitor-treated reactions (FigureC). We used single
ion monitoring for the [M + H]+molecular ion corresponding
to Glu-7,8-DHF (m/z573; observed),
which consistently appeared as the dominant product ion from air oxidation
of the Glu-THF product (m/z575;
not observed). LC-MS analysis of samples taken from these kinetic
assays showed almost complete inhibition of Glu-7,8-DHF formation
at the highest doses of pterin-3-HβL3(FigureA). Conversely, while
hydrolyzed pterin-3-HβL5showed some decrease
in product formation at the highest dose, it was clearly unable to
completely stop DHFS from catalyzing its reaction (FigureB). These observations are
consistent with the steady state enzyme inhibition results, which
showed pterin-3-HβL3achieving near full DHFS
inhibition at highest doses (Figure).

Extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) from LC-MS analysis
of DHFS
enzymatic conversion of THF to Glu-7,8-DHF (m/z= 573 for the [M + H]+ molecular ion). A) The near complete
inhibition of DHFS-catalyzed product formation was observed with the
highest dose of pterin-3-HβL3tested (56 μM).
B) Decrease in the extracted ion counts of DHFS-catalyzed product
formation in the presence of hydrolysis product5at
56 μM. C) Reaction scheme for the conversion of THF to Glu-THF
followed by air oxidation to Glu-DHF. The graphs depict a representative
EIC trace for reactions performed in triplicate as independent trials.
Individual traces are presented as a stacked plot for visualization
with an increasing offset of 10% of the maximum value on both the
x- andy-axes.

We used the Kirby–Bauer
agar diffusion assay to test for bacterial growth inhibition by our
synthetic antifolates. Both trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole showed
zones of growth inhibition for ATCC 25922, with the increasing size of the inhibition zone for
higher doses (Figure S5). Pterin-3-HβL3showed no zone of inhibition beyond the DMSO control and
showed no synergistic effects in combination with either trimethoprim
or sulfamethoxazole. We attribute this lack of activity to a lack
of bacterial cell permeability, which is common for antifolates including
methotrexate.,Given that we could demonstrate
the incorporation of 3-(p-aminophenyl)-3-HβL2into the natural folate biosynthetic pathway to generate
pterin-3-HβL1(Figure), we also attempted broth microdilution
assays with ATCC 25922 treated
with compound2as a potential prodrug for generating
DHFS inhibitor1inside the cell. However, these experiments
failed to show any bacterial growth inhibition or synergy with trimethoprim
(data not shown).

The β-lactam
motif presents an opportunity for covalent inhibition of DHFS through
direct acylation of nucleophilic amino acid side chains. Should a phospho-3-HβL form in the DHFS
active site, it could undergo assisted elimination to form an electrophilic
quinone imine methide capable of alkylating amino acid side chains
(FigureA). To investigate covalent DHFS inhibition, we
incubated recombinant DHFS from with increasing concentrations of pterin-3-HβL3in the presence of ATP. We analyzed these samples by high-resolution
intact protein mass spectrometry and searched for covalent adducts
by monitoring the shift in apparent molecular weight of the DHFS molecular
ions. We observed a strong molecular ion corresponding to the parent
DHFS enzyme with an N-terminal hexahistidine tag appearing atm/z47,495.5 Da (predicted 47,496.85;Figure S6). We did not observe any shift in apparent
molecular weight with the inclusion of 3-HβL3and
ATP. We also performed31P NMR on similarly prepared samples
and searched for potential31P-signals corresponding to
a phosphorylated inhibitor. We observed an increase in the ratio of
Pi/ATP in samples containing inhibitor3under
complete reaction conditions relative to the controls. A weak31P-signal was also detected at ∼6.49 ppm that was unique
to the experimental sample (FigureB; top spectra). This chemical shift is slightly downfield
from the known31P-signals for phosphoserine and phosphothreonine
(∼5 ppm under similar conditions), but given the unique structure
of the proposed phosphoester, the chemical shift is difficult to predict.,While the31P-spectra are suggestive of a phosphorylation
event, we were unable to directly detect any phosphorylated inhibitor
species via LC-MS analysis of these samples. This could be due to
instability of phospho-3-HβL3or in-source fragmentation
during LC-MS analysis (FigureA).

A) Proposed mechanism for the formation of a quinone imine methide
intermediate and Pifrom a 3-phospho-HβL inhibitor3followed by hydration to reform pterin-3-HβL inhibitor3. B)31P NMR (202 MHz, D2O, pH 7.5)
spectra of reaction mixtures containing DHFS, pterin-3-HβL3, and ATP (top spectra) along with relevant control reactions
(bottom three spectra). The Pisignal is set to a chemical
shift of 0 ppm. The31P resonance signals for ATP and ADP
are labeled. An apparent new31P resonance is observed
at 6.49 ppm exclusively for the complete reaction mixture containing
all of the necessary components (top spectra).

To further explore the potential for the formation
of a phosphorylated
inhibitor, we performed molecular docking of potential phosphorylated
tetrahedral intermediates and potential phosphorylated inhibitors
against a template DHFS structure from (PDB:1W78) (Figure). The
template DHFS structure contains bound ligands for the reactive activated
ester intermediate, 7,8-DHP acyl phosphate, and ADP (FigureA,B). We validated a molecular
docking protocol using AutoDock Vina by redocking 7,8-DHP and comparing
the ligand fit to the published crystal structure, which closely resembled
the observed ligand conformation for 7,8-DHP acyl phosphate. We docked
the putative tetrahedral intermediate, both R and S enantiomers, that
would form after the reaction of 7,8-DHP acyl phosphate with the α-amino
group of anl-Glu nucleophile (FigureC,D). We found that the tetrahedral intermediate
with S stereochemistry was best accommodated in our docked structures
(with the R stereochemistry ejecting the tetrahedral carbon into solvent
space). There is one crystal structure of DHFS from with an occupied Glu-binding pocket (PDB
entry3QCZ).
We found that the best fit for the Glu-side chain in our docked ligands
occupied the crystallographically observed Glu-binding pocket. We
docked an additional 24 compounds against the DHFS structural model. Docked structures include the reaction substrate,
the tetrahedral intermediate, synthetic inhibitors, and theoretical
inhibitors designed by using a structure-guided approach. Additional
theoretical inhibitor structures were docked and are presented inFigure S7. The docked structures with the best
fit were examined for protein–ligand interactions compared
with 7,8-DHP (Figure). Our hypothesis that the pterin-binding pocket can be used to anchor
a potential inhibitor was bolstered by the docking results, with 24
of the 26 structures docked with the pterin mimic overlaying the 7,8-DHP
pterin. Potential phosphorylation at the 3-hydroxy position results
in a 0.7 kcal/mol increase in binding energy as compared to that of
the free hydroxyl group (FigureA,B). The hydrolyzed 3-HβL ring of compound5binds in the same general conformation as the intact 3-HβL
of compound3, but with a 0.7 kcal/mol lower binding
energy (FigureC).
When the 3-hydroxyl group is phosphorylated, the conformation is maintained
but with a reduction of 0.6 kcal/mol binding energy compared to the
ring-closed form (FigureD). The stereochemistry at the C3 position of the 3-HβL
proved pivotal when substituents are added to the 3-HβL. In
particular, when the glutaric acid group of a modeled Glu is bound
to N1 of 3-HβL and the 3-hydroxyl group is phosphorylated, there
is a difference in calculated binding energy of 2.1 kcal/mol between
the R and S (at the C3 position) structures. The docked R configuration
orients the phosphate group toward the Mg2+ions, while
the S configuration at C3 of the 3-HβL ring forces this group
out toward solvent rather than toward the Mg2+ions, showing
that stereochemistry at the C3 position is critical for facilitating
the favorable phosphate–magnesium binding interactions (FigureE). The highest binding
energy came from the phosphorylated inhibitor structure, with al-glutaric acid group stemming from the N1 and R configuration
at the C3 position (FigureE).

7,8-Dihydropteroate phosphate and ADP bound to DHFS (PDB entry1W78). A) Zoom in on
the active site showing the pterin binding pocket anchoring the PABA
acyl phosphate intermediate (cyan) toward the ADP (gray) and the two
Mg2+ions (magenta). B) The predicted active site interactions
between phospho-7,8-DHP and DHFS. C) Zoom in on the active site showing
the pterin binding pocket anchoring the docked tetrahedral intermediate
(cyan) overlaid with the docked 7,8-DHP. D) The predicted active site
interactions between the docked S enantiomer of the tetrahedral intermediate
and DHFS. Docking was performed against PDB1W78as a template using
AutoDock Vina.

Selected compounds showing docked structures overlaid
with 7,8-DHP
in the active site of DHFS. A) The R enantiomer of pterin-3-HβL3. B) The R enantiomer of pterin-3-HβL3with a phosphorylated 3-hydroxyl group. C) The R enantiomer of hydrolyzed
3-HβL5. D) The R enantiomer of hydrolyzed 3-HβL5with a phosphorylated 3-hydroxyl group. E) The R enantiomer
of phosphorylated pterin-3-HβL3with a glutaric
acid linked to the N1 position of the β-lactam.

In this work, we sought to repurpose 3-HβL
as a general inhibitor
of ATP-dependent carboxylate-amine ligases using DHFS as a model system.
DHFS is also an attractive antibacterial target, given that it could
serve as a replacement for the traditional antifolate target of the
sulfa drugs, DHPS, which suffers from established clinical resistance.−
,We modeled our study after the
natural GS inhibitor TβL, a glutamate antimetabolite that mimics
the phosphorylated transition state of the enzyme-catalyzed condensation
of Glu γ-carboxy phosphate with ammonia (Figure). We hypothesized
that replacement of the PABA-carboxyl group of 7,8-DHP (or a structural
mimic) with 3-HβL would result in a mechanism-based transition
state inhibitor of DHFS following a mechanism analogous to the inhibition
of GS by TβL (Figure). We validated this hypothesis by synthesizing a pterin-linked
3-aryl-3-HβL (3) that exhibited potent DHFS inhibitionin vitro. We validated the importance of the β-lactam
ring by direct comparison to the hydrolyzed analog5.31P NMR and molecular docking were used to support a model
for mechanism-based inhibition, where inhibitor phosphorylation at
C3 of the 3-HβL generates a tetrahedral product that resembles
the tetrahedral intermediate of the enzyme-catalyzed reaction (Figure). This study provides
the first proof-of-principle that the 3-HβL pharmacophore can
be repurposed to inhibit diverse enzymes in the ATP-dependent carboxylate-amine
ligase superfamily.

Other GS inhibitor “warheads,”
including sulfoximines
and phosphinates, have been repurposed to inhibit ATP-dependent carboxylate-amine
ligases, includingd-Ala-d-Ala ligase (DDL), MurC through MurF, Glu-Cys ligase, and DHFS. The 3-HβL pharmacophore offers several
advantages over sulfoximines and phosphinates, including additional
sites for functionalization (N1, C3, C4), control of stereochemistry,
breadth of synthetic methods available for synthesizing β-lactams,,and charge neutrality (anionic phosphinates fail to permeate the
bacterial cell envelope). Inhibitor design
for DHFS requires consideration of the three-substrate (ATP, 7,8-DHP,
andl-Glu) enzyme reaction mechanism. The reaction trajectory
of the amine and carboxylate components must be reflected in the stereochemistry
of the chiral tetrahedral intermediate, which resembles the transition
states for the nucleophilic acyl substitution. Molecular docking suggests
that the R-stereochemistry at C3 of the 3-HβL best aligns a
3-phospho-HβL toward the bis-Mg2+catalytic center
while positioning the pterin and Glu components in the structurally
characterized binding cavities (FigureB). 3-HβL from TβL is ideal for mimicking
the NH3nucleophile in the GS-catalyzed reaction, but it
is likely that thel-Glu glutaric acid side chain is important
for optimal DHFS binding. This glutaric acid group could be appended
to N1 or C4 of 3-HβL, with N1 being favored by molecular docking
(FigureE).

The aniline-3-HβL component synthesized in this work puts
the 3-hydroxyl group in a benzylic position. Thepara-aniline activates the benzylic position, which provides potential
access to a reactive quinone imine methide. The DHFS-catalyzed phosphorylation
of a 3-aryl-3-HβL could promote phosphate elimination from the
benzylic position, leading to quinone imine methide formation (FigureA). This hypothesis
is supported by the observation that during the synthesis of the aniline-3-HβL2, the hydrogenolysis of the nitro-aniline8spontaneously
eliminates nitromethane from the benzylic position in a retro-Henry
reaction, which can be suppressed by protonation of the aniline amino
group by conducting the hydrogenolysis under acidic conditions.

Hydrolysis of a quinone methide resulting from the elimination
of Pifrom phospho-3-aryl-3-HβL could potentially
regenerate the parent 3-aryl-3-HβL in solution, resulting in
a futile cycle of ATP hydrolysis (FigureA). We provide some evidence for this via
the observation that the ratio of Pi/ATP increases in the
presence of DHFS, inhibitor3, and ATP relative to that
of control reactions (FigureB). We analyzed denatured DHFS-catalyzed reactions by LC-MS
for phosphorylated inhibitors, covalent adducts, thiol adducts (DTT
from buffer), and other potential breakdown products but did not observe
any such compounds. In all cases, we only observe the parent 3-aryl-3-HβL
inhibitor (3), which could arise from in-source fragmentation,
the suggested quinone imine methide mechanism, or might suggest that
the DHFS inhibition mechanism by 3-aryl-3-HβLs is reversible.
There is one report of reversible DHFS inhibitors based on dihydropteroic
acid analogues that showed weakin vitroinhibition
in the 200–500 μM range. We observed more potentin vitroinhibition of DHFS with an apparent IC50of
2.6 ± 1.6 μM for pterin-3-HβL3,suggesting
that 3-HβL provides a significant enhancement in binding and
inhibition. Further exploration of structure–activity relationships
is needed to probe the inhibition mechanism. One interesting analogue
to synthesize would be a 3-aryl-3-HβL inhibitor replacing thepara-aniline with a methylene linker as found in trimethoprim
to suppress the potential C3-phosphate elimination (FigureA).

The lack of whole
cell activity suggests that the methotrexate-derived
synthetic pterin-3-HβL3fails to permeate the cell envelope (Figure S5), which is a common challenge for antifolates.,We explored the possibility of using aniline-3-HβL2as a prodrug where DHPS would accept the PABA mimic as a substrate
to form the corresponding pterin-3-HβL1in the
cytoplasm of the bacterial cell, as observed for the sulfa drugs. While we did demonstrate that this chemoenzymatic
conversion is possiblein vitro(FigureA,B), aniline-3-HβL2still failed to show whole cell antibacterial activity against (not shown). Prodrug approaches using PABA
mimics have been shown to have antifolate activity against , so the potential for
this therapeutic approach might be species-dependent.

The pterin mimic derived
from trimethoprim proved unsuitable to
produce a DHFS inhibitor (FigureB,D), potentially indicating that the size of the pterin
mimic and spacer is vitally important to position 3-HβL correctly
in the DHFS active site. Docking of these trimethoprim-derived HβLs
supported this hypothesis, as the pterin-mimic finds the pterin-binding
pocket, but the spacer is too short to properly orient 3-HβL
near the two active site Mg2+atoms (Figure S7), instead of pushing the 3-HβL out toward
solvents. Clearly, the choice of pterin mimic is an important consideration
when designing DHFS inhibitors, and it cannot be assumed that DHFR
inhibitors such as trimethoprim can be repurposed as DHFS inhibitor
scaffolds. The importance of 3-HβL itself is shown when the
ring is hydrolyzed, and the inhibitory activity drastically decreases
(FigureC,D). The
potential zwitterionic nature of the hydrolyzed β-lactam compound5might also indicate that the electronics near the active
site magnesium ions play a vital role in binding. The β-lactam
ring of pterin-3-HβL3was found to be stable in
the reaction buffer used forin vitroDHFS inhibition
assays, according to LC-MS analysis. Hence, we conclude that the 3-HβL
ring enhances binding and inhibition of DHFS.

The 3-HβL of
TβL presents a potential general warhead
to inhibit the superfamily of ATP-dependent carboxylate-amine ligase
enzymes. The 3-HβL was successfully installed on a molecule
that binds to DHFS and inhibits its enzymatic activity. The 3-HβL
moiety itself was shown to be important for DHFS binding, but the
reasons for this importance still need to be elucidated. The lack
of whole cell bacterial growth inhibition for the newly discovered
DHFS inhibitor is a roadblock for current inhibitor design. Further
investigation into cell permeability will be required to guide inhibitor
modifications that increase potency in whole cell assays. With the
knowledge that the 3-HβL warhead is a potent pharmacophore for
GS and DHFS, this inhibitor strategy could be extended to related
enzyme families. While there are a multitude of ATP-dependent carboxylate-amine
ligase enzymes, one target with high potential is DDL.,While there is an inhibitor of DDL used clinically to treat tuberculosis,d-cycloserine, it is dose-limited by toxicity.−Similar to GS and DHFS, phosphinate inhibitors of DDL have also
been reported.,As such, a 3-HβL-containing
compound could potentially inhibit DDL due to its similarity in mechanism
to both GS and DHFS, as well as its endogeny to bacteria similar to
DHFS.

We would like to thank Drs.
Jeff Kao and Manmilan
Singh (WUSTL Chemistry) for assistance with NMR experiments. We thank
Dr. Michael Gross (WashU Chemistry) and members of the Gross lab for
assistance with high-resolution mass spectrometry supported through
NIH grant 8P41GM103422a. We acknowledge funding provided by the Children’s
Discovery Institute at St. Louis Children’s Hospital in affiliation
with Washington University School of Medicine through Interdisciplinary
Research Initiative grant # MI-PD-II-2018-748. Additional support
was provided by the Sloan Foundation, the Research Corporation for
Science Advancement, and the Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation
through the Sloan Fellowship, the Cottrell Scholar Award, and the
Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award, respectively, to T. A. W.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00036.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): A provisional
patent application (18/297,368) describing these inhibitors has been
filed through the Washington University in St. Louis Office of Technology
Management.