We assessed the extent to which recommended migrant-friendly maternity care (MFMC) components were provided to recently-arrived international migrants giving birth in Montreal, Canada, and the extent to which the provision of MFMC components was related to socioeconomic and migratory characteristics.

Although some MFMC has been implemented, gaps remain. Addressing language barriers remains a top priority. To deliver optimal MFMC, HCPs and policymakers should provide care that is responsive to women’s socioeconomic and migratory backgrounds.

We conducted a cross-sectional study in 2014–2015 on the post-partum units of four public university-affiliated hospitals in Montreal, selected for their high proportion of births to international migrants (42.3–70.7% of births to immigrant women per hospital in 2011). [49] One hospital is smaller and provides primary and secondary care, while the other three larger hospitals provide tertiary (or quaternary) care. Each hospital has between 217 and 637 beds and serves a diverse population in central areas of the city. The study was granted ethics approval from the McGill Faculty of Medicine Institutional Review Board and by the ethics committees of each participating hospital.

Of the 11,755 women who gave birth in the four target hospitals over the course of data collection, 2962 women were confirmed to meet the eligibility criteria and 2636 of these women (89%) consented and participated in the study (Fig 1). Participants were included if they had lived in Canada for 8 years or less and spoke at least one of the eight study languages (Arabic, English, French, Hindi, Chinese (Mandarin/Cantonese), Spanish, Urdu, or Vietnamese). Participants could withdraw from participating at any time, and were informed that no information would be shared with immigration authorities. Exclusion criteria were: major hearing impairments; major mental illness or cognitive impairment precluding fully informed consent; “Western” country/region of birth (i.e., USA, Western and Northern Europe including Scandinavia, Israel, Australia, Japan); and stillborn/neonatal deaths (to avoid burdening the mother).

1227 twins and 7 sets of triplets.2Primary exclusion criteria determined by hospital birthing log and/or medical chart or if unable to communicate with woman (i.e., exclusion did not require administration of a questionnaire).3Initially exclusion was > 5 years. It was changed to ≥8 years after 5 months of recruitment to optimize the recruitment rate.4Women were discharged or declined to be approached or research personnel were restricted by hospital staff to approach women.

Multi-lingual research assistants explained the study to eligible participants in postpartum units, with the help of interpreters if needed or requested, and obtained consent. Thereafter, they interview-administered the MFMCQ to all participants in one of eight languages (S2-S9 Appendices). The MFMCQ was used to collect information on experiences during pregnancy, labour, and post-birth, as well as participants’ socio-demographic characteristics and migration background. In addition, research assistants administered a short supplementary questionnaire (also available in the eight study languages asS10-S17 Appendices) and recorded data from medical records on a standardized form for each participant (S18 Appendix).

The eight explanatory variables included socio-demographic and migration variables known to be important for migrant health [8,20,22] and with ≥10% variation in responses: previous birth in Canada (Y/N), length of time in Canada (<2 years, 2–5 years, or >5 years), parity (Multiparous/Primiparous), language ability in English and/or French (speaking with difficulty or not at all in both; speaking fluently or well in one and with difficulty or not at all in the other; or speaking fluently or well in both), household income (≤CAD21,000, or>CAD21,000 in 2014), level of education (≤secondary completed, or>secondary completed), maternal age in years (≤35, or >35), and maternal region of birth (per World Bank analytical groupings: Sub-Saharan Africa, Middle-East/North Africa, East/South-East Asia, South Asia, Eastern Europe, or South America/Caribbean). [50] Reference categories for each variable were the group with the best expected health outcomes based on the literature, except for maternal region of birth. For the latter,notbeing from the region in question was the reference category (e.g.,notbeing from Sub-Saharan Africa for the variable Sub-Saharan Africa); separate models were generated to test for each region. Participants who had responded to all explanatory variable questions and had complete outcome data were included in the models. We excluded those missing information to avoid making assumptions about missing data; sample loss was moderate ranging from 16–18%. Confidence intervals were set at 95%. Once the full seven models were completed, we reduced each one, removing explanatory variables with the highest p-values, one at a time; variables were retained if a change in any of the ORs exceeded 10%. We ensured the reduced models included the same populations as in the full models. Care outcomes were coded such that ORs > 1 indicated a beneficial association between the explanatory variable and care outcome, and ORs < 1 indicated an adverse association. IBM SPSS Version 27 was used for statistical analyses.

Migration descriptors are reported inTable 2. Nearly half of the participants were from the Middle-East/North Africa (43.6%), though all world (non-Western) regions were represented in the sample. Just over half of the women had been in Canada 2–5 years (54.1%). Two thirds of the women (67.1%) had never given birth in Canada before, with just under half being primiparous (44%), and most not having been pregnant upon arrival to Canada (91.5%). Most of the women were either family-sponsored migrants (50%) or fell within the economic migrant/temporary resident/diplomat/student category (45.7%); 4.3% of participants were humanitarian migrants. The majority of participants did not use English or French as the primary language spoken at home (71.1%), although most spoke one or both languages well or fluently (90.1%).

MFMC components related to access to care during pregnancy are reported inTable 3. Most women had access to care from an obstetrician-gynecologist (OB/GYN) in Canada (87.1%), and a majority had timely access to prenatal care (88.7%). Nearly one third (31.4%) of women did not receive one or more services during pregnancy that they would have wanted to have; the services most often wanted but not received were pregnancy/childbirth classes (60.3%) and food banks (22.5%). Most women did not report barriers to accessing care or services (77.1%). For women who reported experiencing barriers, the most commonly reported ones related to knowing whether and where services were offered, and whether they were eligible to receive them (65.7%). Not having time, having to work, or forgetting to seek or attend an appointment were also frequently reported as reasons for not receiving care or services (39.1%).

aParticipants could choose all options that applied, therefore the percentages total >100%.

MFMC components specific to communication during all phases of maternity care are reported inTable 4. Just over one third of mothers felt that they had received enough information on all topics during pregnancy (34.8%), and one quarter felt that they were underinformed on more than three topics (24.7%). Most women used the internet and cellphone applications as a source of information during pregnancy (61.5%). Two thirds of women reported that HCPs gave them information about breastfeeding (69.6%) and helped them with breastfeeding immediately after birth (63.0%). Most women always felt HCPs kept them informed (86.1%), and always understood the information HCPs provided throughout their maternity care (86.9%), though over a quarter would have understood the information better in another language (28.7%). Among women who needed interpreters, over half always had someone present to interpret (52.3%), while one fifth never had anyone present to interpret (21.7%). Professional interpreters were rarely offered (15.3%), although satisfaction was high when interpreters were used (94.3%). Family members/friends acted as interpreters at least once for a substantial proportion of women (61.7%).

aParticipants could chose all options that applied, therefore the percentages total >100%.

bThese questions were phase dependent, meaning participants answered questions for the pregnancy, labour and post-birth phases; results were combined because variation was < 10% across phases. Responses presented here show the number of participants who responded the same for all three phases.

dNumber of women for whom the question was applicable.

MFMC components relating to experiences and perceptions of maternity care (all phases) are reported inTable 5. Women largely found HCPs always respectful (94.5%), helpful (90.3%), and welcoming (88.2%). Most (94.6%) never felt discriminated, however when they did, it was most often associated with language (36.9%) or race (26.2%). Most mothers (79.4%) found that HCPs always spent enough time providing explanations, 79.1% reported that HCPs always asked if they had questions, and 57.7% found HCPs were never rushed. Most women never or rarely waited too long for care during labour (88%) or post-partum (86.8%), though during pregnancy, more women reported sometimes or always waiting too long for care (39%).

aThese questions were phase dependent, so participants answered questions for the pregnancy, labour and post-birth phases; results were combined because variation was < 10% across phases. Responses presented here show the number of participants who responded the same for all three phases.

cParticipants chose all options that applied, therefore the percentages total >100%. Although 141 women reported feeling discriminated, only 130 responded to the question regarding reasons why.

Results of logistic regression analyses are reported inTable 6.

1ORs > 1 convey a beneficial association. ORs < 1 convey an adverse association. Empty cells indicate variables that were removed from the model.

2In each of the 7 models, only women with data on all potential explanatory variables and outcomes were included. Note that a total of 2222 women answered the question on income, thus excluding 414 women from the total sample for inclusion in the models.

3A separate regression model was generated for each region. The reference category for each region was every participantnotfrom that region.

Access to prenatal care was reported as 35% better for mothers with medium French/English language ability compared to those with high French/English language ability (OR 1.35, 95% CI 1.01–1.81) and reported as twice as good for mothers from East/South-East Asia compared to those who had migrated from other regions (2.02, 1.28–3.20). Prenatal care access was reported as 45% worse for migrants in Canada <2 years (0.55, 0.36–0.85), and 50% worse for migrants 2−5 years in Canada (0.50, 0.31–0.80) compared to migrants in Canada >5 years. It was also reported as 31% worse for mothers with lower household incomes compared to mothers with higher incomes (0.69, 0.52–0.90), and 34% worse for mothers with less education compared to those with more education (0.66, 0.47–0.94).

The odds of reporting better communication facilitation during pregnancy were 51% higher for mothers who had never given birth in Canada before (1.51, 1.19–1.92), 44% higher for low-income mothers (1.44, 1.19–1.76), and over twice as high for mothers from Sub-Saharan Africa (2.24, 1.76–2.85). Communication facilitation during pregnancy was reported as 39% worse for primiparous mothers (0.61, 0.49–0.77), 25% worse for those with medium French/English language ability (0.75, 0.61–0.91), 79% worse for those with low French/English language ability (0.21, 0.14–0.32), and 32% worse for those from Eastern Europe (0.68, 0.47–0.98).

HCP support during pregnancy was reported as 50% better for migrants having been in Canada for 2−5 years (1.50, 1.01–2.22), while it was reported as 44% worse for those with low French/English language ability (0.56, 0.36–0.87) and 33% worse for those from the Middle-East/North Africa (0.77, 0.59–0.99).

The odds of reporting better communication facilitation during labour and birth were over three times as high for mothers from Sub-Saharan Africa (OR 3.24, 95% CI 1.81–5.80), while they were 43% lower for women with medium French/English language ability (OR 0.57, 95% CI 0.42–0.78), 92% lower for those with low French/English language ability (OR 0.08, 95% CI 0.06–0.13), and 55% lower for those from East/South-East Asia (OR 0.45, 95% CI 0.30–0.69).

HCP support during labour and birth was reported as 38% better for primiparous mothers (OR 1.38, 95% CI 1.06–1.80), and 28% worse for mothers with low household incomes (OR 0.72, 95% CI 0.55–0.94).

The variables with the most notable influence on MFMC outcomes in pregnancy and labour were French/English language ability and region of maternal birth. After controlling for other characteristics, French/English language ability was most consistently associated with receiving inadequate MFMC, except for access to prenatal care, while region of maternal birth was associated, both positively and negatively, with all care outcomes, except for HCP support during labour.

Finally, our findings reflect that the most vulnerable migrants – the more recently-arrived and those with lower income and less education – experienced worse access to prenatal care, which aligns with the literature. [32,48] These findings, taken together with the types of barriers reported precluding access to services, are suggestive of a larger structural challenge with information dissemination. Accessing prenatal care on time requires effective outreach to those that need it. Since 2022, to improve access to maternity care for asylum seekers, PRAIDA- the Regional program for the settlement and integration of Asylum Seekers in Québec, implemented a triage system in which pregnant women are screened and directly referred to a hospital for follow-up care. However, no specific policies to improve access for other migrant groups, have been introduced. This lack has partially been addressed by making pregnancy care information more available through migrant community organizations and government websites – sources that pregnant migrants usually access to become informed about maternity topics. Most participants reported using the internet or phone applications, so this approach could be further leveraged to improve access to information about the availability of services and the eligibility criteria for different migrant groups. Other solutions include improving patient navigation of the healthcare system with the help of dedicated individuals to help orient new patients. Despite experiencing poorer access to prenatal care, these vulnerable migrants appeared to receive better communication support once they accessed services, suggesting that, once they are within the system, they are being directed toward resources. This observation highlights the essential fact that improving MFMC to these groups should begin with bettering their access to care.

This study had several strengths including: research methods that were developed in collaboration with migrant community members; representativeness of the international migrant population of Montreal at the time of the study; use of the MFMCQ, a validated tool that has been used internationally; multi-lingual interviewers; questionnaires available in multiple languages; and a focus on women’s views of different components of care, which are potentially amenable to change through policy and practice. There was a rigorous recruitment process, which included screening more than 11,000 births in four urban hospitals for study eligibility, ultimately leading to data from 2,636 migrant women, from which over 2,100 were included for regression analyses. The MFMCQ captured different components of MFMC and included several different sub-elements, thus allowing for nuanced, detailed analyses of women’s experiences and perceptions of care during pregnancy, labour and postpartum.

Our study also had weaknesses. We excluded some women due their vulnerability (e.g., those who had a stillbirth), we were not able to determine the eligibility of all women who gave birth during the study period, and we removed participants with missing information from our regression analyses, so it is possible that the results are not fully representative. Although the MFMCQ was tested and validated, some questions still lacked clarity. We therefore chose to rely on questions that were clearly understood, and, when drawing conclusions, we considered the results from a combination of questions to optimize validity. One of the MFMC component measures, HCP support during pregnancy, was defined based on a single question (were HCPs reassuring and/or encouraging). Other questions that were related to HCP support during pregnancy were deemed better placed under different MFMC components. Finally, the low variability in responses for certain migration and sociodemographic variables prohibited us from conducting more refined analyses.

High levels of reported satisfaction with care could be attributed in part to a halo effect, since our data were collected on the post-partum units of hospitals very soon after birth. This effect has been described elsewhere where mothers highly regard their experiences of care immediately after birth but their positive impressions weaken with time. [53,55] This same bias has also been seen in recently-arrived migrants experiencing healthcare in a Western country for the first time; given the high number of participants who were giving birth for the first-time in Canada (67.1%), it is plausible that this bias was present in our study. [53,55] Social desirability could also play a role in the high satisfaction reported, as the women were interviewed in hospital and could have been reluctant to report negative care experiences while still in the post-partum unit. [53] Due to the cross-sectional design, we cannot explain the relationships between the socioeconomic and migration variables and the MFMC outcomes, and the results only reflect one point in time. Moreover, since the data were collected 10 years ago, it’s possible that the population and migrants’ maternity experiences have changed and the results do not capture the current situation. However, there has been limited policy change in recent years regarding migrants and maternity healthcare in Québec, so the issues related to MFMC identified in this study are likely still relevant. Furthermore, the healthcare system has faced increasing strain, largely due to the pandemic, and migrants’ vulnerabilities have intensified as a result of ongoing sociopolitical and economic challenges, suggesting that care issues may have worsened over time.

Taken together, the study strengths were many, and the weaknesses were few, with the impact of the latter on our conclusions largely mitigated. Overall, our study gathered a wealth of data on various aspects of MFMC on over 2,500 women giving birth in an urban city, and provides for specific, nuanced recommendations for both policy and care.

The authors would like to acknowledge the invaluable contributions of Theresa W. Gyorkos, Masaud Kakkar, Johane Lorvinsky, Jessica Seferian, the full research team, the ROAM collaboration, and the collaborating hospitals, as well as the participation of 2,636 migrant women.