In this work, we
synthesized three novel 4-iodotetrafluorophenoxy-azobenzene
ethers, which contain different substituents (X = −H, −Cl,
−CN) on the opposite side of the molecule in relation to the
perhalogenated moiety carrying the iodine atom. To explore the halogen
bond donor potential of the prepared compounds, we performed cocrystal
screening with a series of nitrogen-containing acceptors: 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]­octane,
4-dimethylaminopyridine, 2,2’-bipyridine, 4,4’-bipyridine,
4,4’-azopyridine,N,N’-bis­(pyridin-4-yl)­methylenehydrazine, 1,2-bis­(pyridin-4-yl)­ethane,
and 1,2-bis­(pyridin-4-yl)­ethylene. These three azobenzenes were selected
in order to investigate how bent molecules carrying a perhalogenated
moiety would act as halogen bond donors, as well as how different
substituents on a distant part of the molecule could affect the formation
of cocrystals. Out of 24 combinations, only 8 experiments yielded
cocrystals suitable for single-crystal X-ray diffraction with two
out of three azobenzene derivatives (X = −Cl and −CN).
Structural analysis revealed that in all obtained cocrystals, the
robust interaction is the I···N halogen bond between
the azobenzene iodine atom and the acceptor nitrogen atom. A majority
of cocrystals feature two donor molecules per one acceptor molecule
and display crystal packing based on discrete trimeric halogen-bonded
complexes. Only in the case of the 4,4’-bipyridine cocrystal
with a 1:1 stoichiometry is the crystal structure based on discrete
halogen-bonded dimers. In order to investigate changes in the halogen
bond donor ability of the azobenzene derivatives, we have calculated
values of the molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) for the DFT-optimized
molecular geometries. Calculations showed that the electrostatic potential
on the iodine atom only slightly depends on the functional group located
on the opposite side of the molecule, with relatively large MEP values
(+135 kJ mol–1e–1on average).

Noncovalent
interactions are, in general,
an important tool in
supramolecular chemistry for the design and synthesis of multicomponent
crystals,−i.e., such as photoresponsive,,conductive, and magnetic materials.
Among the vast majority of noncovalent interactions, halogen bonding
has been intensely investigated throughout the last two decades, becoming
the most appropriate σ-hole interaction for applications in
the field of supramolecular chemistry and one of the paramount tools
in crystal engineering alongside hydrogen bonding.−Both hydrogen
and halogen bonds are strong and directional interactions with a similar
range of bond energies, and both can vary from purely electrostatic
to largely covalent.,−Numerous studies have been focused
on using (inter)­halogens,−unsaturated iodo- (and bromo-)
hydrocarbons,−N-haloimides,,−and other molecules with halogen atoms bonded to an electronegative
atom as halogen bond donors in cocrystal design. Such molecules are generally quite reactive and are therefore
difficult to handle and use as building blocks in the crystal engineering
of multicomponent crystals. More appropriate for supramolecular chemistry
are perfluorohalocarbons, halogen bond donors introduced by Resnati
and Metrangolo in the late 1990s.−Perfluorinated halobenzenes,
in particular pentafluoroiodobenzene, the three isomers of tetrafluorodiiodobenzene,
and 1,3,5-trifluorotriiodobenzene, are to date the most widely used
in crystal engineering.−
,−Their widespread use is a result of the strong electron-withdrawing
effect of fluorine atoms leading to significant donor atom polarization,
their lack of competing functional groups for supramolecular interactions
and overall stability under commonly used synthetic conditions (e.g.
in typical solution crystallization experiments in a number of different
solvents, or in mechanochemical synthesis),and their commercial availability. According to the available structural
data in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD), there are a total of 1880 data sets for crystals containing
perfluorinated halobenzenes. Of those, 802 data sets correspond to
multicomponent crystals with 1,4-diiodotetrafluorobenzene, 362 data
sets are with 1,3,5-triiodotrifluorobenzene, 139 data sets are with
iodopentafluorobenzene, 126 data sets are with 1,2-diiodotetrafluorobenzene,
and 92 data sets are with 1,3-diiodotetrafluorobenzene. Furthermore,
there are 289 data sets for crystals containing the [I–C6F4-R] motif (R being C, N, or O) that correspond
to molecules containing the perfluorinated iodobenzene moiety, which
are mostly commercially unavailable. A subset of these data corresponds
to crystals containing the [Ipara-C6F4-R] motif, with 255 data sets. Of those, 151
data sets correspond to cocrystals: 71 data sets with the [Ipara-C6F4–C] motif, 52
data sets with the [Ipara-C6F4–N] motif, and 28 data sets with the [Ipara-C6F4–O] motif. While
there is a solid amount of data for a general azobenzene motif [Ph-N
= N-Ph] with 4559 data sets (Ph being a benzene ring with no restrictions
on its substituents), only a small amount of these data exhibited
the [Ph-N = N–C6F4–I] motif, 43
data sets, of which 36 correspond to multicomponent crystals. A subset
of these data corresponds to crystals containing the I–C6F4–N = N–C6F4–I molecule, with 30 data sets. Due tocis/transisomerization of this type of donor, cocrystallization
with appropriate acceptors could yield materials that exhibit remarkable
photomechanical properties.−After narrowing the search to
structures containing both the [Ph-N = N-Ph] and [R-C6F4–I] motifs, we found only two data sets corresponding
to peripherally perfluorinated azobenzene ethers in which a perfluorinated
unit is attached to an azobenzene unit through an ether linker. These
two compounds were reported by Frangville and co-workers and were
investigated only in solution. This overview
clearly shows that work including azobenzene moieties in halogen-bonded
cocrystals was exclusively done with perfluorinated azobenzenes, while
the behavior of peripherally perfluorinated azobenzenes in the solid
state remains mostly unexplored.

In this work we performed cocrystal screening with azobenzene
ethers
and a series of selected nitrogen containing acceptors: 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]­octane
(dabco), 4-dimethylaminopyridine (dmap),
2,2’-bipyridine (22bpy), 4,4’-bipyridine
(44bpy), 4,4’-azopyridine (44azpy),N,N’-bis­(pyridin-4-yl)­methylenehydrazine
(hpy), 1,2-bis­(pyridin-4-yl)­ethane (dpa),
and 1,2-bis­(pyridin-4-yl)­ethylene (dpe), (Scheme). For this purpose, we synthesized
three 4-iodotetrafluorophenoxy-azobenzene ethers that exhibit “V-shaped”
molecular geometry and contain different substituents (−H,
−Cl, −CN) on the opposite side of the molecule in relation
to the moiety carrying the iodine atom (Scheme). We selected these compounds in order to
explore how bent molecules carrying a perhalogenated moiety would
act as halogen bond donors, as well as how the incorporation of atoms
like hydrogen and chlorine and groups like the cyano group on a distant
part of the molecule could affect the formation of cocrystals.

All
substances except44azpy,hpy,IazH,IazCl, andIazCNwere purchased from
commercial sources. The synthesis
of halogen bond donors was performed in a two-step process (Scheme). In the first step,
azo-precursors were synthesized using the azo-coupling reaction of
phenol with an appropriate substituted aniline. In the next step,
azo-precursors were condensed with iodopentafluorobenzene, thus forming
the desired compounds.

The substituted aniline (5.0
mmol) was dissolved in hydrochloric
acid (6 mL, 2 mol dm–3). The prepared solution was
cooled to 0 °C; 2 mL of a water solution of sodium nitrite (2
mol dm–3) was added, and the solution was stirred
for another 5 min. The prepared diazonium salt solution was then added
to a solution of phenol (0.476 g, 5.0 mmol) in potassium hydroxide
(10 mL, 2 mol dm–3) with strong stirring while the
temperature was kept at 0 °C. The reaction mixture was stirred
for another 40 min, after which dilute hydrochloric acid (10 mL, 2
mol dm–3) was added, and the obtained precipitate
was filtered off and dried. The obtained azo-precursor was used without
further purification.

The prepared azo-precursor
(2.5 mmol) was mixed with potassium carbonate (3.25 mmol). The obtained
mixture was then suspended in DMF (5 mL) and heated between 50–55
°C. After half an hour, pentafluoroiodobenzene (2.75 mmol) was
added to a vigorously stirred solution, and the reaction mixture was
stirred for another 6 h. After the reaction was complete, the mixture
was cooled to room temperature, and the product was precipitated by
the addition of 100 mL of ice-cold water. The colored product was
then vacuum filtered, dried, and used without further purification
(yields: 46% forIazH, 60% forIazCl, and
47% forIazCN).

In a 250 mL
beaker, a water solution
of sodium hypochlorite (6–14%, 60 mL) was cooled to 0 °C
using an ice water bath. Then, 25 mL of a cold water solution of 4-aminopyridine
(1.18 g, 12.5 mmol) was added dropwise over 45 min, with the temperature
of the reaction mixture kept below 5 °C. After the addition,
the mixture was stirred for another 1 h. The crude product was obtained
via vacuum filtration. The resulting orange precipitate was further
recrystallized fromn-hexane.

A water solution of hydrazine hydrate
(1 mL, 21.0 mmol) was added dropwise to a solution of pyridine-4-carbaldehyde
(4 mL, 40.0 mmol) in 15 mL of absolute ethanol with vigorous stirring.
After the addition, the mixture was stirred for another 30 min. The
crude product was obtained by vacuum filtration. The resulting yellow
precipitate was used without further purification.

Cocrystal screening
was performed by ball-milling mixtures ofIazH,IazCl, orIazCNwith44bpy,44azpy,dpe,dpa, andhpyin stoichiometric ratios of 2:1. The reaction mixture (60 mg) was
placed in a 5 mL stainless steel jar along with 15 μL of acetonitrile
and one stainless-steel ball 7 mm in diameter and then milled for
15 min in a Retsch MM200 Shaker Mill operating at 25 Hz. The resulting
powders were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction. Details on
mechanochemical experiments are given in theESI.

Cocrystals suitable
for single-crystal experiments were prepared by crystallization from
a suitable solvent. About 30 mg of a mixture ofIazH,IazClorIazCN, with either44bpy,hpy,dpe,dpa, or44azpyin a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio, was dissolved in a hot
solvent. The crystals were obtained by slow evaporation of the solvent
at room temperature after a few days. Details for crystallization
experiments are given in theESI.

Crystal and
molecular structures of eight cocrystals and all three azobenzene-ethers
were determined by using single-crystal X-ray diffraction. Diffraction
measurements were made on an Oxford Diffraction Xcalibur Kappa CCD
X-ray diffractometer with graphite-monochromated MoKα (λ = 0.71073 Å) radiation. The data sets were
collected using ω scan mode over the 2θ range up to 54°.
All data were collected at 295 K. Programs CrysAlis CCD, CrysAlis
RED, and CrysAlisPro were employed for data collection, cell refinement,
and data reduction, respectively. The
structures were solved by direct methods and refined using the SHELXT,
SHELXS, and SHELXL programs, respectively.,Structural refinement was performed onF2using all of the data. The hydrogen atoms were placed in calculated
positions and treated as riding on their parent atoms [C–H
= 0.93 Å andUiso(H) = 1.2Ueq(C); C–H = 0.97 Å andUiso(H) = 1.2Ueq(C)]. Crystal data and refinement details are given in the ESI. All
calculations were performed using the WINGX crystallographic suite
of programs.

Intermolecular contacts
were analyzed using Mercury 2022.3.0. In the determined structures, contacts that are shorter than the
sum of the van der Waals radii of the involved atoms were analyzed.
Two-dimensional molecular fingerprint plots were calculated and drawn
using thednormfunction of CrystalExplorer
21.5 software.

Bulksamples for DSC measurements for
both azobenzene ethers and
their cocrystals were obtained by solution crystallization or recrystallization
experiments. Due to issues with crystal nucleation, all experiments
ended with complete evaporation of the solvent, and the crystals were
usually scraped off the crystallization vial walls and bottom. The
measurements were performed on a Mettler Toledo DSC823emodule in sealed aluminum pans (40 μL) with one pinhole in
the lid, heated in flowing nitrogen (200 mL min–1) at a rate of 10 °C min–1. The data collection
and analysis were performed using the program package STARe Software
15.00.

All calculations were performed
using the Gaussian 16 software package. Geometry optimizations of halogen bond donors and acceptors, as
well as MEP calculations, were performed using M06–2X/def2-tzvp
level of theory, with an ultrafine integration
grid (99 radial shells and 590 points per shell). The default Gaussian
convergence criteria were used. Harmonic frequency calculations were
performed on the optimized geometries to ensure that the obtained
structures represented true minima. The Figures were prepared using
GaussView 5.1.

We synthesized three novel peripherally
perfluorinated azobenzene
ethers,IazH,IazCl, andIazCN, which are orange solids at room temperature (Figure). Structural characterization showed that
molecules ofIazCNare interconnected through I···Nnitrilehalogen bonds (d(I1···N3)
= 3.053 Å), thus forming a chain spreading along the diagonal
of theaccrystallographic plane. The chains are
connected into a 2D layer via a combination of anR2(10)R22(10) hydrogen bonding motif (d(C5···N3) = 3.637 Å, ∠(C5–H5···N3)
= 167.0°) and a C–H···F contact (d(C6···F2) = 3.488 Å, ∠(C6–H6···F2)
= 154.7°). The layers are then closely packed in the 3D crystal
structure. On the other hand, in crystals ofIazCl, we
observed interhalogen type I I···Cl contacts (d(I1···Cl1) = 3.613 Å), at an angle
of 137.1°. These contacts lead to the formation of a chain, and
the chains are connected by C–H···F contacts
(d(C2···F3) = 3.383 Å, ∠(C2–H2···F3)
= 161.9°;d(C8···F4) = 3.142
Å, ∠(C8–H8···F4) = 144.3°;d(C5···F2) = 3.563 Å, ∠(C5–H5···F2)
= 160.0°) into a 3D network. Although theIazHmolecule
contains potential halogen bond acceptor sites like the ether oxygen
atom, the azo-group as well as two benzene rings, the iodine atom
ofIazHdoes not engage in halogen bonding with any of
these groups, insteadIazHmolecules are interconnected
only through C–H···F contacts (d(C9···F1) = 3.450 Å, ∠(C9–H9···F1)
= 148.4°) into a chain along theacrystallographic
axis. The chains are then closely packed in the 3D crystal structure.

Parts
of crystal structures of the herein synthesized azobenzene
ethers: (a)IazH, (b)IazCl,and (c)IazCN.

In order to investigate how halogen
bond donor
and acceptor abilities
change in the prepared azobenzene derivatives and the nitrogen-containing
molecules used, we have calculated values of the molecular electrostatic
potential (MEP) of the DFT-optimized geometries for donor and acceptor
molecules. It can be noticed that the electrostatic potential on the
iodine atom only slightly depends on the functional group X located
on the opposite side of the molecule (the biggest difference in MEPs
betweenIazHandIazCNis about 8 kJ mol–1e–1,Figure). This observation is a consequence of the
reduced inductive effect of X toward the iodine atom due to their
unfavorable relative position in the molecule (they are separated
by 16 bonds) and large spatial distance (d(I···X)
= 16.9 Å on average). Nevertheless, all donors have relatively
large MEP values on the donor atoms (MEP = +135 kJ mol–1e–1on average), which implies the possibility
of realizing halogen bonds with suitable acceptor species. Regarding
the acceptors, they all have negative MEP values on the nitrogen atoms,
ranging from −100 kJ mol–1e–1(22bpy) to −180 kJ mol–1e–1(dmap), which, according to the well-established
principles and guidelines for crystal engineering of halogen-bonded
materials, should make them all good halogen bond acceptors. Considering
the presence of two acceptor sites with negative MEP values and a
relatively large distance between them within the acceptor molecules
(which significantly reduces the impact of anticooperativity on the
binding of second donor molecules), the formation of D2A cocrystals is expected with monotopicIazXdonors.

Calculated
values in kJ mol–1e–1of the
molecular electrostatic potential mapped to the electron
density isosurfaces (ρ = 0.001 au) corresponding to the optimized
geometries of azobenzene derivatives (M06-2X/def2-tzvp level of theory).

Out of 24 combinations, we obtained a total of
8 cocrystals by
cocrystallization experiments from a solution of reactants, with two
out of three azobenzene derivatives,IazClandIazCN. This revealed several interesting results. In spite
of our expectations and calculation results, which both considered
the change in substituents on the part of the molecule distant to
the activated iodine atom as being negligible, all experiments performed
withIazHfailed to yield any cocrystals at all. We were
unable to detect the formation of new crystalline solids, since we
predominantly obtained oils and amorphous solids, and only rarely
a mixture of reactants. Although we have no evidence to prove whetherIazHis capable or not of being a halogen bond donor in combination
with the used bipyridyl acceptors, it is surprising that no crystalline
material was obtained under the same experimental conditions as for
the cocrystals obtained withIazClandIazCN, considering the minute differences in the relatively large donor
molecules. As is evident from the mentioned previous studies, which
involved cocrystal screening experiments for systems utilizing well-established
halogen bonding donor and acceptor moieties, one can easily infer
that the mere possibility of forming a primary robust interaction
does not ensure the formation of cocrystals. This is mainly because
strong, usually highly directional interactions are important for
molecular recognition and in the initial state of crystal nucleation,
but the overall cocrystallization outcome also depends on other factors.
Weak secondary interactions are a large contributor to the energy
of the crystal and also significantly affect the close packing of
molecules in the crystal and its thermodynamic stability. Furthermore,
for all of the prepared azobenzene ethers, cocrystallization experiments
from the solution were accompanied by mechanochemical experiments.
However, we obtained only amorphous solids by LAG in all combinations
of acceptors andIazCl,IazCN, orIazH(seeESI). This is a rather
unusual result, since grinding experiments are often considered a
superior method for cocrystal screening, both in the literature as
well as in our research experience.,,,,,,,,,Because of the amorphization of mixtures, we could
not detect the formation of any cocrystals.

The third interesting
observation in our cocrystal screening is
that we only obtained cocrystals with bulkier acceptor molecules,
except22bpy, which is both a sterically hindered, rod-like
molecule and the weakest Lewis base. This result is consistent with
a trend that we observed based on data in the CSD for similar and
large halogen bond donors mentioned in the introduction. One can find
28 deposited data sets corresponding to cocrystals of Ipara-C6F4–O-R donors.
A subset of these data corresponds to crystals containing ditopic
bulkier rod-like pyridine derivatives with 23 data sets (77%). Furthermore,
we found 71 data sets corresponding to cocrystals of Ipara-C6F4–C-R donors,
of which 54 (76%) correspond to cocrystals containing bulkier rod-like
pyridine derivatives and only 17 correspond to cocrystals containing
monotopic simple pyridine derivatives. For cocrystals of Ipara-C6F4–N-R halogen
bond donors, we found 52 data sets, of which 38 (73%) correspond to
cocrystals containing bulkier acceptors.

Single-crystal X-ray
diffraction analysis showed that in all obtained
cocrystals, the robust interaction is the I···N halogen
bond. All obtained cocrystals showed a 2:1 halogen bond donor to acceptor
ratio, while in the case of the44bpycocrystal, the
stoichiometry was 1:1. A very similar halogen-bonded trimer (Figuresand ) is present in all cocrystals, except in the case of the44bpycocrystal, where the molecules form a discrete halogen-bonded
dimer.

Parts of the crystal structures ofIazClcocrystals
with bipyridine derivatives.

Parts
of the crystal structures ofIazCNcocrystals
with bipyridine derivatives.

Cocrystallization ofIazClwith bipyridyl
acceptors
resulted in five cocrystals (Figure, seeTable S5in theESIfor a full list of directional intermolecular
interactions). As mentioned above, the (IazCl)­(44bpy) cocrystal is different from others in this series since
it exhibits a 1:1 donor to acceptor ratio. In the crystal structure,
one nitrogen atom of44bpyparticipates in halogen bonding
with an iodine atom of the donor molecule, while the other nitrogen
atom participates in C–H···N hydrogen bonding
with the azobenzene part of the halogen bond donor molecule. Therefore,
two molecules of44bpyand two molecules ofIazClare interconnected through both hydrogen and halogen bonds, thus
forming a tetrameric supramolecular motif that has not been observed
in cocrystals with other bipyridyl acceptors. The tetramers are connected
into a 2D layer by a combination of C–H···F
and C–H···Cπcontacts. The
layers are then closely packed in the 3D crystal structure. In all
other cocrystals ofIazCland bipyridyl acceptors, bipyridyl
molecules act as ditopic halogen bond acceptors. TwoIazClmolecules are bonded to bipyridyl acceptors via two symmetrically
equivalent I···N halogen bonds, except in (IazCl)2(44azpy), where there are two symmetrically
inequivalent I···N halogen bonds instead. In the crystal
structures of (IazCl)2(44azpy) and (IazCl)2(dpe), trimers
formed by halogen bonding are then interconnected into a 3D network
through a combination of Cl···Cl contacts between peripherally
located chlorine atoms and C–H···F contacts.
In the (IazCl)2(dpa) crystal
structure, trimers are connected into a chain by Cl···Cl
contacts and then closely packed in the 3D crystal structure. Interhalogen
contacts are absent in the (IazCl)2(hpy) crystal structure, where the trimers are connected to
the 3D network solely by C–H···F contacts. Due
to inherent similarities in the structure and Lewis basicity of the
used halogen bond acceptors, with only the spacer between pyridine
rings being different, it comes as no surprise that I···N
halogen bonds were similar in length in allIazClcocrystals,
with relative shortening values from 17.2% in (IazCl)2(44azpy) to 20.7% in (IazCl)2(dpe). Also, by analyzing data inTable, it can be seen that halogen
bonds in theIazClseries are highly linear, ranging
from 169.9° in (IazCl)2(hpy) to 178.3° in (IazCl)2(dpe).

Cocrystallization
ofIazCNwith selected
acceptors
resulted in three cocrystals (Figure). Analogously toIazClcocrystals, molecules
in these cocrystals are connected by I···N halogen
bonds into trimers formed by one bipyridyl molecule and two molecules
ofIazCN. In the (IazCN)2(dpe) and (IazCN)2(44azpy) cocrystals the halogen bonded trimers are then interconnected via
a combination of theR22(10)
C–H···N hydrogen bonding motif with nitrile
nitrogen atoms and C–H···F contacts into a 3D
network, also with additional C–H···N hydrogen
bonds in the (IazCN)2(dpe) cocrystal.
In the (IazCN)2(hpy) cocrystal,
the nitrile functional group does not participate in hydrogen bonding,
and therefore, the 3D network is obtained by connecting the trimer
solely by C–H···F contacts. As is the case withIazCl, cocrystals withIazCNfeature highly linear
halogen bonds ranging from 169.9° in (IazCl)2(hpy) to 175.4° in (IazCN)2(dpe), with relative shortening values from 16.4%
for (IazCN)2(dpe) to 20.7% for
(IazCl)2(dpe). From a summary
of halogen bonding parameters presented inTable, it can be observed that for the same halogen
bond acceptors, bothIazClandIazCNform
halogen bonds of almost equivalent bond lengths and relative shortening
values. This observation also implies that changing chlorido and cyano
functional groups on distant parts of a molecule (spacers in our case
being one ether oxygen atom and one azo linker group along with an
azobenzene ring) has minor effects on geometrical characteristics
of halogen bonding, which furthermore implies a minimal effect on
halogen bond strength.

From the data inFigure, it can be seen that there is a shortening
for our data set.
The data that exhibit a roughly linear relationship belong to cocrystals
of structurally similar bipyridyl molecules44bpy,44azpy,dpe, anddpathat have a
similar spacer length between the two pyridine rings. Points fromFigurethat deviate from
the observed trend correspond to cocrystals withhpy,
where the spacer length is much larger, and to the (IazCN)2(dpe) cocrystal in which bothorthoC–H groups ofdpeparticipate in additional
C–H···F and C–H···NC hydrogen
bonding, thereby preventing a closer approach of the donor atom to
the acceptor site and the formation of a shorter halogen bond.

Dependence
of halogen bond angle on relative shortening.

In order to quantitatively investigate intermolecular
interactions
in the obtained cocrystals, we performed Hirshfeld surface analysis
(HSA). Percentages for individual intermolecular interactions ofIazClandIazCNmolecules in the obtained cocrystals
are shown inTable S4(seeESI). From these data, it is possible to observe
a remarkable similarity in percentages of I···X (X
= N, F, C, H, and O) contacts in cocrystals with the same acceptor
molecule. This similarity between contacts formed with iodine indicates
that changing electron-withdrawing substituents located peripherally
at a large distance from the iodine atom has a negligible effect on
the formation of intermolecular contacts. A closer examination of
data inTable S4also reveals that the
percentage of I···N halogen bonding in all obtained
cocrystals falls in a range between 1.7 and 3.7%, unsurprising considering
the structural similarities of XB acceptor molecules. These similarities
in interaction types are well represented by the two-dimensional fingerprint
plots (Figure). Cocrystals
with the same halogen bond acceptor molecules have similar fingerprint
plots, with the only notable differences observable in thedpecocrystal fingerprint plots. Additionally, similarities in donor
fingerprint plots can be observed in cocrystals of different bipyridyl
acceptors with the same halogen bond donor, which implies that the
overall electron density around azobenzene remains the same.

Two-dimensional
fingerprint plots of donor molecules in the obtained
cocrystals.

Thermal analysis using the DSC
method was performed
in order to
ascertain the thermal stabilities of precursor compoundsIazH,IazCl, andIazCN, and their cocrystals
(Table). Additionally,
the method was used to determine the phase purity of the compounds
obtained from solution experiments that also yielded single crystals.
Due to relatively poor nucleation properties in these systems, all
bulk materials were obtained after complete (or near-complete) evaporation
of the solvents used. Therefore, for cocrystallization experiments,
it could be expected that some of the solid products, in the case
of lower supramolecular yield, even when the reactants were mixed
in a stoichiometric ratio, would contain a mixture of cocrystal and
unreacted reactants. Indeed, only two cocrystals, (IazCl)­(44bpy) and (IazCl)2(44azpy), feature either one sharp endothermic signal (melting)
or a sharp endothermic signal that is composite with a broader one
(melting accompanied by decomposition) and could therefore be treated
as pure compounds, also indicating high supramolecular yield. The
other cocrystals were not obtained as pure phases, indicating lower
supramolecular yield. Despite this, we can conclude that the prepared
cocrystals are generally thermally stable up to at least 120 °C,
and that cocrystals ofIazCNare more thermally stable
than those ofIazClcocrystals.IazClcocrystals,
with the exception of (IazCl)­(44bpy), are
stable up to at least 140 °C, whileIazCNcocrystals
are stable at least up to 160 °C. This discrepancy in thermal
stabilities can be explained by the type of contacts that different
groups on azobenzene (in this work–Cl and–CN) form,
since no simple trend can otherwise be found when comparing coformer
melting and decomposition points to those of their cocrystals. Supramolecular
trimers ofIazClare connected through weak Cl···Cl
interactions, while supramolecular trimers formed fromIazCNare connected through much stronger Cphenyl–H···Nnitrilecontacts, and this could be the cause for the much
higher melting points ofIazCNcocrystals.

To conclude, in this work, we have successfully
synthesized three
novel peripherally perfluorinated azobenzene ethers with three different
substituents (−H, −Cl, −CN) on the azobenzene
unit. In order to investigate the potential of these novel large building
blocks as halogen bond donors, we performed a series of cocrystallization
experiments with nitrogen-containing acceptors and calculated the
molecular electrostatic potential values on their optimized geometries.
Altogether, we obtained eight new cocrystals with two azobenzene ethers,IazClandIazCN. In all cocrystal structures,
the expected I···N halogen bonds are present between
the azobenzene iodine atom and a bipyridine derivative nitrogen atom.
Out of 8 cocrystals, 7 cocrystals display crystal packing based on
discrete trimeric halogen-bonded complexes. Hirshfeld fingerprint
plots show that the overall electron density around the azobenzene
molecule is similar, and additionally, theIazClcocrystals
almost perfectly fit the expectation that shorter halogen bonds are
also more linear. Our study revealed several interesting results:
(i) It was determined thatIazHdoes not behave as a
halogen bond donor in its crystal structure as a pure compound. Furthermore,
since we were not able to obtain crystal products that could be characterized,
we have no evidence of whetherIazHis capable or not
of being a halogen bond donor in combination with the used nitrogen-containing
acceptors. Considering the minute differences in the relatively bulky
donor molecules, it is surprising that no crystalline material was
obtained under the same experimental conditions as for theIazCNandIazClcocrystals; (ii) We obtained only amorphous
solids by LAG in all combinations of acceptors andIazCl,IazCN, orIazH.This is a rather unusual
result, since grinding experiments are often considered a superior
method for cocrystal screening; and (iii) We obtained cocrystals only
with bulkier acceptor molecules, which is consistent with a trend
that we observed based on data in the CSD. Finally, based on our data,
we can presume that the presence of an electron-rich functional group
on the azobenzene unit, on the opposite side of the molecule in relation
to perhalogenated moiety, either (i) makes the cocrystals of the prepared
azobenzene ethers more stable in comparison to pure crystal phases
enabling weak secondary interactions which contribute largely to the
dense packing of molecules in the cocrystal and its stability, or
(ii) somewhat enhances the nucleation properties of the cocrystal
phase, thus yielding a crystalline product as opposed to mostly obtained
amorphous solids or oils.

We acknowledge the support of the project CIuK cofinanced
by the Croatian Government and the European Union through the European
Regional Development Fund-Competitiveness and Cohesion Operational
Programme (Grant KK.01.1.1.02.0016).

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.cgd.5c00749.

F.K. performed
synthesis and characterization of reactants and cocrystals by DSC,
PXRD and SCXRD. L.P. performed PXRD and SCXRD. N.B. performed calculations.
F.K., V.N. and D.C. designed the project. The manuscript was written
through contributions of both authors. All authors have given approval
to the final version of the manuscript.

This research
was supported by the Croatian Science Foundation under the project
IP-2019–04–1868.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.