Chronic non-specific low back pain (CNLBP) is a prevalent and costly condition that encourages research into self-management strategies. Mobile health (mhealth) applications are promising interventions, but current evidence on their effectiveness is still conflicting. The aim is to investigate the (cost-)effectiveness of a supervised and personalized mhealth intervention, compared with conventional exercise therapy in individuals with CNLBP.

A multicentre trial-based economic evaluation was designed to compare a mhealth intervention with conventional exercise. Participants will be recruited from two physical therapy rehabilitation clinics located within the participating centres. Adults aged between 18 and 59 years and with self-reported LBP > 12 weeks will be included. Following the collection of baseline data, participants will be randomly assigned to one of two groups using a permuted block randomization: (1) mhealth; (2) Conventional exercise delivered through a booklet. Outcome assessments will be conducted following randomisation at five distinct time points, resulting in a total follow-up period of 12 months. The primary clinical outcome is disability (Roland-Morris Disability Questionnaire), while secondary outcomes include pain (NRS), utility (Eq. 5D5L), fears and beliefs (FABQ), self-efficacy (PSEQ), and global perceived effect. A sample size of 146 participants was estimated (73 allocated to each group) to detect a 2-point between-groups difference on disability. A cost-effectiveness study will be conducted alongside the trial, comparing the two interventions in terms of costs and clinical outcomes.

While mhealth applications show promise as interventions for people with LBP, there is still a gap regarding the type of delivery and personalisation strategies. This study investigates whether the implementation of stratified and tailored care within a mobile application, based on patient-reported outcome measures and supervised by a physiotherapist, is (cost-)effective.

Trial registration:NCT06651099(registration date 21/10/2024).

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12891-025-09118-5.

Chronic non-specific low back pain (CNLBP) is a common condition, affecting between 20% and 30% of people over the age of 18 [1]. Low back pain can vary in severity, from acute and self-limited episodes to chronic and highly disabling cases [2], leading to a substantial burden to individuals, health systems and society [3]. For instance, a study conducted in Brazil estimated that the societal cost of low back pain, including treatment and lost productivity, was approximately $2.2 billion [4].

International clinical guidelines currently recommend self-management of CNLBP, based on the use of exercise and psychological therapies to reduce pain and improve quality of life [5,6]. This approach aims to empower individuals to actively engage in their health by learning appropriate exercise techniques, emotional self-regulation practices, and pain coping strategies [7,8]. A prominent resource in recent years has been mobile health (mhealth), which is characterised by the use of mobile and wireless technologies, such as mobile phones, user monitoring devices and virtual assistants, to support the management and monitoring of health conditions [9,10]. Users can receive personalised guidance, track their progress, record symptoms, monitor physical activity and receive reminders to maintain a consistent self-management routine. These technological solutions allow for greater autonomy and engagement of individuals in managing their condition, such as CNLBP, which might improve adherence to long-term self-management strategies [11].

Notwithstanding, while mhealth interventions have been considered a promising intervention for people with CNLBP in the past few years [11–13], there is still conflicting evidence about the most effective method of delivery (i.e. stand-alone or supervised). For example, a recent systematic review [12] showed that the use of mhealth alone and without healthcare professional supervision was no more effective than usual care in reducing pain and disability in patients with CNLBP. Nevertheless, m-health interventions combined with other strategies (e.g. telephone calls, real-time monitoring, website information) led to small improvements in pain intensity and disability in people with low back pain compared with usual care alone [11].

A systematic review highlighted that the majority of available mhealth applications focused on LBP management are not usually tailored to the clinical or functional aspects of people with LBP, providing a ‘one size fits all’ approach that may not be adequate [8]. Thus, the delivery of personalised content seems to be a gap in mhealth applications, including in Brazil. In this context, a recent study [14] has shown that Dutch individuals with LBP in this intervention improved; however, there were no differences compared to the control group, where patients received a combination of exercise, self-management, and physical activity encouragement delivered face-to-face by a physiotherapist. The lack of between-group differences was mainly explained by the similarity of the content between both interventions, insufficient support for patients’ self-management behavior, and lack of consideration of the suitability of the intervention, meaning that some patients may not benefit from mhealth strategies [14]. We aim to overcome some of these limitations by investigating the self-management of CNLBP provided by a mhealth application, tailored to the clinical and functional condition and considering aspects of suitability for this population. In addition, we will combine mhealth with professional supervision and a stratified care model, which entails a personalised approach [15], to investigate whether it can effectively improve disability, self-management and adherence compared to usual care provided by physiotherapists in Brazil using conventional exercise therapy alone. We also want to investigate whether this intervention could be useful in the context of a middle-income country, such as Brazil. This is important because the prevalence of disabling LBP is increasing in middle-income countries [3] and may be influenced by factors such as inequalities in health care [16] and fragile social support systems [17]. This is particularly relevant as technological advances have created new ways of managing CNLBP that could improve self-management in this population and provide interesting practical applications for the health system.

Therefore, the aim of this study will be to investigate the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a supervised and personalized mhealth intervention, compared with conventional exercise therapy in individuals with chronic non-specific low back pain. It is hypothesized that the combined mhealth intervention will be more effective (superior) than the conventional intervention.

We designed a multicenter trial-based economic evaluation comparing mhealth intervention versus a conventional exercise therapy intervention alone. The study was registered at clinicaltrials.gov (NCT06651099, 21/10/2024) and will be reported according to the Consolidated Health Economic Evaluation Reporting Standards (CHEERS 2022) statement [18]. The current protocol paper was reported following recommendations from the SPIRIT (Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional Trials) Statement [19].

Participants will be recruited from two rehabilitation clinics in the city of Brasília and Campo Grande. The interventions will be provided at the two rehabilitation clinics under supervision of the trial team. After the baseline measurements, all participants will be randomly assigned to one of the groups: (1) blended mhealth intervention (mhG) or (2) conventional exercise therapy delivered through a booklet (beG).

Participants will be included if the following criteria are met: (1) Adults aged between 18 and 59 years); (2) Self-reported low back pain for more than 12 consecutive weeks prior to the study, with pain intensity ≥ 4 in the numerical rating scale (NRS); (3) Not having participated in physiotherapy sessions for treatment of low back pain for at least 6 months prior to the start of the study; (4) Having a smartphone withinternetaccess; (5) Self-management activation classified as Level 2 or higher (i.e., classifications of low, medium and high knowledge about self-management), according to the Patient Activation Measure (PAM) questionnaire. The 13-item PAM questionnaire, validated for the Brazilian Portuguese, will be used to assess self-management activation [20]. The term individual activation in relation to self-management refers to the level of knowledge, skill, and confidence that an individual must autonomously manage and actively perform care related to their health, as perceived in their level of ability [21]. Each item on the PAM has an ordinal response scale, made up of five options: Strongly disagree (1 point), Disagree (2 points), Agree (3 points), Strongly agree (4 points), and Not Applicable (0 points). Thus, PAM 13 scores range from 13 to 52 points. The raw score is calculated by adding up item scores. If there are items not answered or marked as “not applicable”, the raw score must be divided by the number of items completed and multiplied by the total number of items in the questionnaire (13 for PAM 13). If necessary, the raw score is converted to the nearest whole number [20].

Participants will be excluded according to the following criteria: (1) History of spinal trauma or fracture; (2) Diagnosis of spinal osteoarthritis, fibromyalgia, or rheumatic diseases; (3) Referred pain (from viscera, appendicitis, abdominal and pelvic pain); (4) Previous spinal surgery; (5) Presence of red flags, signs and/or symptoms of neurological impairment and/or pain radiating below the knee; (6) Pregnancy.

All participants will be invited to take part in the study by signing the Informed Consent. The study was granted approval by the Institutional Ethics Committee under protocols n. 6.910.170 (CEP/UFMS) and n. 6.674.643 (CEP/FCTS/UnB).

The Open Epi program [22] was used for the sample size calculation. We designed the study to detect a 2-point between-groups difference in disability as measured by the Roland-Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ) [23], with an estimated standard deviation of 3.9 [24,25]. Using a statistical power of 80%, an alpha value of 5% for the comparison between groups, a total sample of 122 participants was defined. Considering a dropout of approximately 20%, a total sample of 146 participants was estimated (n: 73 per group).

Outcome assessments will be carried out after the randomization, at four different time-points during a 12-month follow-up: (1) Baseline (time point ‘1’, namely pre-intervention); (2) at the end of the intervention period (time point ‘2’; around eight to ten weeks from baseline); (3) follow-up 1 (time point ‘3’, 26 weeks after baseline); (4) follow-up 2 (time point ‘4’, 39 weeks after baseline), and (5) follow-up 3 (time point ‘5’, 52 weeks after baseline). Details are provided in Table1. All of the measurement instruments used in this study have been found to be valid and reliable in previous research. Data collection of the primary and secondary outcomes will be performed preferably using online communication via face calls.

Disability will be the primary clinical outcome and will be measured using the Roland-Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ), which was adapted and validated for Brazilian Portuguese [26]. The questionnaire consists of 24 items with 0 = no and 1 = yes, and the total score ranges from zero (no disability) to 24 (severe disability) [26].

The secondary outcomes will be pain intensity, quality of life, fears and beliefs, self-efficacy, and global perceived effect.

Pain intensity: will be measured using the Numerical Rating Scale (NRS). This scale is characterized by a line with unit scores ranging from 0 to 10, where zero corresponds to no pain and ten corresponds to the worst pain ever experienced. Participants will be instructed to mark a number on the line, representing the pain intensity in the last week [27,28].

Health-related quality of life: The Brazilian-portuguese version of the EQ-5D-5 L questionnaire available at Euroqol [29] will be used to assess participants’ health states based on five dimensions: mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort, and anxiety/depression. Each dimension has five response levels (i.e., no problems, slight problems, moderate problems, severe problems, and extreme problems). As the Brazilian tariffs for this instrument have not been developed by the time of submission of this protocol, we will use the Uruguayan population-based value set [30] to value EQ-5D-5 L responses and convert health states into utility values. If the Brazilian tariffs are available by the start of data analysis, we will use this value set.

Fear and beliefs: will be assessed using the validated Brazilian version of the FAB-Q (Fear Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire) [31]. The FABQ consists of 16 self-report items, divided into two subscales: FABQ-Work, which addresses individuals’ fears and beliefs in relation to work, and FABQ-Phys, which addresses their fears and beliefs in relation to physical activities. Each item is assessed on a seven-point Likert scale, ranging from 0 (completely disagree) to 6 (completely agree). These subscales are designed to assess the degree to which fear of pain and movement influences an individual’s behavior, especially in cases of chronic pain or musculoskeletal conditions [31].

Will be assessed using the Pain Self-Efficacy Questionnaire (PSEQ) [32], translated and validated to Brazilian Portuguese [33,34]. Previous studies showed that the PSEQ is responsive in people with LBP [35,36]. The PSEQ is a 10-item questionnaire designed to assess the confidence of people with persistent pain in performing various activities, even in the presence of pain. Each item is scored on a 7-point numerical scale (scores from 0 to 6), where 0 means ‘not at all confident’ and 6 means ‘completely confident’. The items assess self-efficacy for a range of functions, including housework, socialising, work, and pain management without medication and with medication. The total score is obtained by summing the scores of the 10 items, resulting in a value between 0 and 60. Higher scores indicate greater perceived self-efficacy.

The perceived recovery will be assessed at the end of the intervention period and follow-up moments using the Global Perceived Effect Scale (11-point scale), ranging from − 5 (‘much worse’), 0 (‘no change’) to 5 (‘completely recovered’) [37].

Baseline measurements will be conducted face-to-face. As baseline measures, we will assess personal and sociodemographic data (age, gender, height, mass, schooling) and clinical characteristics (duration of pain), as well as catastrophizing measured by the PCS (Pain Catastrophizing Scale), low back pain prognosis and eHealth Literacy.

We will use the validated version for Brazilian-portuguese of the PCS scale [38] to assess catastrophic thoughts related to chronic pain. The PCS allows the rapid identification of individuals at risk of psychological consequences resulting from pain, which may require additional psychosocial assessment. The PCS is a self-administered consisting of 13 items to assess catastrophizing behavior. It is divided into three domains: helplessness, magnification, and rumination. The items are assessed on a 5-point Likert-type scale, on which information on intensity and frequency is represented, with the following five response levels for each Likert item: (0) not at all, (1) to a slight degree, (3) to a moderate degree, (4) to a high degree, (5) and all the time. The scores for the three domains are given by the sum of the corresponding items (amplification 6, 7, and 13; rumination 8–11; and helplessness 1–5 and 12), and the total score is calculated by the sum of all the items, which ranges from 0 to 52 points.

The risk of poor prognosis for low back pain will be measured using the Brazilian Portuguese version of the STarT (Subgroups Target Treatment) Back Screening Tool Questionnaire [39]. This questionnaire classifies the risk of poor prognosis in individuals with low back pain, based on physical and psychosocial factors (referring to discomfort, catastrophizing, fear, anxiety and depression). The questionnaire consists of 9 items (4 are related to referred pain, dysfunction and comorbidities such as shoulder or neck pain and 5 items make up the psychosocial subscale). The prognosis is classified as: high risk (presence of a high level of psychosocial factors, with or without the presence of physical factors), medium risk (presence of physical and psychosocial factors, but at levels lower than those of participants classified as high risk) and low risk (presence of minimal physical and psychosocial factors). A total score of 0 to 3 points represents low risk. If there are values greater than 3 in the total score, the psychosocial subscale score, composed of questions 5 to 9, is considered. If the score on this subscale is less than or equal to 3 points, the participant is classified as medium risk, and if it is greater than 3 points, as high risk.

To assess digital literacy, the Brazilian Portuguese version of the eHealth Literacy Scale (eHEALS) instrument will be used [40]. The eHEALS is an eight-item scale with 5-points Likert-scale in each item, ranging from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally agree). The sum score ranges from 8 to 40 points, and higher scores indicate a higher level of digital health literacy [40,41].

Blinding the therapists will not be possible due to the nature of the interventions. Because outcomes are self-reported, blinding participants to the intervention will also not be possible. However, an assessor who will be unaware of the group allocation will perform the data collection. The researcher responsible for the statistical analysis will also be blinded to the group allocation (i.e. they will receive the data sheet with the groups/individuals coded numerically).

Participants will be randomized into one of the groups according to a table of random numbers within permuted blocks, stratified by intervention center. The randomization sequence will be prepared in Microsoft Excel, and the allocation sequence will be implemented via telephone calls or e-mail to an independent researcher, which will be blinded (i.e., no knowledge of the aims nor methods, and will have no contact with the RCT team). This procedure will ensure a concealed allocation and prevent common biases of block randomization by adopting random block sizes (i.e., permuted blocks).

The structure of the mobile application is initially characterized by an anamnesis containing personal and clinical information and the patient’s pain history. After the anamnesis, pain assessment will be carried out (using the numeric scale - NRS), disability (Roland Morris Questionnaire) and low back pain prognosis (StartBack Questionnaire), using interactive assessment forms within the application environment.

Individuals enrolled in the mhealth intervention will complete an in-app brief survey that includes an anamnesis covering personal and clinical information, as well as the patient’s pain history. Following the anamnesis, the main assessment characterized by pain intensity (using the Numeric Rating Scale - NRS), disability (via the Roland-Morris Questionnaire), and low back pain prognosis (using the StartBack Questionnaire) will be conducted.

Based on their responses, users will be classified into three subgroups according to the severity of disability—high, moderate, or low—and the risk of poor prognosis—high, medium, or low. This stratified classification will be used by the mobile application to personalize the content according to the user’s clinical condition. The tailored content will include exercises focused on mobility, flexibility, core stabilization, and strengthening. Additionally, the mobile application will provide educational material on pain and health, covering topics such as the neurophysiology of pain, the multidimensional nature of low back pain, myths and facts about the condition, the importance of sleep, and stress management, which will include relaxation techniques and mindfulness. All content will be evidence-based, using clinical guidelines, systematic reviews, and other high-quality studies to support inclusion in the mobile application.

The mhealth intervention group will be instructed to perform the exercises twice a week for 8 weeks, lasting approximately 30 min per session. Participants will be instructed to watch the health education content provided by the app (e.g., short videos, infographics), and to take breaks during each session. Guidance will be provided during the intervention and weekly monitoring by a physiotherapist as described above (adherence topic).

In the first week of the intervention there will be two face-to-face sessions supervised by the physiotherapist to familiarize the participants with the mobile application and provide instructions on the intervention. A further face-to-face session will take place in week 4 to monitor the intervention.

Participants will be monitored by the therapist via a messaging app or telephone calls, for recommendations, questions, as well as reports on adherence, the number of sessions carried out and possible adverse events.

The individuals in the comparator group will undergo the same assessment procedures described for the intervention group (anamnesis and questionnaires). The questionnaires will be applied in an online format via electronic forms.

After the assessment, all participants will receive a printed booklet containing a description and recommendations for carrying out the exercise program at home, which will be characterized by general exercises (e.g., strengthening, mobilization, balance). The individuals will be instructed to perform the exercises twice a week for 8 weeks, following the same duration of the experimental group.

Participants will be monitored and supervised by another physiotherapist via messaging app or telephone calls, following the same procedures reported in the experimental group.

Adherence to the intervention will be measured, on both groups, using the Brazilian Portuguese validated version of the Exercise Adherence Rating Scale (EARS-Br) [42]. We will use section B, which directly assesses adherence behavior. Section B has six items that are summed and scored using a Likert scale (ranging from 0 = totally agree to 4 = totally disagree). The total score ranges from 0 to 24, and higher scores indicate greater adherence. We will also measure adherence via the mobile application (in the experimental group), by monitoring the daily use via app login, and by monitoring if the users accessed the daily sessions (videos and contents displayed in the application).

Adverse effects will be monitored via text messaging and/or telephone calls and were defined as unintended responses that occur during or after an intervention but are not necessarily caused by the intervention. An adverse event was defined as an event for which a causal relationship between the intervention and the event is at least a reasonable possibility [43,44].

A cost-effectiveness study will be conducted alongside the randomized trial, comparing both interventions (mhealth versus booklet exercises) in terms of their costs and clinical outcomes. A self-report questionnaire will be used in which participants will indicate the quantity and frequency of inputs/resources used, at the same time-points of the clinical trial.

The perspectives of the public health system and society will be adopted. In the first perspective, only the costs incurred by the Brazilian public health system (in Portuguese,Sistema Único de Saúde) will be included in the analysis; consisting of costs related to consultations, medications, surgeries, exams, hospital admissions, and other relevant procedures. In the societal perspective, intervention costs, healthcare utilization costs, costs incurred by participants related to transportation, and when applicable, costs related to paying caregivers (i.e., informal care costs) will be added, as well as costs related to absenteeism (lost workdays), presenteeism (loss of productivity at work) and unpaid productivity losses (reduced productivity in unpaid activities, such as volunteer work).

The time horizon will be one (1) year (i.e., eight weeks of intervention plus 10 months of follow-up), which does not require the use of discount rates on costs and clinical outcomes.

The QALY will be calculated from the utilities assessed at each of the 5 time points by the EQ-5D-5 L questionnaire using the area under the curve method [45]. In this approach, the average utility values between each two time points for each participant are multiplied by the corresponding time periods in weeks. The resulting values are then summed to obtain the total QALYs over the study period (12 months).

Cost outcomes will include healthcare costs (i.e., healthcare utilization costs and intervention costs) and total societal costs (i.e., healthcare utilization costs, intervention costs, informal care costs, and lost productivity costs). All costs will be collected in national currency (Brazilian reais - R$). The amounts will later be converted to International dollars (Int$) based on the latest available World Bank Purchasing Power Parity (PPP). Information on costs will be obtained from information systems available at a national level: for medication costs, the Health Price Bank (in Portuguese,BPS), publicly available by the Ministry of Health; for medical consultations, exams, hospital admissions and other procedures, the average values transferred by the Ministry of Health to health services, using the reference table for prices and reimbursement of the Brazilian public health system (in Portuguese,SIGTAP). Productivity costs will be estimated considering the self-reported income of the participants.

The costs of the intervention will be estimated based on the number of physiotherapy sessions carried out by the participants and the materials used in each session. The unit cost of a physiotherapy session will be based on the average cost paid by the Ministry of Health to public health services, available on the health system reference payment table (SIGTAP), available athttp://sigtap.datasus.gov.br/. Material costs will be estimated based on Ministry of Health purchasing information, if available, or via estimates on market prices information.

Intervention costs will also encompass the cost per individual for the development, hosting and maintenance of the intervention offered to the mhealth group via the mobile application. These costs will be estimated by dividing the total costs (i.e. development, hosting, and maintenance) by the estimated number of people with low back pain who could be potential users of the mobile application in Brazil, following a previous study using a similar methodology [14].

To estimate the absenteeism and presenteeism costs, the self-reported income of the participants will be used, and the hourly wage will be calculated considering the number of workable days, monthly.

Absenteeism will be measured as the number of working hours absent from paid work due to CNLBP and will be calculated by dividing the self-reported gross monthly salary by their total number of workable days per month. Presenteeism will be calculated based on the participants’ self-reported data, which will indicate how many days they went to work while suffering from low back pain and the percentage of lost productivity in the paid work environment.

To obtain the equivalents of working days lost due to presenteeism, the number of days will be multiplied by a self-reported inefficiency score ranging from 0 (as effective as in good health) to 1 (totally ineffective) [46]. Accordingly, presenteeism costs will be calculated by multiplying the total number of days of presenteeism by the associated costs.

Analyses will be performed following the intention-to-treat principles and complete-cases, using RStudio. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (costs per clinical outcome) and cost-utility ratios (costs per QALY gained) will be calculated from the perspectives of the public health system and society. We will also perform sensitivity analysis considering the clinical effectiveness and costs stratified by the risk of poor LBP prognosis (low, medium and high) in each group.

Missing data related to cost and clinical effectiveness will be filled with multiple chained equation imputation (MICE). The imputation model will include variables related to missing data and outcomes, and potential confounders, covering all background variables such as costs and utility. To deal with the skewed distribution of costs, predictive mean matching will be applied within the MICE procedure. The number of imputed data sets will be increased until the proportion of missing data is less than 5%, creating a total of five imputed data sets [47]. Each imputed data set will be analyzed individually, and the final estimates will be aggregated following Rubin’s rules [48].

Using SUR (seemingly unrelated regression), differences in costs and clinical effects between treatment groups during the 12-month follow-up will be estimated. The model will adjust cost and effect estimates using covariates such as group, age, sex, baseline utility, baseline costs, and CNLBP prognosis at baseline.

Costs typically do not follow a normal distribution, therefore, joint uncertainty related to differences in costs and effects will be estimated using the accelerated bias-corrected bootstrap method with 5,000 replications. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) will be determined by dividing the difference in costs between groups by the difference in effects. The uncertainty associated with ICERs will be illustrated through plots of cost-effect pairs obtained by bootstrapping cost-effectiveness diagrams [49]. Cost-effectiveness acceptability curves (CEAC) will be created to illustrate the probability of mhealth group (new intervention) being more cost-effective compared to the exercise booklet group, considering a range of willingness-to-pay (WTP) thresholds.

This study describes the design and methods of the eBack trial. The aim is to investigate the (cost-)effectiveness of a supervised mhealth application intervention, focusing on short and long-term effects, compared with conventional exercise therapy alone, for people with CNLBP.

One of the main strengths of this study is the use of stratified and tailored care, embedded in the mobile application, based on patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) and supervised by a physiotherapist. In addition, we decided to include participants with minimal level of skills and confidence towards self-management and with smartphones connected to theinternet, to further reduce the likelihood of negative attitudes towards mobile applications, and to prevent attrition bias. We chose to adopt this inclusion criteria to further improve the suitability of the mhealth intervention and on the assumption that mobile applications may not be beneficial for all individuals with CNLBP, based on the results of a previous trial [14]. This study was designed to provide robust evidence on the (cost-)effectiveness of combining a mhealth application with physiotherapist supervision and monitoring, in the context of a middle-income country. The use of specific PROMs [8,50] will ensure the assessment of disability and pain intensity associated with the LBP prognosis classification to deliver the most appropriate content (e.g., mobility exercises, pain education) which will be focused on the user’s specific health condition and will help monitoring the progress during the intervention period. The study will also ensure that users receive appropriate and evidence-based content.

In addition, the trial-based economic evaluation was designed to take advantage of an experimental design that maximises internal validity and collects economic data alongside, rather than funding a stand-alone economic evaluation study. This is relevant because despite the potential of mhealth applications to improve the management of CNLBP, further rigorous research is still needed to substantiate their effectiveness [8]. The use of tailored apps could enhance patient acceptance and adherence, which would in turn lead to improved clinical outcomes [8]. Furthermore, the number of cost-effectiveness studies of mobile applications for the management of patients with CNLBP is limited, representing a gap in the literature [14] and confirming the practical applications of the present study.

Additional methodological considerations should be highlighted. We have designed a multi-centre trial and an appropriate randomisation procedure will be used to ensure a balanced number of participants in each centre. Face-to-face sessions will take place before the start and halfway through the intervention period to ensure adherence and to support participants. Regarding adherence, previous studies [12,51] showed heterogeneous monitoring strategies in mhealth trials, e.g. by monitoring the number of complete active days of app use or the average time spent using the app. We decided to adopt a range of monitoring strategies, e.g. monitoring via the app usage and via messaging or phone call, in addition to the face-to-face sessions, to prevent bias. This is an essential part of mhealth trials, as low adherence to mobile applications might underestimate the effectiveness estimates [51].

A limitation of this study is the impossibility of blinding participants and therapists due to the nature of the interventions. Another possibility is the dropout of participants, due to the long-term follow-up of 12 months. To minimize this risk, we will ensure that the same assessors conduct the follow-up measurements using different strategies such as phone calls and face-to-face assessments. Another limitation may be the relatively small sample size for an economic evaluation, as clinical outcomes are usually adopted in sample size calculations. As economic evaluation data tend to be skewed, an extremely large sample size would be required, which may be impractical or unethical. We acknowledged this issue and included uncertainty analyses to check the robustness of the results, as recommended by the Brazilian economic evaluation guideline [52] and international recommendations [53].

The results of this study will help to understand whether stratified care is (cost-)effective when delivered via a mobile application intervention and will provide results applicable to health system managers and decision makers.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.