The Kocher maneuver is the most common surgical approach for duodenal tumors. However, the extensive dissection required for the second and third portions of the duodenum complicates laparoscopic procedures. This study introduces the anterior and transmesocolic approaches in laparoscopic and endoscopic cooperative surgery for duodenal neoplasms (D-LECS). Thirty patients who underwent D-LECS at our institute between November 2016 and August 2024 were included. The median age was 62.5 years, and the median pathological tumor size was 15 mm. Tumors were located in the first, second, and third portions of the duodenum in 5, 20, and 5 patients, respectively. The anterior approach was performed in the first to upper second portion of the duodenum in seven patients; the transmesocolic approach was performed in the second to third portions of the duodenum in 23 patients. All patients underwent full-thickness suture reinforcement after endoscopic submucosal dissection. The median operation time and bleeding volume were 281 min and 10 mL, respectively, for the anterior approach and 297 min and 0 mL, respectively, for the transmesocolic approach. Postoperative complications, such as delayed perforation, were not observed. All patients underwent curative resection. Pathological analyses revealed 21, 7, 1, and 1 case of adenoma, adenocarcinoma, gastrointestinal tumor, and neuroendocrine tumor, respectively. Disease recurrence was not observed during the follow-up (median, 35 months). D-LECS using the anterior and transmesocolic approaches based on tumor location may allow for individualized surgical management in patients with early duodenal neoplasms.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-17296-4.

Duodenal cancer is rare, with reported incidences of 2.9–4.3 per 1,000,000 person-years in Western countries1,2and 23.7 per 1,000,000 person-years in Japan3. Moreover, duodenal gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are extremely rare, accounting for 5% of all GISTs in Japan; the incidence of all GISTs is 1–2 per 100,000 person-years4. Pancreaticoduodenectomy after chemotherapy is the standard treatment strategy for advanced duodenal cancers, including Vater’s ampulla tumors. Although minimally invasive techniques, such as laparoscopic surgery and endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD), have been developed for digestive system tumors, the efficacy of these modalities for duodenal neoplasms remains unclear. Several studies have demonstrated the clinical utility of endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) and ESD for duodenal neoplasms5. However, the risk of severe complications, such as intraoperative and delayed perforation caused by severe peritonitis, should be noted6,7. Considering the risks associated with ESD, laparoscopic partial resection may be a safer approach with good oncological curability. However, this procedure often results in unnecessary excision of the duodenal wall, which can cause duodenal constriction and obstruction. Hiki et al.8,9reported laparoscopic and endoscopic cooperative surgery (LECS) for GIST, termed LECS for duodenal tumors (D-LECS), which enables reinforcement of the ESD site immediately after the procedure to prevent delayed leakage. Although several studies have corroborated the safety and feasibility of D-LECS10–12details regarding the surgical procedures for D-LECS remain controversial. In several studies, the Kocher maneuver was performed to expose the ESD site; however, this approach sometimes requires extensive dissection of the second and third portions of the duodenum. Herein, we report two surgical approaches for D-LECS based on tumor location to facilitate access to the ESD site.

This study retrospectively enrolled 30 patients with non-ampullary duodenal neoplasms, such as adenomas and early adenocarcinomas, who were diagnosed using white-light imaging and image-enhanced endoscopy (IEE) at Kagoshima University Hospital between November 2016 and August 2024. Biopsy of duodenal lesions causes fibrosis in the submucosal layer, making ESD difficult. Therefore, endoscopic biopsy was not performed in principle.

Surgery was performed using a 5-port laparoscopic setup under general anesthesia, with the patient in the open-leg position. First, a 12 mm laparoscopic camera port was inserted through the umbilicus, and pneumoperitoneum was induced with carbon dioxide. Five trocars were inserted, as shown in Fig.1. Using bed rotation, the patient was placed in a head-up position (5–10°) during laparoscopic procedures and in the left lower half of the lateral decubitus position during ESD. Pneumoperitoneum was stopped during ESD.

Trocar placement. A 12 mm laparoscopy camera port was inserted through the umbilicus, and four additional trocars were inserted.

Before initiating endoscopy, the upper jejunum was clamped by removing the long intestinal clip. The tumor location was confirmed using both endoscopy and laparoscopy. If necessary, laparoscopic adhesiotomy was performed to enhance operability for both endoscopy and laparoscopy.

Before the endoscopic procedure, marking around the lesion was performed using an electrical knife. Sodium hyaluronate (MucoUp; Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) was injected into the submucosal layer of the target region via carbon dioxide insufflation. Pre-mucosal incision and submucosal dissection were performed using Dual Knife J (KD-655Q; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) with the water pressure method13in which the duodenal lumen was filled with normal saline, and the pocket creation method, in which a submucosal pocket was created without a full circumferential incision14. A traction device (S-O clip; Zeon Medical, Tokyo, Japan) was used as needed.

The anterior or transmesocolic approach for laparoscopic dissection of the duodenum was performed depending on the tumor location. Laparoscopic dissection was conducted using coagulating shears (Harmonic 1000i or 1100; Ethicon, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States; or SonoSurg; Olympus Medical System, Tokyo, Japan).

The anterior approach using the Kocher maneuver was utilized for tumors located in the first portion of the duodenum. First, the right side of the greater omentum was exfoliated from the right gastroepiploic artery, and the transverse mesocolon was dissected from the pancreatic head and duodenum from the left side. Second, the right colic flexure was mobilized. Finally, the operator changed position from the left to the right side of the patient, and the Kocher maneuver was performed until the ESD site was sufficiently exposed (Fig.2).

The anterior approach. Mobilization of the right colic flexure followed by the Kocher maneuver.

The transmesocolic approach was used for tumors located in the second and third portions of the duodenum. All the tumors were located within 4 cm of the major duodenal papilla on contrast fluoroscopic study. First, the transverse colon was lifted cranially, and the second to third portions of the duodenum were elevated behind the thin mesocolon membrane. After pulling the transverse mesocolon upward using one or two organ retractors to maintain a clear surgical field, gradual dissection around the duodenum was initiated (Fig.3a, b). During dissection, endoscopically transmitted light was used to check the ESD site (Fig.3c). The extent of dissection was maintained at ≥ 2 cm around the ESD site.

The transmesocolic approach. (a) Lifting of the transverse mesocolon using organ retractors. (b) Gradual dissection around the duodenum. (c) Use of endoscopic transmitted light to visualize the endoscopic submucosal dissection site.

After dissecting the duodenum, full-thickness suture reinforcement of the ESD scar was performed. All needle handling was monitored using an endoscope to ensure full-thickness suturing (Fig.4a). The number of stitches depended on the size of the ESD scar; 4–10 sutures were required in almost all cases. The suture direction was generally along the short axis to avoid stenosis. Depending on the tumor location, such as the proximal side of the papilla ampulla, the suture direction, as well as the angle of the laparoscopic devices, was adjusted to an oblique axis. Finally, endoscopic mucosal clipping was performed (Fig.4b). A closed drainage tube was placed near the ESD site, and the transverse mesocolon was closed using a running barbed suture (Fig.4c).

Full-thickness reinforced suturing of the endoscopic submucosal dissection bed. (a) All needle handlings were followed with an endoscope to ensure full-thickness suturing. (b) Endoscopic clipping reinforcement. (c) Drainage tube placement and mesocolon closure with running barbed suture.

Statistical analysis was conducted using JMP Pro 18 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North Carolina, USA). Continuous variables were compared using the Mann–Whitney U-test. Categorical variables were analyzed using Fisher’s exact test. A P-value of < 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance.

The patients’ median age was 62.5 years (range, 47–84 years), and 17 were men. The median BMI (body mass index) was 22.2 (range, 17.6–27.5) and Performance status (PS) was favorable (PS 0) in all patients. The median tumor size at preoperative diagnosis was 15 mm (range, 7–27 mm). The macroscopic tumor types were 0-I, 0-IIa, and 0-IIc, with submucosal tumors (SMT) noted in 2, 18, 8, and 2 cases, respectively. Tumors were located in the first, second, and third portions of the duodenum in 5, 20, and 5 cases, respectively. Regarding the horizontal localization of the tumor in the duodenum, 1, 12, 8, and 9 tumors were located at the papilla-ampulla side, the counterpart of the papilla-ampulla, the anterior wall, and the posterior wall, respectively (Table1). Here, 7 and 23 patients underwent the anterior and transmesocolic approaches, respectively. Five cases out of seven were men for the anterior approach and twelve cases out of twenty-three were men for the transmesocolic approach. The median age was 70 years (range, 58–84 years) for the anterior approach and 62 years (range, 47–79) for the transmesocolic approach. The median BMI was 22.1 (range, 17.6–24.6) for the anterior approach and 22.4 (range, 19.7–27.5) for the transmesocolic approach. The macroscopic tumor types were 0-I, 0-IIa, 0-IIc, and SMT noted in 1, 3, 3, and 0 cases for the anterior approach and, 1, 15, 5, and 2 cases for the transmesocolic approach, respectively. The horizontal localization of the tumor in the duodenum, 0, 1, 4 and 2 tumors were located at the papilla-ampulla side, the counterpart of the papilla-ampulla, the anterior wall, and the posterior wall for the anterior approach and, 1, 11, 4, and 7 tumors for the transmesocolic approach, respectively. There were no statistical differences in these clinical features described above. The median tumor size was 12 mm (range, 7–20 mm) for the anterior approach and 20 mm (range, 8–27 mm) for the transmesocolic approach; a significant difference was observed between the two approaches (p= 0.02). Tumors were located in the first, second, and third portions of the duodenum in 5, 2, and 0 cases for the anterior approach, and 0, 18, and 5 cases for the transmesocolic approach, respectively; a significant difference was observed between the two approaches (p< 0.001). The median total operation time was 281 min (range, 168–401 min) for the anterior approach and 297 min (range, 182–535 min) for the transmesocolic approach (p= 0.76). The median ESD time was 47 min (range, 20–180 min) for the anterior approach and 75 min (range, 5–120 min) for the transmesocolic approach (p= 0.66). The median laparoscopic time was 135 min (range, 22–359 min) for the anterior approach and 138 min (range, 68–421 min) for the transmesocolic approach (p= 0.81). The median amount of bleeding was 10 mL (range, 0–126 mL) for the anterior approach and 0 mL (range, 0–1117 mL) for the transmesocolic approach (p= 0.50) (Table2). During ESD, seromuscular layer injury occurred in four cases, and the right branch of the middle colic artery was injured by the high-frequency ESD knife in one case. All intraoperative complications were treated with laparoscopic suturing. No postoperative complications, such as delayed perforation or pancreatitis, were observed.

BMI, body mass index; GIST, gastrointestinal stromal tumor; NET, neuroendocrine tumor; PS, performance status; SMT, submucosal tumor.

All patients underwent curative resection. Pathological analysis revealed 21 cases of adenoma, 7 of adenocarcinoma, 1 of gastrointestinal tumor, and 1 of neuroendocrine tumor (Table1). All seven adenocarcinoma cases showed intramucosal invasion without vessel invasion or exposure at the resection edge. No disease recurrence was observed via endoscopy or CT surveillance during the median follow-up period of 35 months.

Five patients underwent additional surgical procedures during D-LECS (Table2). Three patients were converted to laparoscopic full-thickness tumor resection; among them, one underwent duodenojejunal bypass due to a large defect in the duodenal wall. One patient underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and another underwent ESD for a remnant gastric adenoma after subtotal esophagectomy. These additional procedures extended the total surgical time compared to the simple D-LECS procedure.

To compare the two different D-LECS approaches without surgical bias, 25 cases, excluding the five described above, were re-evaluated. The anterior and transmesocolic approaches were used in 4 and 21 cases, respectively. The patients’ median age was 65 years (range, 58–74 years) for the anterior approach and 62 years (range, 47–79 years) for the transmesocolic approach. The median BMI was 19.7 (range, 17.6–24.6) for the anterior approach and 21.8 (range, 19.7–27.5) for the transmesocolic approach. Tumors were located in the first, second, and third portions of the duodenum in 2, 2, and 0 cases for the anterior approach, and 0, 16, and 5 cases for the transmesocolic approach, respectively; a significant difference was observed between the two approaches (p< 0.01). The median tumor size was 15.5 mm (range, 8–20 mm) for the anterior approach and 20 mm (range, 9–27 mm) for the transmesocolic approach. There were no statistical differences in these clinical features described above. The median total operation time was 258 min (range, 168–401 min) for the anterior approach and 295 min (range, 182–416 min) for the transmesocolic approach. The median ESD time was 45 min (range, 20–100 min) for the anterior approach and 77 min (range, 45–120 min) for the transmesocolic approach. The median laparoscopic procedure time was 126 min (range, 66–359 min) for the anterior approach and 126 min (range, 68–233 min) for the transmesocolic approach. The median amount of bleeding was 20 mL (range, 5–32 mL) for the anterior approach and 0 mL (range, 0–75 mL) for the transmesocolic approach. No significant differences were observed in these factors between the two approaches (Table3and Supplemental Fig.1). Body mass index tended to positively correlate with the total operation time, laparoscopic time, and the amount of bleeding (Supplemental Fig.2).

Surgical parameters in 25cases without additional procedures.

Owing to advancements in endoscopic techniques and devices, superficial digestive tumors can now be resected using endoscopic procedures such as EMR and ESD. Globally, ESD is widely used for early gastric and colorectal tumors, and its feasibility and safety in managing these diseases have been reported. However, ESD for non-ampullary duodenal neoplasms is associated with several clinical challenges; anatomical features, such as the winding lumen of the duodenum, complicate endoscopic handling. Because of the thin wall of the duodenum, the incidences of intra- and postoperative duodenal perforation are higher after duodenal ESD than after gastric and colorectal ESD. Kato et al. reported that the incidences of intra- and postoperative perforation after duodenal ESD were 9.3% and 2.3%, respectively. Duodenal perforations can lead to severe peritonitis and peritoneal abscess formation, and can sometimes be fatal.

To avoid such complications, D-LECS was developed to prevent perforation of the ESD site in the duodenum. Several studies have reported the safety and feasibility of D-LECS10–12. In fact, LECS makes it possible to rapidly recover from complications such as serosal injury and bleeding during ESD. Additionally, Kanaji et al. recently validated the feasibility of D-LECS in a single-arm confirmatory trial15. However, in almost all of these reports, only the anterior approach with the Kocher maneuver was used to access the ESD site. This procedure sometimes requires extensive dissection in the second and third portions of the duodenum and is time-consuming.

Herein, we report two different surgical approaches based on tumor location to allow easier access to the ESD site. The anterior approach using the Kocher maneuver is commonly used in upper gastrointestinal surgery, whereas the transmesocolic approach is typically used in colorectal surgery. Although these approaches are straightforward, the transmesocolic approach may pose challenges for upper gastrointestinal surgeons. The ESD time tended to increase with tumor size, but no differences were observed in total operation time, laparoscopic time, and total bleeding between the two approaches. No patient complained of clinical symptoms of duodenal paralysis after D-LECS. In several cases, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed normal peristaltic activity of the duodenum one month after D-LECS (data not shown). These results highlight the importance of selecting the appropriate D-LECS approach based on tumor location, which may be suitable for simple and individualized laparoscopic procedures. In this study, no tumor was located in the ascending fourth part of the duodenum, and there was no need to operate near the surgical trunk. If a tumor were located in the ascending fourth part of the duodenum, we would have performed partial resection of the duodenum.

This study had several limitations. First, it was a single-center study with a small number of cases. Second, there was a technical surgical bias between the anterior and transmesocolic approaches. Third, clinical outcomes were not compared between D-LECS and ESD alone. In the future, a multicenter, large randomized cohort study comparing the clinical feasibility of D-LECS, ESD alone, and ESD with an endoscopic hand-suturing technique should be conducted.

In conclusion, this study suggests that D-LECS using anterior and transmesocolic approaches based on tumor location may allow for individualized surgical management in patients with non-ampullary duodenal neoplasms.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.