Unhealthy and unsustainable diets are common worldwide. Health and sustainability need to be balanced because environmentally sustainable diets may lack macro- and/or micronutrients, resulting in nutrient deficiencies.

A systematic review was conducted following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis guidelines to analyze the environmental impact of current diets and alternative dietary scenarios worldwide based on food-group consumption.

The Scopus, Web of Sciences, and PubMed literature databases were searched. Only studies quantifying the food composition of diets per food group and their environmental impact were eligible.

Data were extracted for food groups as averages, means, or medians, depending on how they were reported in the original publication, for both environmental impact indicators and grams consumed.

A total of 120 original articles from 41 countries were included and 703 diets were analyzed. Current diets were the most prevalent (42%). Among the environmental indicators, carbon footprint (CF) was the most reported (86% of diets), followed by land (36%), total freshwater (22%), blue water (15%), and cumulative energy use (14%). Data about food consumption and environmental impact were available mainly for European countries (n = 471 diets; 67%), and Africa was the most underrepresented continent, with data from only 2 countries.

The environmental impact of food consumption varied widely among diet types and continents, due to methodology heterogeneity of dietary assessment and different definitions of diets and food groups. Diets enhancing healthiness, such as the Mediterranean diet and food-based dietary guidelines, were associated with a higher CF than diets reducing meat consumption. Furthermore, diets including meat substitutes were associated with a higher CF than other plant-based diets that did not include them. Affordable diets involved more freshwater use, whereas acceptable diets that include high amounts of meat intake had a high CF. Finally, extensive research on dietary intake and environmental impact in low- and middle-income countries is required due to lack of available studies and data in these areas.

The technological innovations in the food and agricultural sectors have contributed significantly to the increase of food availability and security and, consequently, the reduction of hunger, undernutrition, poverty, and death worldwide.1,2However, food production contributes to around one-third of global greenhouse gas emissions (GHGEs), two-thirds of freshwater use, and one-third of land occupation caused by human activities.2–5Diets characterized by a relatively high caloric and animal-based protein content have a negative impact both on health and the environment.1,6,7Specifically, animal-based foods seem to be responsible for the double amount of GHGEs compared to plant foods, such as whole vegetables, fruits, and legumes.8The nutrition and economic transition in low- and middle-income countries due to urbanization, resulting in the adoption of a Western diet is 1 of the main factors of the double burden of malnutrition and high environmental impact of diets in these countries.9–12Hence, a dietary shift to more sustainable dietary sources is necessary.

Previous and more recent systematic reviews analyzed the available literature by selecting specific geographic areas and/or only considering certain dietary patterns, such as priori diets20or “sustainable diets” rich in plant-sourced and poor in animal-sourced foods,21or reporting in a general way diet categories without focusing on their food components (food groups).22,23To our knowledge, no systematic review has been conducted until now that extensively evaluated the contemporary food consumption habits per food group, and all the available environmental impact indicators globally, in a long of time. Therefore, the aim of this systematic review was to systematically analyze the available data about the environmental impact characterizing current diets and alternative dietary scenarios based on food-group intake worldwide. Diets of any type including the actual food consumption of populations, optimized diets, and a priori–defined dietary patterns were evaluated according to the consumption of food groups and their environmental impact, considering any available environmental impact indicator from GHGEs to eutrophication and biodiversity loss. To allow comparisons, the outcomes were reported by diet type and by continent and continental regions.

This systematic review was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) guidelines.24The Web of Science, Scopus, and PubMed literature databases were searched for pertinent articles from October 2021 until January 2022. Key strings were adjusted depending on the database searched and can be found inTable S1. The general search strategy included environmental impact indicators (eg, “carbon dioxide emission*” OR “nitrogen use” OR “energy use”) AND diet-related keywords (eg, “diet” OR “diet* change” OR “food choice”) AND keywords related to energy and nutrient composition of the diets (eg, “nutrient” OR “energy” OR “nutrition quality”). After removing duplicates, articles were screened and selected for eligibility initially by title and abstract and subsequently by full text. Two researchers screened all articles independently and conflicts were solved after discussion.

The final data set was composed of full-length original studies in the English language and conducted from 2000 onward. Other types of publications, such as letters, short communications, brief reports, and reviews, were excluded. Observational, intervention, and modelling studies were eligible. Only studies quantifying both environmental impact indicators and daily dietary intakes per food group (eg, vegetables, fruit, red meat, dairy, pulses, nuts and seeds, fish and seafood) were included. Studies reporting on a single food group or product were excluded. Studies conducted of general, free-living adult populations (ie, aged ≥ 18 years) were included; studies of diseased populations or populations with special food consumption (eg, athletes, pregnant, lactating women) were excluded. When dietary data on current diets (CDs) was reported, studies or surveys had to be conducted as of January 2000 to retrieve an adequate picture of modern food consumption habits.Table 1presents the PICOS criteria for study selection.

Data were extracted for food groups as averages, means, or medians, depending on how they were reported in the original publication, for both environmental impact indicators and grams consumed. The main food groups considered were Cereals and starchy roots; fruits and vegetables; fruits; vegetables; legumes and pulses; nuts and seeds; oils and fats; fish and seafood; total meat; white meat; red meat; dairy products; eggs; sugar, spreads, sweeteners, sweets, and desserts; and total beverages. If studies reported food groups not according to the definitions used in this review, the data were added to the food group considered by the authors and noted (eg, in some studies, legumes were included in the vegetable group; therefore, if it was not possible to separate legumes and vegetables were reported all together under the vegetable group), or they were not considered for the calculation of the average consumption per food group per continent or continent region (eg, if fish and meat consumption were reported together in the included studies). Additional information about food groups and subgroups categorization can be found inTables S2andS3.

Basic characteristics of the studied population, such as sex, age, sample size, type of study, and territory were extracted. Specifically, countries were divided into continents and continent regions based on the United Nations Geoscheme by the United Nations Statistics Division25and WorldAtlas.26Additional information, such as year the study was conducted, national representativeness of the surveys or studies, year of publication, and type of diets and dietary scenarios were also extracted. Macro- and micronutrient composition of the diets was retrieved when available.

Diets not classified as CDs were (1) diets defined a priori based on already established dietary patterns, such as diets compliant with food-based dietary guidelines (FBDGs), traditional diets and the New Nordic Diet; and (2) optimized diets based on mathematical optimization models, which seek to find an optimal solution regarding food consumption by applying an objective function and taking into consideration constraints such as environmental impact indicators, healthiness, nutrient adequacy, and food acceptability. The objective of the optimization models and constraints applied for diet optimization were categorized based on their frequency of use in 6 general classes: meat and/or animal restriction; nutritional adequacy; diet healthiness; lower environmental impact; affordability; acceptability; and “other.” When a diet belonged to more than 1 category, either a new main diet category was created, if the type of dietary scenario was common among studies (≥3 dietary scenarios) or it was categorized based on the characteristic that was considered dominant. For example, if a dietary scenario was described as omnivorous with a minimum water footprint, the dominant characteristic of the diet is the minimum water footprint.

Descriptive statistics were used to report food consumption and environmental impact data. Data were analyzed in Microsoft Excel (Redmond, WA) and IBM SPSS Statistics (Armonk, NY) and reported as means and SDs per continent region. When alternatively reported, dietary intake was converted to grams per capita per day. When food consumption data were expressed in kilocalories or servings and no information was provided by the researchers regarding the conversion in grams, the food equivalents list defined by the American Dietetic and Diabetes Associations was used.27When data were presented for the total population, the number of inhabitants estimated for the specific year, provided by the World Bank, was researched.28Specifically, to express data as grams of food group consumed per capita per day, the annual food group consumption (in grams) was divided by the number of the total population and by 365 days.

The following environmental indicators and units of measurement were included in the analysis: GHGEs (kg CO2equivalent [eq] capita–1d–1); water use (L capita–1d–1); land use (m2capita–1d–1); energy use (MJ capita–1d–1); acidification (g SO2eq capita–1d–1); eutrophication (g PO4eq capita–1d–1); biodiversity loss (potentially disappeared fraction of species [PDF] × y capita–1d–1); nitrogen application (g N capita–1d–1), and phosphorus application (g P capita–1d–1).

Other, less commonly reported environmental impact indicators, such as water scarcity, fossil energy use, green and grey water use, water deprivation, cropland malnutrition, cropland scarcity, fine particulate formulation, and food loss or waste, were not included in the main analysis of this review, but the data are listed inTable S3.

Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) flowchart.

Abbreviations: BL, biodiversity loss; CD, current diet; CF, carbon footprint; CMF, cropland malnutrition footprint; CSF, carbon scarcity footprint; EU, energy use; FBDG, food-based dietary guideline; FEU, fossil energy use; GHGE, greenhouse gas emissions; LU, land use; min-Btu, diet minimizing energy consumption in food production measured in British thermal units (Btu); NAOS, Strategy for Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Prevention of Obesity (Spain); OPT, optimized diet; USDA, US Department of Agriculture; WF, water footprint.

Specifically, 22 European countries (45%) were represented in articles included in this review, followed by Asian countries (n= 11; 24%), American and Oceanian countries (n= 4; 8%; andn= 2; 8%, respectively), and African countries (n= 2; 3%).Figure 2shows the countries and the different diets considered in the review.Figure 3shows the distribution of diet categories among CDs, a priori diets, and optimized diets. A priori and optimized diets shared multiple diet categories, whereas diets such as the Mediterranean, Western, and Atlantic were only part of a priori diets. Diets focusing on affordability, acceptability, and sustainability of dietary scenarios were mostly described by optimized models. From a total of 703 diets extracted (Table 3), 294 were CDs (42%) and 206 were diets defined a priori (29%). Among optimized diets (n= 203; 29%), healthiness of diets (51%) and nutritional adequacy (50%) were the objectives or constraints mostly reported, followed by lower environmental impact (36%), meat and/or animal products reduction (23%), acceptability (21%), affordability (18%), and then the “others” group (42%; eg, nutrient-oriented constraints, organic production and bioavailability). Among the environmental indicators, the carbon footprint (CF) was the most reported (86% of dietary scenarios), followed by land use (36%), total freshwater use (22%), blue water use (15%), energy use (14%), nitrogen and phosphorus application (10% each), biodiversity loss (7%), eutrophication (4%), and acidification (1%) (Table S3).

Diets and dietary scenarios included in this review. Dots represent the presence of the diets or dietary scenarios per continent or European region.

Sankey diagram of current, a priori and optimized diets divided in diet categories. Abbreviations: APR, a priori diet; CD, current diet; OPT, optimized diet.

Total beverage intake deriving only from nonalcoholic beverages.

Total beverage intake deriving only from alcohol intake.

Studies reporting meat, fish, and eggs consumption together in theSupplementary Material.

Studies reporting legumes, nuts, and seeds consumption together in theSupplementary Material.

Studies reporting vegetables and potatoes or legumes or nuts and seeds together in theSupplementary Material.

The majority of studies or surveys reporting CDs were considered nationally representative (68%) (Table S3). Moreover, most of the CDs (47%) derived from national nutrition surveys (nationally representative surveys conducted to assess the health status and nutritional intake of a country’s general population), 27% derived from health and nutrition studies (studies usually not nationally representative, with specific outcomes related to health and nutrition, including food consumption data), 22% from secondary data (11% from FAOSTAT FBS, 7% from combination of studies and/or surveys, and 4% from household and/or purchase surveys), and 4% from unclear or not-reported study types.

Due to the lack of data, most of the middle- and low-income countries are not represented, and only results from Europe are shown per continent region, otherwise they are presented per continent (Figure 2). The majority of the studies (63%) and diets (67% of total) refer to Europe, whereas Africa is the most underrepresented continent because data from only 2 countries are available. Specifically, in western Europe, 36 studies were conducted providing 214 diets (46% of diets referring to Europe); northern and southern Europe followed with 107 diets (23%) from 23 studies; and 99 diets (21%) derived from 28 studies. Lastly, 6 studies, reporting on a total of 32 diets (7%), were included from eastern Europe (Figure 2). Additionally, 4 studies with 16 diets reported summed results for all of Europe or countries around Europe (Table S3). Most of the data from the Americas derive from high-income countries of North America (n= 14 studies;n= 53 dietary scenarios). Only 4 studies and 8 dietary scenarios were reported for South American countries; specifically, 6 dietary scenarios were from Argentina and 2 dietary scenarios were for all of South America.

The contribution of main food groups, excluding total beverages, was evaluated overall per CDs and a priori and optimized diets (Figure 4). The highest mean fruit (314 g d–1) and vegetable (322 g d–1) consumption was noticed for the a priori diets; the lowest mean fruit intake (197 g d–1) was noted for optimized diets and the lowest vegetable intake for CDs (226 g d–1). On the other hand, the total meat consumption was the highest for CDs (124 g d–1); for optimized diets, total meat consumption was less than half that of CDs (51 g d–1). The highest amounts of dairy consumption was found for a priori diets (364 g d–1) and the lowest was with optimized diets (212 g d–1). Fish consumption ranged from 35 g d–1for CDs to 44 g d–1for optimized diets. Nuts and seeds were poorly consumed in CDs (9.6 g d–1); a higher consumption of nuts occurred with optimized diets (34 g d–1).

Mean daily intake of food groups by diet categories. Abbreviations: APR, a priori diet; CD, current diet; OPT, optimized diet.

The global environmental impact of the 3 most commonly studied environmental impact indicators (ie, CF, land use, and freshwater use) was evaluated per diet category (Figure 5A, C, and E) considering all dietary scenarios included.Figure 5B, D, and Fshow the same results divided per a priori and optimized diets. The lowest mean CF was reported for sustainable and acceptable diets (1.1 kg CO2eq d–1), and the highest was found for Western diets (9.2 kg CO2eq d–1). The CF of CDs varied globally, with a mean CF of 4.4 kg CO2eq d–1(range, 0.5-25.2 kg CO2eq d–1). The Mediterranean, healthy, meat-replacement diets, and diets following FBDGs had similar CFs with CDs, ranging from 4.3 to 4.6 kg CO2eq d–1. Diets with relatively high CFs were the acceptable (5.3 kg CO2eq d–1), omnivorous (6.5 kg CO2eq d–1), and protein-oriented (5.4 kg CO2eq d–1) diets, whereas diets with relatively low CFs were the sustainable, healthy, and affordable diets (1.6 kg CO2eq d–1), the flexitarian diets (1.5 kg CO2eq d–1), and the affordable diets (1.6 kg CO2eq d–1) (Figure 5A).

Environmental impact indicators by diet categories. Data in box plots are expressed as medians and interquartile range. Carbon footprint (CF) total (A) and per optimized and a priori diets (B). Freshwater use total (C) and per optimized and a priori diets (D). Land use total (E) and per optimized and a priori diets (F) according to diet categories reported in descending order based on the environmental impact mean values, indicated as orange lines. Abbreviations: APR, a priori diet; CD, current diet; eq, equivalent; FBDG, food-based dietary guideline; OPT, optimized diet.

Affordable diets showed the highest impact on freshwater use (3030 L d–1). Flexitarian diets reported the lowest freshwater use (510 L d–1). The mean freshwater use of CDs was 1772 L d–1and varied widely from 193 to 4368 L d–1. Most of the diet categories affected freshwater use less than did CDs, but examples of diets with higher freshwater use are the Mediterranean diet (2458 L d–1), the healthy diets (2288 L d–1), and the sustainable diets (1936 L d–1) (Figure 5C).

When land use and diet categories that studied land use in more than 1 dietary scenario were considered, sustainable and healthy diets had the highest mean land use impact (78.6 m2d–1); however, this may be related to some extreme values found in the data. On the other hand, vegan diets and diets reducing specific environmental impact indicators (specifically land use) had the lowest land use impact (3 m2d–1each). The mean land use impact of CDs was 11.5 m2d–1(range, 3.2-190 m2d–1) (Figure 5E).

The average consumption of animal products ranged from 151 g d–1in Africa to 479 g d–1in northern Europe, with a respective total meat intake of 59 g d–1and 135 g d–1, which peaked in eastern Europe (190 g capita–1d–1). Average fish consumption ranged from 13 g d–1in eastern Europe to 64 g d–1in southern Europe. Considering the mean consumption of fruit and vegetables, the lower and upper extremes were found in northern (347 g d–1) and southern (578 g d–1) Europe, respectively. Average consumption of legumes ranged from 8 g d–1in eastern Europe to 47 g d–1in Asia. Moreover, the highest and the lowest amounts of cereals and starchy roots consumption were noted in Asia (589) and Oceania (237 g d–1), respectively. Sugar, sweeteners, and desserts consumption ranged from 42 g d–1in Asia to 94 g d–1in northern Europe (Table 3,Table S3).

Most of the CDs analyzing GHGEs were from western Europe (n= 86). The average performance of African diets was 1.6 kg CO2eq d–1, which was at the opposite extreme of that noticed in Oceania (10.7 kg CO2eq d–1). Total freshwater use was mostly analyzed in southern Europe (n= 38 diets), where a mean value of 2188 L capita–1d–1was calculated. The highest value occurred in western Europe, accounting for 3409 L capita–1d–1. Specifically, blue water use was mainly reported in Asian diets (n= 22) and ranged from 40 L d–1in eastern Europe to 555 L d–1in the Americas. Land use was mostly evaluated in western Europe (n= 46 diets) and ranged from 3.2 m2d–1in Asia and Oceania combined to 158 m2d–1in Oceania, as reported by 115and 738–42,44,45studies, respectively. In Africa, nitrogen and phosphorus applications corresponded to 11 g N d–1and 2 g P d–1, respectively. These values were less than 33% of those of Asia and Oceania combined (36 g N d–1) and western Europe (8 g P d–1). Current diets had the largest energy-use impact in the Americas (32 MJ d–1); they had a small energy-use impact in Oceania (4 MJ d–1).

Countries in southern Europe were associated with the highest eutrophication values (29 g PO4d–1), and those in northern Europe were associated with the highest acidification values (35 g SO2d–1). Finally, biodiversity loss ranged from an average of 2 × 10–13PDF × y d–1in Africa to 5 × 10–12PDF × y d–1in the eastern, northern, and southern Europe regions (Table 3,Table S3).

There was variability in the reported CF in vegan dietary scenarios, with impact ranging from 0.3 CO2eq d–1, as reported in a study assessing dietary GHGEs globally,16to 2.6 CO2eq d–1for northern Europe.74,76,79Vegetarian diets ranged higher in CF impact than did vegan diets, from 0.6 CO2eq d–1in a study assessing dietary GHGEs globally16to 6.2 CO2eq d–1in southern Europe,98,115,134even though the dairy consumption in southern Europe was lower than in other continents and in European regions. Flexitarian diets had a moderate CF impact (1.1-1.6 CO2eq d–1) in western Europe. Other plant-based diets (namely, a low-food-chain diet reported by de Pee et al64and a green diet reported by Mogensen et al75, described in detail inTable S3) for which CF was assessed derived from only 2 studies64,75and dietary scenarios ranging from 1 to 4.3 CO2eq d–1in Asia and northern Europe, respectively. Pescatarian diets assessing CF also were derived from 2 studies,16,125and they reported values ranging from 0.6 CO2eq d–1globally to 2 CO2eq d–1in western Europe. Total freshwater use varied from 517 globally to 2258 L d–1in Oceania for vegan diets, from 445 L d–1globally to 2584 L d–1in Europe for vegetarian diets, from 430 L d–1globally to 590 L d–1in western Europe for flexitarian diets, and from 434 L d–1globally to 2401 L d–1in Asia for pescatarian diets. Consequently, total freshwater use may not differ significantly among the specific diets, and moderate consumption of fish, meat, and animal products may not play the most important role—the food supply may be the key (Table 3,Table S3).

The highest average meat consumption occurred with the FBDGs of northern Europe (169 g d–1) and the lowest in Oceania (42 g d–1); the average meat consumption in healthy diets ranged from 50 g d–1in western Europe to 110 g d–1in Oceania. The highest average fish consumption was associated with the FBDGs of southern Europe (78 g d–1), the lowest was associated with those in Asia (15 g d–1). while the highest average fish consumption in healthy diets was reported in southern Europe (74 g d–1) and the lowest in Oceania (21 g d–1). Asian FBDGs included the highest level of fruit and vegetable consumption (746 g d–1) and the highest consumption of legumes (91 g d–1). Oceanian healthy diets included the highest level of fruit and vegetable consumption (685 g d–1) and southern European healthy diets the highest amount of legume consumption (90 g d–1). Finally, consumption of cereals and starchy roots ranged from 115 g d–1in Asia and Oceania combined to 554 g d–1in northern Europe.

The CF of diets following the FBDGs varied widely, from 1.7 CO2eq d–1in Asia and Oceania combined (n= 1)16to 13 CO2eq d–1in Oceania alone.32,40Among European regions, diets following the FBDGs of northern Europe (5.1 CO2eq d–1) had the highest CF impact and those from southern Europe (3 CO2eq d–1) the lowest. The CF of acceptable and healthy acceptable diets was similar among regions and varied from 4.1 CO2eq d–1in eastern, northern, southern, and total Europe to 5.6 CO2eq d–1in eastern Europe. On the other hand, the CF of healthy diets and traditional diets varied extensively from 3.6 CO2eq d–1in western Europe to 7.9 CO2eq d–1in southern Europe, and from 1.7 CO2eq d–1in Asia to 3.5 CO2eq d–1in northern Europe. Diet scenarios following the FBDGs in Asia and Oceania combined had a total freshwater use of 634 L d–1, accounting for less than one-third of the impact noticed in southern Europe (2178 L d–1). Land use of diets following the FBDGs was high in Oceania (13 m2d–1) and low in Asia and Oceania combined (1.7 m2d–1), whereas for healthy diets, in western Europe it was less than 3% of that in Oceania (4.7 m2d–1and 180 m2d–1, respectively) (Table 3,Table S3).

The CF associated with diets including or excluding specific meat or animal products varied from 2 CO2eq d–1in the Americas to 4.4 CO2eq d–1in northern Europe. The diets replacing meat with vegan or vegetarian products had a limited CF variance, from 3.9 CO2eq d–1in southern Europe to 4.9 CO2eq d–1in Oceania, compared with the studies that reduced the meat consumption in comparison with the baseline diets (1.1-2.7 CO2eq d–1). Conversely, the CF associated with omnivorous diets greatly varied, from 3.8 CO2eq d–1in West Asia to 9.2 CO2eq d–1in Americas (Table 3,Table S3).

The Mediterranean-style diet was also reported on in regions other than the Mediterranean—specifically, in the United States32and in the Netherlands.126,132The Mediterranean diet was differently defined among the regions in which this dietary pattern has been proposed. Average meat consumption was higher in western Europe (108 g d–1) and lower in southern Europe (44 g d–1), and fish consumption in western Europe (25 g d–1) accounted for less than half that in the Americas (56 g d–1). High levels of fruit and vegetable consumption were associated with the Mediterranean diet in studies from southern Europe (963 g d–1), whereas western European studies were associated with low amounts of fruit and vegetable consumption (381 g d–1). However, based on the diet analysis of these studies, the Mediterranean diet as followed in western Europe had the lowest CF impact (3.3 CO2eq d–1), and that in the Americas had the highest (5.4 CO2eq d–1).

The New Nordic Diet was studied only in Denmark and Iceland,47,77where the meat and fish consumption was higher than in Mediterranean diet (100-141 g d–1and 43-66 g d–1, respectively), and the average CF ranged from 3.8 to 4.3 CO2eq d–1. The Atlantic diet was evaluated only in Spain,107,109,111where the average meat and fish consumption was 113 g d–1and 159 g d–1, respectively, and the average CF was 3.7 CO2eq d–1. The Western diet also was analyzed only in Spain (southern Europe), where the highest average meat consumption (282 g d–1) and CF impact (9.2 CO2eq d–1) occurred from among the ”other” group of dietary patterns (ie, Mediterranean, New Nordic, Atlantic, and Western diets) (Table 3,Table S3).

Affluent/transition diets are based more on economic growth rather than healthy guidelines, and they include a wide consumption of animal products (from 90 g d–1in Asia to 225 g d–1in western Europe). The available dietary scenarios of affluent/transition diets provided mainly data for land use and nitrogen application. The lowest values were found in western Europe (4.9 m2d–1and 6.7 g N d–1, respectively), and the highest were found in Asia (14.4 m2d–1and 80 g N d–1, respectively). Affordable and healthy-affordable diets suggested lower, absent, or limited meat consumption (≤ 92 g d–1); however, the average CF range was lower for affordable diets (1.2-2.3 CO2eq d–1) than healthy-affordable diets (2.9-6.8 CO2eq d–1) (Table 3,Table S3).

Among all the types of sustainable diets, the lowest CF was reported in Asia for the sustainable-healthy-acceptable diet scenario (0.5 CO2eq d–1), where the total meat consumption was relatively high (75 g d–1) and fruit and vegetable consumption was 662 g d–1. The highest CF impact among all types of sustainable diets was noticed in the dietary scenarios defined as sustainable in eastern Europe (4.9 CO2eq d–1), where the highest level of meat consumption in the category was reported (109 g d–1).

Additionally, the minimum freshwater use was found in dietary scenarios from the Americas aimed specifically at reducing such indicator (average water footprint, 364 L d–1). The most freshwater use occurred in dietary scenarios from Asia (average reduced water footprint, 3100 L d–1), which was reported in a study from Iran, where the freshwater use of the CD was 4100 L d–1. It was reduced with the limitation of cereals, bread, pasta, and rice (Table 3,Table S3).

Current African diets had a higher environmental impact in terms of CF (1.6 CO2eq d–1) and land use (134 m3d–1) than diets following the FBDGs in Africa (1.3 CO2eq d–1and 6 m2d–1, respectively). However, fruit and vegetable consumption (285 g d–1) and cereals and starchy roots consumption (154 g d–1) recommendations of FBDGs are very low and nutrient intake needs would not be probably met (Table 3,Supplementary Material). On the other hand, diets following the FBDGs had a greater impact than CDs in terms of nitrogen and phosphorus application. Moreover, land use associated with CDs was much lower in contrast to healthy (315 m3d–1) and sustainable healthy (142 m3d–1) diets, whereas CDs contributed more (2 × 10–13PDF × y d–1) to biodiversity loss than did sustainable healthy diets (1.3 × 10–13PDF × y d–1) but less than healthy diets (2.7 × 10–13PDF × y d–1) (Table 3,Table S3).

In the Americas, CD had the lowest CF impact (4.8 CO2eq d–1) than the other diets except for vegan diets (1.5 CO2eq d–1), diets including/excluding specific meat/animal products (2.1 CO2eq d–1), and energy-oriented diets (3.8 CO2eq d–1). The CF in the Americas ranged from 1.5 CO2eq d–1for vegan diets to 9.2 CO2eq d–1for omnivorous diets. The greatest total freshwater use derived from vegetarian and omnivorous diets (1181 L d–1each), and the greatest impact from blue water use was associated with the CDs across the American continent (555 L d–1) and the lowest from healthy diets (106 L d–1). Current diets performed worse than other diets in terms of land use (14.5 m2d–1), excluding healthy diets (18.7 m2d–1), but they resulted in the lowest energy use (32 MJ d–1) compared with other diets, except for energy-oriented diets (29 MJ d–1). Furthermore, CDs (16 gPO4eq d–1) are responsible for more eutrophication than vegetarian (13.3 g PO4eq d–1) and the Mediterranean (15.8 g PO4eq d–1) diets, apart from healthy diets (19.2 g PO4eq d–1). The FBDGs performed the best for land use (4.1 m2d–1) and nitrogen application (22.4 g N d–1) among the other dietary scenarios analyzed in Americas (Table 3,Table S3).

Current diets in Asia were associated with a moderate to high CF (2.6 CO2eq d–1) compared with the other extracted diets in Asia. Sustainable-healthy-acceptable diets had the best performance in Asia with respect to CF (0.5 CO2eq d–1) and total freshwater use (470 L d–1), whereas healthy-affordable diets, those following the FBDGs (2.9 CO2eq d–1each) and the affordable diets performed the worst (3900 L d–1), respectively. The lowest impacts on land use (3.8 m2d–1) and nitrogen application use (18.4 g N d–1) were reported for CDs. The highest impacts of blue water use (700 L d–1), land use (14.4 m2d–1), and nitrogen application (80.4 g N d–1) impact were associated with affluent/transition diets. Sustainable-acceptable diets had the lowest phosphorous application impact (2.9 g P d–1), but those following the FBDGs had the highest (5.7 g P d–1) (Table 3,Table S3).

Vegan diets had the least impact on total freshwater (865 L d–1) and blue water (23 L d–1) use, whereas CDs performed the best for CF (2.6 CO2eq d–1). The most blue water use (51 L d–1) and highest CF (5.7 CO2eq d–1) were associated with healthy diets (Table 3,Table S3).

In northern Europe, CDs had the highest CF impact (4.9 CO2eq d–1) among the diets presented, except for acceptable diets (5.5 CO2 eq d–1), those following the FBDGs (5.1 CO2eq d–1), and the omnivorous diets (5 CO2eq d–1). Additionally, in terms of CF, the lowest impact was reported with affordable diets (1.8 CO2eq d–1). Moreover, CDs had the greatest impact on land use (8.4 m2d–1), whereas plant-based diets (4.1 m2d–1) had the lowest (Table 3,Table S3).

In southern Europe, CDs had the lowest blue water (439 L d–1) and energy (27 MJ d–1) use, whereas they had a larger CF (4.9 CO2eq d–1) and land use impact (7.5 m2d–1) compared with other diets in the region. The best performance related to CF impact was associated with affordable diets (1.2 CO2eq d–1), and the worst was with Western diets (9.2 CO2eq d–1), even though Western diets had the lowest total freshwater use (1352 L d–1). Although the lowest land use impact was related to the Mediterranean diet (5.2 m2d–1), this diet performed the worst in the region in terms of biodiversity loss (4.5 × 10–10PDF × y d–1). The Atlantic diet contributed the greatest blue water use impact (527 L d–1), and the healthy diet had the biggest energy-use impact (52 MJ d–1) (Table 3,Table S3).

Sustainable-healthy-acceptable diets performed well in western Europe by having the lowest CF impact (1.6 CO2eq d–1) and the lowest energy-use impact (9.9 MJ d–1). Meanwhile, CDs had the largest environmental impact related to total freshwater use (4.3 CO2eq d–1) and acidification (7 g SO2eq d–1). Also, diets adhering to FBDGs performed the worst among the dietary scenarios evaluated in western Europe with regard to eutrophication (4.7 g PO4eq d–1) and phosphorous application (11.5 g P d–1), whereas they had the lowest blue water use footprint (57 L d–1). Omnivorous diets had the greatest performance for total freshwater use (583 L d–1) and the poorest for nitrogen application (33 g N d–1) among the diets (Table 3,Table S3).

Carbon footprint was evaluated for most dietary scenarios in Oceania, where sustainable-healthy-affordable diets performed the best (1.6 CO2eq d–1), whereas diets following the FBDGs (13 CO2eq d–1) performed the worst, followed by CDs (10.7 CO2eq d–1). On the contrary, CDs resulted in the lowest amount of freshwater use (1944 L d–1) compared with the other available scenarios, such as vegan diets (2258 L d–1) and healthy dietary patterns (2183 L d–1) (Table 3,Table S3).

The aim of this systematic review was to gain an overall understanding and interpretation of the environmental impact of diets worldwide. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review analyzing all available environmental impact indicators of CDs and other dietary scenarios, considering consumption per food group globally. The environmental impact and the food consumption of the different considered diets varied widely among diets, continents, and continent regions, as also reported in the systematic review by Aleksandrowicz et al.149Even though data were harmonized to be expressed in the same units of measure, a wide variation in environmental impact within the same diet category was observed, which could be partially explained by the absence of strict definitions of diets and the different methodologies used for the construction of dietary scenarios, including the different applied assumptions and constraints, reducing the comparability among diets. Optimized diets were associated with lower dairy, total meat and eggs, and higher fish, nuts, and seeds consumption than were CDs and a priori diets.

An aspect characterizing multiple studies evaluating the environmental impact of diets is that the main attention is given to the analysis and reporting of the environmental impact indicators, ignoring sometimes the importance of efficiently describing the data collection methodology. Specifically, food consumption and baseline characteristics of the studied population may not be described in detail and, as a consequence, the dietary assessment methods used and/or the characteristics of the population remain unknown or not adequately understood.

Another source of heterogeneity is the constraints used for the modelling of the optimized dietary scenarios. Healthiness and nutritional adequacy of diets, followed by their environmental impact, were the constraints used most commonly, but they were defined diversely in numerous cases. For example, nutritional adequacy of a diet may have derived from FBDGs or dietary reference levels or from a diet that is commonly recognized as healthy and/or nutritionally adequate, such as the Mediterranean diet. On the other hand, different environmental impact indicators have been used, some of them set at the lowest possible level without simultaneously considering other variables for a sustainable diet. Hence, even though some optimized dietary scenarios were categorized together (eg, as vegan or vegetarian diet), their constraints may have differed, taking into consideration the cultural differences and the outcomes of interest of the researchers. Additionally, the mean CF and freshwater use of a priori vegetarian and vegan diets were higher than those of the optimized diets (Figure 5B and D), probably due to stricter constraints applied regarding the environmental impact of the latter.

Researchers based their estimations of environmental impact measurements related to diet on different literature sources, sustainability tools, protein consumption, and life cycle assessment (LCA) implementations. The results of LCA, even for the same environmental impact measurement, could vary significantly due to different calculations and assumptions.199For this reason, it is essential that national LCA data be provided from reliable government sources for comparable and harmonized measurements per country.200Like food consumption data, sustainability assessment tools have been used mostly in developed countries. Ideally, harmonized indicators could be used related to nutrition, health, environment, and socioeconomic status for the assessment of sustainable food systems.

To our knowledge, this is the first review providing a wide picture of the environmental impact of CDs and a priori or optimized diets collected worldwide. The findings strengthen the need for harmonized measurements in food consumption and environmental impact to allow meaningful and easier comparisons. The strength of the present systematic review is, indeed, the broad inclusion of studies, which allows us to describe the high variability of diet definitions and categorization and of methods applied to measure food consumption and diet environmental impact.

The comparison of the environmental impact and food consumption of CDs and alternative dietary scenarios is very challenging and demanding, due to the different variables and methodologies used for the definition and analysis of the various diets. Harmonized LCA and dietary assessment methods are essential. As mentioned, the composition of a diet in terms of food groups may not, itself, define its environmental impact, because other factors related to food systems, such as technology use, applied farming techniques, and farmers’ knowledge, may contribute greatly. Therefore, extensive understanding of all LCA steps is fundamental. Moreover, specific dietary scenarios performed highly regarding GHGEs but low for other environmental impact factors; thus, a holistic approach is required with the use of multiple environmental indicators to analyze the environmental performance of a diet. Diets considering healthiness, such as the Mediterranean, healthy, healthy-acceptable diets, and diets based on FBDGs, seem to have a higher CF than other diets that reduce meat and animal-based product consumption. Furthermore, diets including meat substitutes had a higher CF than other plant-based diets. The environmental impact of vegan and vegetarian diets comparing a priori and optimized diets showed that the latter had lower CF and freshwater use, possibly due to the use of stricter constraints. On the other hand, affordable diets in total seemed to have a high freshwater use, probably due to the high cultivation of staple foods and acceptable diets that report very enhanced CF due to high meat intake. Additionally, food systems transformation cannot be expected to occur through actions simultaneously in different parts of the world, because food systems and local population needs for the transition toward sustainability, including food accessibility and security, differ substantially. Considering the high diversity of food systems, cultural habits, and needs, the design of sustainable diets should also consider food types such as neglected species, novel foods, and alternative plant-based products that could harmoniously contribute to the reduction of different environmental impact indicators. Moreover, diets named identically may produce different environmental impacts, not only because of the different criteria used for their definition but also the geographic context in which the food is produced. Hence, a diet that may be sustainable in 1 region of the world may not be in another. Data about food consumption and environmental impact are available only in a small part of the world. Extensive research on dietary intake and environmental impact in low- and middle-income countries is required to draw reliable conclusions about the environmental impact of diets worldwide and to promote evidence-based changes in the food systems based on the international context and national possibilities considering population needs, habits, and feasible food supply.

Aliki Kalmpourtzidou, 
Human Nutrition Unit, Department of Food and Drug, University of Parma, 43125 Parma, Italy.

Beatrice Biasini, 
Human Nutrition Unit, Department of Food and Drug, University of Parma, 43125 Parma, Italy.

Alice Rosi, 
Human Nutrition Unit, Department of Food and Drug, University of Parma, 43125 Parma, Italy.

Francesca Scazzina, 
Human Nutrition Unit, Department of Food and Drug, University of Parma, 43125 Parma, Italy.