Vascular calcification is associated with atherosclerosis, plaque destabilization and related cardiovascular risk/mortality. A key cell type involved in vascular calcification is the vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC). Although several studies have reported the role of non-coding RNAs in regulating vascular calcification, the expressions and functions of certain circular RNAs in vascular calcification have not yet been fully explored. This study aimed to identify the differentially expressed circRNAs involved in the calcification of VSMCs and explore the regulatory function and molecular mechanism of certain circRNA.

High-throughput sequencing and qRT‒PCR revealed that circ-GALK2 (hsa_circ_0008488), a circular RNA generated from the GALK2 gene, was prominently upregulated in calcified VSMCs. Gain-of-function studies indicated that the overexpression of circ-GALK2 promoted VSMC calcificationin vitro. We investigated the mechanism of circ-GALK2 as a microRNA sponge and noted that miR-134-3p and CD36 are downstream targets of circ-GALK2. The overexpression of circ-GALK2 promoted VSMC calcification by sponging miR-134-3p and increasing CD36 expression. The above effects were neutralized by the overexpression of miR-134-3p. We also confirmed the expression of the circ-Galk2/miR-134-3p/Cd36 axis in a mouse aortic calcification model. In addition, we investigated the relationship between plasma circ-GALK2 expression and human aortic calcification.

The current study elucidates the unique expression and critical function of the circ-GALK2/miR-134-3p/CD36 axis in vascular smooth muscle calcification, potentially offering significant insights for developing strategies to mitigate the progression of vascular calcification disease. Furthermore, this axis is anticipated to serve as a biomarker and a prospective therapeutic target for vascular calcification.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40001-025-03040-1.

Vascular calcification (VC) is characterized mainly by the deposition of calcium–phosphate salt in the arterial wall and is closely linked to the occurrence and severity of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease [1,2]. Intimal and medial calcification are active and tightly regulated processes driven primarily by vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) [3]. VSMCs can dynamically express a series of proteins that inhibit or promote calcification, alter their transcription program as needed, and induce the expression of runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP2) and other osteogenic markers [3]. There is, therefore, a need to study and uncover the specific transcription programs and signalling pathways that drive the osteogenic differentiation of VSMCs. Several studies have focused on the mechanism of action of protein-coding genes, such as alkaline phosphatase and BMPs, in vascular calcification [4]. Procalcific signalling pathways (e.g., wingless type/β-catenin, protein kinase B, and nuclear factor-kappa B) are also involved in vascular calcification progression [4]. However, the pathogenesis of vascular calcification is incompletely understood, and there is no drug that can cure vascular calcification completely.

In recent years, researchers have reported that various types of non-coding RNAs, including microRNAs (miRNAs), long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and circular RNAs (circRNAs), can regulate vascular calcification [5]. Compared with other types of ncRNAs, circRNAs have better stability and tolerance to exonucleases because of their circular structure. CircRNAs are a large class of RNA molecules produced primarily from precursor mRNA back-splicing [6]. Often, they exhibit cell type- and tissue-specific patterns and potentially play important roles in physiological and pathological conditions [7]. The functions of circRNAs include acting as “miRNA sponges”, modulating transcription, interfering with splicing, protein binding and translation to produce polypeptides [6,7]. Several studies have shown that circRNAs are abnormally expressed or play regulatory roles in cardiovascular diseases [8]. However, very few studies have focused on the role of circRNAs in vascular calcification. Ryu et al. were the first to identify and characterize circRNAs in calcified VSMCs in rats and reported that circSamd4a is a protective factor against vascular calcification [9]. They also introduced circSmoc1-2 as an inhibitor of vascular calcification through a circSmoc1-2/miR-874-3p/Adam19 axis [10]. Recently, we reported the downregulation of circSamd4a in calcified endothelial cells, the mouse aorta, and the plasma of patients with aortic calcification, indicating that circSamd4a is a potential biomarker for vascular calcification [11]. However, in general, research on circRNAs in the field of vascular calcification remains rare compared with that in other cardiovascular diseases.

In this study, we analysed the differential expression of circRNAs via a β-glycerophosphate (β-GP)-induced model of VSMC calcificationin vitroas previously described [12]. We propose that circ-GALK2 is an accelerating factor of vascular calcification and explore its molecular mechanism of action. Moreover, we measured circ-GALK2 expression in the plasma of patients with aortic calcification and in the aortic tissue of mice suffering from aortic calcification. These findings expand the understanding of circRNAs involved in vascular calcification.

Human aortic SMCs were purchased from QuiCell Biotechnology (Shanghai, China) and cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Corning, Corning, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA), penicillin (100 units/mL) and streptomycin (100 µg/mL) at 37 °C in an incubator in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. VSMC calcification was induced by β-GP (10 mmol/L) with L-ascorbic acid (50 μg/mL) and dexamethasone (100 nmol/L; Merck, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA) for 7 days.

We used the preparation scheme of the vascular calcification model originally described by Niederhoffer et al. [13]. C57BL/6 male mice (8 weeks; Qinglongshan Laboratory Animal Center, Nanjing, China) were injected with vitamin D3 (in absolute ethanol solution, 3 × 105IU/mL) into the muscle of the left thigh at a dose of 0.001 mL/g. A mixture of nicotine and peanut oil (10 mg/mL) was administered by gavage at a dose of 0.0025 mL/g. This regimen was repeated after 9 h. The control group comprised mice that underwent intramuscular injection of absolute ethanol and intragastric administration of peanut oil.

All patients provided written informed consent for the use of their samples. Patients hospitalized in our center who underwent chest computed tomography via an Aquilion One Dynamic Volume CT scanner (Toshiba, Tokyo, Japan) from July to December 2020 were enrolled. Venous blood was collected the morning after hospital admission. Plasma was collected after ultracentrifugation (1500 ×gfor 10 min at 4 °C and 12,000 ×gfor 15 min at room temperature). The basic clinical data of the patients were recorded. Patients were divided into an aortic calcification (AC) group and a control group according to the presence or absence of calcification in the aorta upon CT. The exclusion criteria were as follows: (i) heart failure; (ii) abnormal parathyroid function; (iii) valvular heart disease; (iv) history of coronary revascularization, cerebrovascular disease or peripheral vascular disease; (v) systemic inflammatory disease; (vi) active infection; (vii) malignant tumor; and (viii) chronic kidney disease.

High-throughput sequencing was completed by Vengene Technology (Guangzhou, China). The total RNA from three calcified VSMCs and three blank control VSMCs was extracted via the HiPure™Total RNA Mini Kit (Magen, Guangzhou, China). The extracted total RNA was sampled for quality inspection, and then the Total RNA-seq (H/M/R) Library Prep Kit®(Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) was used to construct an RNA library. A Qubit 3.0 fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used for preliminary quantification. Next, an Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used to determine the size range of the RNA library. Once the size of the target fragment to be inserted met expectations, real-time reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT qPCR) was performed to quantify the effective concentration of the RNA library. The various DNA libraries were subsequently pooled, and the HiSeq X10 system under the PE150 mode (Illumina) was subsequently utilized for sequencing. The reads were first mapped to the latest transcript set from the University of California Santa Cruz via Bowtie 2 (version 2.1.0;http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/Bowtie2/index.shtml/), and gene expression was estimated using RSEM v1.2.15 (http://deweylab.biostat.wisc.edu/rsem). For circRNA expression, STAR (http://code.google.com/p/rna-star/) was used to map reads to the genome, and DCC (https://github.com/dieterich-lab/) was employed to identify circRNAs and estimate their expressions. The circRNAs expressions were normalized via the trimmed mean ofMvalues (TMM). Start by inputting the original counting matrix and sample grouping info to initialize the data object. Next, calculate theMvalue for each gene's expression in the reference sample, representing its expression fold. Exclude the top and bottom 30% ofMvalues to minimize outliers. Compute the TMM value using the weighted average of the remainingMvalues. Finally, multiply the non-reference sample's gene expression levels by the TMM value for standardization. The edgeR program (www.bioconductor.com/) was used to identify differentially expressed circRNAs.

Total RNA was extracted from cells via an RNA-Quick Purification Kit (Yishan, Shanghai, China). The integrity of total RNA was detected by 1.5% denatured agarose gel electrophoresis and staining with ethidium bromide (EtBr). Clear 28S and 18S ribosomal RNA bands are generated during electrophoresis, and a 2:1 ratio of 28S: 18S is used to determine the integrity of total RNA. The concentration and purity of the RNA were detected with a NanoDrop™1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The PrimeScript RT Reagent Kit (Takara Biotechnology, Shiga, Japan) was used to reverse transcribe the RNA into complementary DNA. For the separation and analysis of DNA fragments, agarose gel electrophoresis was employed. The extraction and reverse transcription of miRNAs were performed via the miRcute miRNA Extraction and Separation Kit as well as the miRcute Enhanced miRNA cDNA First-Strand Synthesis Kit (Tiangen, Beijing, China). TB Green Premix Ex Taq (Takara Biotechnology) was used for relative quantitative analyses of the transcription products of the target genes by RT‒qPCR. The sequences of primers used are listed in Additional file1.

The circ-GALK2 overexpression plasmid was constructed by OBiO Technology (Shanghai, China). Mimics, inhibitors, and negative controls of miR-134-3p were synthesized by Tsingke Biotechnology (Beijing, China). Subsequently, Lipofectamine™3000 Transfection Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used to transfect plasmids, miRNA mimics and miRNA inhibitors into VSMCs following the instructions provided by the manufacturer.

Protein samples from VSMCs were isolated with RIPA buffer (NCM, Suzhou, China). The isolated protein samples were then loaded onto gels for sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis with NuPAG LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Merck). The PVDF membranes were blocked with 5% skim milk and incubated with primary antibodies against BMP2 (1:1000 dilution; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), BMP4 (1:1000; Abcam), RUNX2 (1:1000; Abcam), cluster of differentiation 36 (CD36, 1:500; ZEN Bio, Chengdu, China) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH, 1:500; ZEN Bio) overnight at 4 °C. The membranes were then subjected to a 2 h reaction at room temperature with a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (Ig)G secondary antibody (diluted 1:5000; ZEN Bio). ECL Ultra Enhanced Chemiluminescent Reagent (NCM) was used for detection of the western blotting bands. Images were obtained with an ImageQuant®LAS 4000 system (General Electric, Boston, MA, USA).

circRIP was performed as previously described [14]. Circ-GALK2-overexpressing cells were fixed, cleaved, suspended and mixed. After centrifugation, 50 μL of the supernatant was taken as the input, and the remaining portion was mixed with the circ-GALK2-specific probe and Dynabeads™M-280 Streptavidin (Thermo Scientific, USA) and incubated at 30 °C overnight. The next day, the immunoprecipitate was treated with protein K to digest the protein. After magnetic bead sorting, the supernatant was transferred to an RNase-free tube for RNA extraction and detection.

The sequence of circ-GALK2 and the corresponding miR-134-3p mutant were cloned and inserted into the 3’UTR of the psiCHECK-2 plasmid. HEK293T cells were cultured to approximately 70% confluence and then cotransfected with a wild-type or mutant luciferase reporter vector (2 μg) and simulated miRNA mimics or a negative control (2 μg). After 48 h, the cells were lysed on ice for 15 min before centrifugation. The supernatant was measured via the dual-luciferase reporter assay system (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions as previously described [15].

ARS dye forms complexes with calcium ions via chelation, so calcium salts in cells can be identified. Following the removal of the culture medium, the cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The cells were subsequently fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 30 min. Afterward, the cells were washed three times with PBS, with each wash lasting 5 min. ARS staining solution (1%, pH = 4.2; Solarbio, Beijing, China) was added for 8 min, the samples were rinsed rapidly with PBS. Images were captured using an optical microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and Image-J software was utilized to evaluate calcium deposits.

The vascular tissue, which had been fixed in paraformaldehyde, underwent a sequential dehydration process using a graded series of alcohol solutions. The tissue was subsequently embedded in paraffin, sliced, and dried. Afterward, the tissue sections underwent a double dewaxing process using xylene and were then washed with a graded series of ethanol solutions. We added 1 mL of silver nitrate solution (1%), irradiated it with ultraviolet light for 30 min, discarded the silver nitrate solution, added 1 mL of sodium thiosulfate solution (5%) and left the sample to stand for 1 min. After back-staining with basic fuchsin, the sample was dehydrated twice with 95% ethanol and anhydrous ethanol. Then, the conventional method was used to dehydrate and make the samples transparent, and the samples were sealed with neutral resin glue. Under an optical microscope (Olympus), many black particles could be observed between the elastic fibres of the media of calcified blood vessels, but black particles were absent in normal blood vessels.

Immunohistochemical analyses of calcified aortic samples from the mice were performed as previously described [16] with anti-RUNX2 antibody (Abways, Shanghai, China), anti-BMP2 antibody (Immunoway, Plano, TX, USA) and anti-BMP4 antibody (GeneTex, San Antonio, TX, USA), all at a 1:100 dilution. Aortic sections were visualized via an optical microscope (Olympus).

All the statistical analyses were performed via SPSS version 24.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). Continuous variables were assessed for normality using Shapiro–Wilk tests. Normally distributed data are reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD), and group comparisons were made using Student’sttests. Non-normally distributed data are presented as median (IQR), with Mann–WhitneyUtests for comparisons. Categorical variables are described as counts (%) and analyzed with χ2or Fisher’s exact tests as appropriate. Statistical significance was defined as a two-tailedP< 0.05.

Ribosomal RNA-depleted circRNA sequencing (circRNA-seq) was used in β-GP-induced human VSMCs to identify the differential expression of circRNAs during calcification. RT‒qPCR, western blotting and ARS staining were used to confirm the effect of calcification. After β-GP treatment for 7 d, the mRNA and protein expression of RUNX2, BMP2 and BMP4 was significantly upregulated in VSMCs (Fig.1A, B). ARS staining revealed prominent calcified deposits in β-GP-induced VSMCs (Fig.1C). A total of 880 circRNAs were identified via high-throughput sequencing. Furthermore, 46 circRNAs were differentially expressed after we filtered out circRNAs with low TMM expression and analysed them with edgeR. Compared with those in the control group, 15 circRNAs were upregulated in calcified VSMCs, and the expression of the other 31 circRNAs was downregulated (Fig.1D). Then, we detected circRNAs whose expression was upregulated by RT‒qPCR. Among them, circ-GALK2 (circBase ID: hsa_circ_0008488) presented significantly higher expression in the VC group than in the control group (Fig.1E). Next, we validated the back-splicing site of circ-GALK2 via PCR product sequencing (Fig.1F). Given that circular RNAs cannot be degraded by exonucleases, we used RNase R to confirm the closed-loop structure of circ-GALK2. According to the qPCR results, unlike linear RNA, the expression level of circ-GALK2 did not significantly change in the presence or absence of RNase R (Fig.1G). In addition, we confirmed the expression of circ-GALK2 in RNA, cDNA and gDNA via divergent and convergent primers (Fig.1H). Here, we demonstrated that circ-GALK2 is significantly upregulated during VSMC calcification and may play a regulatory role in vascular calcification.

To determine the role of circ-GALK2 in VSMC calcification, we constructed a circRNA-specific overexpression plasmid (Fig.2A). Specific overexpression of circ-GALK2 was confirmed by qPCR using divergent primers (Fig.2B). Then, VSMC calcification was induced by β-GP in vitro. The results obtained from Western blotting and qPCR demonstrated significant upregulation of the osteogenic genes RUNX2, BMP2 and BMP4 after circ-GALK2 overexpression compared with the negative control group (Fig.2C, D). ARS staining revealed significantly more calcium deposits in circ-GALK2-overexpressing cells than in vector cells (Fig.2E). The gain-of-function results revealed that overexpression of circ-GALK2 could significantly promote VSMC calcification.

Considering the reported role of circRNAs as miRNA sponges, our research focused on investigating the specific miRNAs that interact with circ-GALK2 to elucidate the mechanism through which circ-GALK2 regulates VSMC calcification. We used miRanda to predict the relationships between the miRNAs in the miRBase database (https://www.mirbase.org/) and circ-GALK2. According to the ranking of the total score, we undertook qPCR verification on the top 5 miRNAs. After circ-GALK2 overexpression, the expression of miR-134-3p and miR-1972 was obviously downregulated, whereas no significant difference in expression was observed for miR-330-3p, miR-449c-5p or miR-6874-5p (Fig.3A). Among these genes, miR-134-3p expression exhibited the greatest decrease (~ 50%). CircRNA immunoprecipitation revealed specific enrichment of circ-GALK2 and miR-134-3p (Fig.3B). Moreover, the effects of the miR-134-3p mimics and inhibitor are shown in Fig.3C. Bioinformatics analysis revealed a potential binding site for miR-134-3p within the sequence of circ-GALK2, as depicted in Fig.3D, which highlights the corresponding mutation site. The bioinformatics prediction was validated via a dual-luciferase reporter assay. The findings indicated a significant alteration in the luciferase activity of the wild type group attributable to miR-134-3p, whereas no such effect was observed in the mutant group (Fig.3E). These results collectively indicate that circ-GALK2 potentially acts as a sponge for miR-134-3p in VSMCs.

The potential target genes of miR-134-3p were subsequently investigated via TargetScan. KEGG pathway analysis and literature reports have shown that CD36 is involved in the inflammation and calcification mediated by VSMCs [17,18]. The mRNA encoded by CD36 contains two 3′-untranslated region (3’ UTR) elements that exhibit partial complementarity to miR-134-3p (Fig.4A). A luciferase reporter assay further demonstrated the binding of miR-134-3p to the CD36 3′ UTR (Fig.4B). Transfection of a miR-134-3p mimic inhibited β-GP-induced VSMC calcification, whereas a miR-134-3p inhibitor had the opposite effect (Fig.4C, D). Subsequent western blotting analysis revealed a significant decrease in CD36 protein expression after treatment with the miR-134-3p mimics. Conversely, treatment with a miR-134-3p inhibitor led to notable upregulation of CD36 expression (Fig.4D). To further verify the relationship between the circ-GALK2/miR-134-3p/CD36 axis, we cotransfected a circ-GALK2-overexpressing plasmid and miR-134-3p mimics into VSMCs. The overexpression of miR-134-3p attenuated the enhancing effect of circ-GALK2 on vascular calcification at the RNA and protein levels, thereby decreasing the protein expression of CD36 (Fig.4E, F). Collectively, these findings suggest that the increase in circ-GALK2 expression may act as a sponge for miR-134-3p, consequently leading to increased CD36 expression and potentially contributing to VSMC calcification.

To observe the pro-calcific effect of circ-GALK2in vivo, we created a model of aortic calcification induced by vitamin D3 in mice. Von-Kossa staining revealed obvious deposition of calcium salt in the media of the mouse aorta (Fig.5A), whereas immunohistochemical and qPCR analyses revealed significant increases in the expression ofRunx2,Bmp2andBmp4(Fig.5B, C). We subsequently searched for circRNAs homologous to circ-GALK2 in mice from circAtlas 2.0 (http://159.226.67.237:8080/). A mouse-derived circRNA called “circ-Galk2” (circAtlas ID: mmu-Galk2-0007) is similar to hsa-circ-GALK2. Therefore, we measured the expression of circ-Galk2, miR-134-3p and Cd36 in the calcified aortas of mice. QPCR revealed that circ-Galk2 expression was significantly increased in the aortic calcification (AC) group, whereas miR-134-3p expression was notably decreased compared with that in the control group (Fig.5D). Bioinformatics analysis also revealed the complementary sequence of circ-Galk2 and miR-134-3p (Fig.5E). Moreover, the protein expression of Cd36 was also upregulated in the calcified aortas of the mice (Fig.5F). The results shown above provide evidence that the circ-GALK2/miR-134-3p/CD36 axis is involved in vascular calcificationin vivo.

To further explore the relationship between circ-GALK2 and vascular calcification, we measured circ-GALK2 expression in human plasma. Dual-source CT imaging was used to evaluate aortic calcification. Twenty-one patients without aortic calcification (non-AC) and 38 patients with AC were selected. The fundamental clinical characteristics of the patients are outlined in Table1. Compared with patients in the non-AC group, patients in the AC group were older and presented elevated levels of glycosylated haemoglobin and serum uric acid, whereas no significant differences were observed in other baseline clinical data. Compared with that in non-AC patients, circ-GALK2 expression in plasma was obviously increased in the AC group (P<0.05, Fig.6). This finding not only reaffirmed the strong association between circ-GALK2 and vascular calcification but also indicated its potential as a diagnostic marker and therapeutic target.

Vascular calcification is the advanced stage of atherosclerosis and is associated with plaque destabilization and related cardiovascular risk/mortality [19]. Vascular calcification has been explored from the perspectives of cytology to epigenetics for a long time [4]. However, to date, traditional drug treatment does not seem to solve this problem. With the deepening of research in the field of non-coding RNA, as well as the advent of small-molecule nucleic acid drugs, a new horizon has been opened for the treatment of diseases. In the present study, we used β-GP to induce VSMC calcificationin vitroand identified a specific circ-GALK2 that is significantly upregulated during vascular calcification. Mechanistically, circ-GALK2 acts as a miR-134-3p sponge to upregulate CD36 expression bothin vitroandin vivo. Furthermore, human plasma circ-GALK2 expression is related to aortic calcification. We believe that these results provide new evidence regarding the expression, effects and mechanism of circRNAs in vascular calcification and may also provide potential targets for the development of siRNA drugs [20].

Since the discovery of CDR1 antisense RNA (CDR1as) binding to miR-7 in neuronal tissues [21], the importance of circRNAs has been increasingly recognized in both physiological and pathological processes [8]. This is attributed to their stable structure, relative conservation, and tissue- and cell-specific characteristics. Although there is some understanding of the expression and regulatory role of circRNAs in cardiovascular disease [22], the expression and role of circRNAs in vascular calcification have just begun to attract researchers' attention in the past 5 years. Ryu identified circRNAs involved in inorganic phosphate-induced calcification in rat VSMCs via RNA-seq data and demonstrated that circSamd4a, a protective factor against vascular calcification, acted as a sponge for miR-125a-3p and miR-483-5p and regulated the expression of Camsap2 and Flna [9]. Recently, Zhang et al. reported the regulatory role of circHIPK3 in VSMC calcification, which acts not only as a miRNA sponge but also through interactions with the RNA-binding protein FUS [23,24]. Hu et al. reported that circTOP1 promotes vascular calcification by regulating PTBP1 bothin vitroandin vivo[25]. There have also been several studies of circRNAs in the area of heart valve calcification [26,27]. In this study, we detected and screened all the circRNAs expressed in this process via high-throughput sequencing and discovered the novel circRNA circ-GALK2. Since circRNAs carrying several miRNA binding sites can play regulatory roles as competing endogenous RNAs [6], we determined the targeted binding of circ-GALK2 to miR-134-3p via bioinformatics analysis, RNA pulldown and dual-luciferase reporter assays. Although not all the binding of circRNAs to miRNAs is sufficient to play effective roles in cells, we confirmed the effect of the circ-GALK2/miR-134-3p axis on VSMC calcification through gain-of-function tests and rescue experiments. This, to some extent, demonstrates the role of circ-GALK2 as a miR-134-3p sponge in vascular calcification.

In this study, we also identified CD36 as a downstream target of the circ-GALK2/miR-134-3p axis. CD36 is a multifunctional membrane protein that is highly expressed in a variety of vascular cells, including VSMCs and endothelial cells [17]. In VSMCs, CD36 can promote the production of reactive oxygen species, downregulate the expression of antioxidant genes, and accelerate vascular injury and calcification [28]. CD36 expression is significantly elevated in hyperglycemic and/or oxLDL-induced VSMC calcification and promotes oxLDL uptake, ER stress and vascular calcification [18]. Here, we demonstrated that circ-GALK2 accelerates VSMC calcification by upregulating CD36, which is consistent with the findings of previous studies.

Although the regulatory roles of circRNAs have been extensively studied, how to make them play specific rolesin vivois still a key question to be solved. We can certainly make circRNAs work in animals through methods, such as adeno-associated viruses, but there may be many uncertainties about the use of similar viruses in humans. With the clinical application of inclisiran in cardiovascular diseases [29], small nucleic acid drugs based on siRNA have gradually attracted increasing interest [20]. Du et al. reported that targeted delivery of siRNA for circMDK via poly(β-amino esters) (PAE) nanoparticles could maintain the stability of the siRNA and play an antitumour rolein vivo[30]. This discovery opens a new perspective for the precise delivery andin vivoregulation of circRNAs. As a molecule that plays a prominent role in vascular calcification, we believe that circ-GALK2 may be a target for siRNA drug development in the future for the treatment of vascular calcification diseases.

While our assessments demonstrated the role of circ-GALK2 as a miR-134-3p sponge in vascular calcification, it is important to note that in addition to miRNA sponging, the mechanisms of circRNAs also include modulating transcription, regulating splicing, interacting with mRNAs, binding proteins and translation [6]. Therefore, a more comprehensive mechanism of action of circ-GALK2 needs to be further explored. In a previous study, we reported that circ-MALAT1 binds to both ribosomes and PAX5 mRNA to form a complex and act as a mRNA brake to inhibit translation [31]. Similarly, circ-GALK2 also has an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) but no open reading frame, which suggests that it may also bind to ribosomes to inhibit mRNA translation, thereby may directly inhibiting the protein expression of anticalcific factors. The potential of circ-GALK2 interacting with proteins or acting as a transcriptional regulator should be further investigated.

Given that circ-GALK2 is generated through the back-splicing of GALK2 exons, it is pertinent to explore whether the regulatory influence of circ-GALK2 on vascular calcification is associated with GALK2. N-Acetylgalactosamine kinase (GALK2), a member of the GHMP kinase family, is responsible for the phosphorylation of N-acetylgalactosamine [32] and may play a role in neural plasticity, neurotransmitter regulation, and related biological processes [33]. Galactokinase deficiency has also been linked to increased cellular senescence [34]. Furthermore, N-acetylgalactosamine transferase 3 (GALNT3) has been shown to mitigate vascular calcification by alleviating oxidative stress, vascular inflammation, and apoptosis in smooth muscle cells [35,36]. However, the specific role of GALK2 in vascular calcification or atherosclerotic diseases remains inadequately documented. In our investigation, we assessed the expression of GALK2 in VSMCs and observed that the overexpression of circ-GALK2 did not lead to an increase in intracellular GALK2 levels (Fig.2B). Consequently, we posit that the pro-calcific effect of circ-GALK2 may operate independently of GALK2.

This study also has some limitations. We revealed in this study that plasma circ-GALK2 is highly expressed in individuals with aortic calcification, but the sample size was too small, which may have limited the statistical power and generalizability of the results. In the future, we will continue to expand the sample size and, if possible, conduct multicenter studies to further detect the expression of circ-GALK2 in patients' plasma, to reveal the diagnostic value of plasma circ-GALK2 for aortic calcification and even coronary artery calcification. In addition, in thein vivoexperiments, we only detected calcification markers and circ-Galk2/miR-134-3p/Cd36 in mouse aortic specimens, but did not involve specific overexpression or knockdown of circ-GALK2 in mice, which limits the expansion of the results at thein vivolevel. In the future, we may overexpress circ-Galk2 in mice using adenovirus vectors and observe its accelerating effect on aortic calcification. Meanwhile, it is also possible to consider knocking down circ-Galk2 through siRNA encapsulated in nanocarriers, to observe its effect on delaying or reversing aortic calcification in mice, and provide animal experimental evidence for the clinical development of siRNA drugs.

This study elucidated a novel regulatory axis, wherein circ-GALK2 exacerbates VSMC calcification via competitive binding to miR-134-3p, leading to the subsequent upregulation of CD36. The observed positive correlation between circ-GALK2 expression levels in patient plasma and the extent of aortic calcification suggests its potential as a circulating biomarker for monitoring disease progression. Mechanistically, the circ-GALK2/miR-134-3p/CD36 axis constitutes a druggable pathway, and given the successful clinical application of siRNA-based therapeutics, circ-GALK2 emerges as a promising molecular target for precise therapeutic intervention in vascular calcification.