Treatment of the two billion people with tuberculosis (TB) infection worldwide is crucial to prevent progression to TB disease and thereby prevent further transmission. However, TB is associated with fear and stigma, and knowledge gaps about TB disease are widespread, complicating adherence to treatment. As increasing knowledge about TB can reduce stigma and increase adherence to treatment, we developed an educational film about TB infection and disease. After showing the film to people with TB, our qualitative study aimed to evaluate the film and to explore perceptions, fears and possible knowledge gaps.

We conducted a qualitative study, with in-depth interviews (n=13), at two Infectious Disease Outpatient Departments in Sweden. Included research participants were adults with TB infection or TB disease. After informed consent, the participants watched the film, available in Swedish, English, Somali and Tigrinya. Subsequently, in-depth interviews, using a topic guide, were conducted, transcribed, and a reflexive thematic analysis was performed.

All participants considered the film to be a valuable addition to the written and oral information they had previously received. Identified themes included the perception of TB infection being a deadly, non-curable disease, and many feared being contagious. However, the film challenged these fears and increased the understanding of TB infection being treatable and non-infectious. Another theme revealed that TB-related stigma was experienced in encounters with healthcare professionals in Sweden.

Our educational film was perceived to increase understanding about TB symptoms, transmission and treatment. Implementing the film in Infectious Disease Departments across Sweden may contribute to decreasing stigma and enhancing awareness of the importance of treatment adherence, an outcome that warrants further investigation post-implementation.

To the best of our knowledge, attempts to explore the introduction of educational information about TB in the format of a film have rarely been made.

A demographically broad range of people with TB was included in the study, reflecting a diversity of different experiences regarding TB.

The study used in-depth interviews providing abundant insights into the participants’ understanding of TB.

Extensive discussions and revision of the coding process and themes identification involved the entire research team, allowing for better understanding and dependability of the data.

A limitation was that the interviews were conducted in English or Swedish, and some nuances may have been lost if these languages were not the mother tongue of the participants.

Increasing knowledge about TB infection and disease can reduce stigma9 20 21and thereby potentially increase treatment adherence. This association highlights the importance of education about TB. However, there are few studies addressing TB education and stigma reduction, particularly those with verbal information, which is preferred by many people with TB.11 22Therefore, we developed an educational film, combining verbal information about TB infection and disease with visual aid, to explore experiences and perceptions regarding TB, aiming to understand possible knowledge gaps, stigma and misconceptions among people with TB.

This study was informed by a constructionist epistemology.24We approached participant narratives not as objective accounts of reality, but as lived experiences that are situated and shaped by social, cultural and personal factors. Our analysis was also guided by the conceptual model developed by Nuttallet al,25which offers a framework for understanding patient engagement and behaviour in the context of TB care and specifically reducing TB-related stigma. We used this framework as a theoretical scaffold supporting our interpretation of how participants made sense of their TB experiences and the intervention, while remaining open to emergent themes beyond the scope of the model.

A pathway in the framework includes a particular target population and intervention format, and thereafter suggests an intended outcome and impact of the intervention. In our study, we have adapted one of the pathways (figure 1) by making an educational film.

The study took place at two outpatient infectious disease departments in Sweden: the Central Hospital of Kristianstad, Kristianstad and the Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Stockholm. People with TB were approached during their planned appointment to one of these departments. In total, 18 people were asked to participate in the study, of whom 13 agreed to participate and gave their written consent. Five people declined participation, three due to lack of time in conjunction with their appointment and two due to lack of interest in participating. After their planned appointment with the physician or nurse, the participants watched the film in a separate room at the clinic, followed by an in-depth interview. The sampling was purposive with the aim of maximum variation of the demographic characteristics gender, age and country of birth. Three people were contacted by telephone by EEL after their appointment, due to a lack of time after their scheduled appointment. If interested in participating, a time for an interview at the clinic was planned in agreement with the person.

The sample size was estimated using the five dimensions of information power.27The study had a narrow aim of exploring patients’ perceptions of a disease after having watched an educational film. Study participants were all highly specific to the target group, and together with an underlying theoretical framework, we originally estimated a sample size of around ten participants. However, the quality of the interview dialogues varied, and as an exploratory analytic approach was used, we decided to conduct an additional three interviews.

Eligible participants were adults newly diagnosed with TB infection or disease, attending their first or second visit to the infectious disease outpatient department. A total of 13 participants were included from June 2022 to October 2023, one diagnosed with TB disease and the rest with TB infection. The age range of the participants was 18–78 years. Participants were born in nine different countries and spoke at least one of the languages in which the film was available. Socio-demographic characteristics are presented intable 1.

The interviews were conducted by EEL (nine), JK (three) and LDF (one) in a separate room at the infectious disease outpatient departments of the two hospitals. All three interviewers were infectious disease specialists working with people with TB regularly. The interviews were conducted using a topic guide available in Swedish and English and took between six and 36 min. As multiple interviewers conducted the interviews, all three interviewers were involved in the development of the topic guide and discussed interview techniques before the first interview. During the interviews, the term ‘latent tuberculosis’ was used instead of ‘TB infection’, as it better matches Swedish terminology. The topic guide with open-ended questions was developed by EEL, JK and LDF and the experienced qualitative researcher KSA (online supplemental appendix 1). The topic guide was further revised by EEL and KSA in the middle of the study period (online supplemental appendix 2). The revision was initiated by the interviewers as some questions did not allow reflexive responses from the participants. Rephrasing some questions allowed for a better approach to asking the question, for example, expanding the question ‘What is the general perception of TB in your community?’ to include ‘What do you think about the disease?’. The guide covered all seven components of the theoretical framework of acceptability of healthcare interventions, developed by Sekhonet al.28Ten interviews were conducted in Swedish and three in English. The interviews were audio recorded and later transcribed verbatim by LDF (one) and EEL (twelve). The quotes in Swedish have been translated by a native English speaker, being bi-lingual, and grammatical errors have been corrected.

Reflexive thematic analysis, according to Braun and Clarke,29with further guidance from Nowellet al,30was performed. The coding was done in NVivo V.14 (Lumivero). The first two interviews were coded by both OB and EEL; the results were compared and the codes were revised. The remaining coding was performed by EEL. A list of codes was created, and all data were checked repeatedly to revise previous coding. From the codes, categories were inductively composed from patterns of meaning in the data and discussed with LDF and OB. Thereafter, categories were diagrammed into a concept map to find possible associations between the categories and between their meanings. The categories were also related to the framework by Nuttallet al,25by comparing the categories to the mechanisms of stigma reduction proposed by the framework (figure 1). Themes were identified from associations between the categories and their meaning, and in relation to the framework. Phases 4 and 5 (reviewing and defining themes) of Braun and Clarke’s thematic analysis process were discussed and revised by all co-authors. Examples of the thematic analysis process are presented intable 2.

The study was approved by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority (numbers 2022-00722-01 and 2022-04215-02), and participants’ data were handled in accordance with the general data protection regulation. All participants were given oral and written information about the study, including information that they could withdraw at any point. Study participants provided written informed consent.

As part of the in-depth interviews, the patients were asked how we could improve the content of the educational film. They were also asked about their opinions regarding a future implementation process of the film, for example, at which sites the film could be presented and the timing of film presentation in the process of TB care management. These suggestions will be taken into consideration for the forthcoming development of the film and the planned implementation process of the education film throughout Sweden.

We identified four themes and seven sub-themes from the data, summarised intable 3and shown in relation to the conceptual framework25infigure 2. The themes are presented by first describing participants’ perceptions of TB, that is, themes 1 and 2. Thereafter follow themes 3 and 4, in accordance with the framework’s intended outcome (improving TB knowledge and awareness) and mechanism (removing or challenging misconceptions or fears) of an intervention. Finally, the participants’ suggestions regarding possible improvements to the film before implementation are described.

Another concern expressed by some was that their friends and family would worry about their TB diagnosis. Some participants even avoided telling their relatives to spare them from worrying—‘I’ve been thinking that maybe it’s not something they need to know, and I mean, I’m not at risk of spreading the disease. But just to not scare them either’(interviewee #12, male, 30s).

Reasons not to tell others or not to talk about TB included lack of knowledge of the disease, fear of the unknown and of isolation from society. Participants explained that sharing their TB diagnosis might deter others from visiting them out of fear and even gave examples of physical assaults against people living with TB. Some participants also described that people with TB might hide, fearing that others know about their disease.

However, other participants stated that their TB diagnosis was not a secret and that they felt comfortable telling friends and family about their diagnosis. One participant also had thoughts on how to reduce TB-related stigma and awareness of TB-related stigma is also demonstrated by one participant—‘you start (talking) in a friendly way, so you don’t try to stigmatise them because it’s not really fair, and you don’t make them feel fear of themselves’ (interviewee #1, female, 30s).

All participants thought the film improved their understanding of TB, in particular in terms of TB symptoms, transmission and treatment. Primarily, after having watched the film, the participants described an increased awareness of TB symptoms. Beforehand, many participants had an idea of TB being exclusively a pulmonary disease, but after the film, they displayed knowledge of extra-pulmonary TB symptoms, such as enlarged lymph nodes and back pain. Weight loss and night sweats were also mentioned as new information.

Furthermore, many participants demonstrated an increased awareness of how TB was transmitted after having watched the film. They were surprised by the information that only active lung TB was contagious—‘that it is only from the lungs that it can infect. I didn’t know that’ (interviewee #7, male, 30s).

In line with the participants’ acquired awareness of TB infection, the knowledge of TB infection not being contagious was a relief for many—‘I realised it (TB) wouldn’t infect anyone else (…) It feels good’ (interviewee #5, female, 30s). Many participants also reflected on the word ‘latent’ when dealing with TB infection without any symptoms. They thought the word ‘latent’ was hard to understand and even sounded harsh—‘Latent is, also can feel that just that word is a bit of a risk somehow, risky. (…) Explosive’ (interviewee #6, female, 50s).

The participants also expressed a new understanding of TB treatment, both against TB infection and disease. The idea of preventive treatment was easier to grasp, and why treatment is recommended for TB infection. Several participants mentioned the value of knowing that treatment is for free—‘They (the film) tell you that medicines are free, without money, just that you’re willing to take the tablets’ (interviewee #13, male, 30s).

After viewing the film, participants primarily expressed two key concerns. First, many questioned the origin of their TB infection, wondering where and how they may have been exposed. Additionally, some participants raised doubts regarding the efficacy of treatment and wondered‘if you really get well after treatment?’ (interviewee #6, female, 50s).

In general, the film was well received by the participants. They expressed that the information was easy to grasp, and it clarified a lot of previous thoughts and questions—‘Now I have an idea about what tuberculosis is … before I hadn’t any idea, so now, I know more’(interviewee #9, female, 40s). Participants thought the language of the film was easy to understand, and they were able to concentrate throughout the entire duration of the film. Participants with Somali or Tigrinya as their mother tongue confirmed a correct translation of the film.

However, some participants voiced negative feedback regarding the film as well. They felt it was too slow and repetitive. Improvements were suggested, for example, more statistics about treatment success and reinfection rates, treatment options and side effects. Other suggestions reflected the participants’ remaining thoughts about where they had acquired the infection and thus wanted to know more about TB epidemiology and country-specific prevalence—‘point out a little bit more specifically where in the world it is most commonly found’ (interviewee #7, male, 30s).

The majority of participants thought that the best location to watch the film was right before the visit to the physician or nurse treating TB. Watching the film at home before the visit could induce fears and questions, which would remain unanswered for a longer period of time. On the other hand, some participants thought that the film should be made available to the public to increase the general knowledge of TB in the Swedish population. Furthermore, one participant suggested that we should implement the film on a broader scale, including primary healthcare facilities and at the national education programme ‘Swedish for immigrants’.

Our study introduced an educational film about TB, after which participants’ perceptions, fears and possible knowledge gaps were explored. We derived four major themes: the participants expressed concerns of TB being a lethal, highly infectious disease and something that is not talked about. However, the film was perceived to improve the understanding of TB symptoms, transmission and treatment and challenged the fears of TB being deadly and always contagious. Furthermore, participants’ suggestions for changes to the film can improve the film before implementation.

Our findings resonate with the theoretical framework proposed by Nuttallet al,25particularly regarding improving awareness of TB and challenging fears and misconceptions regarding the disease. Participants’ experiences underscore how educational material can enhance understanding of TB, affirming the applicability of this framework in comprehending TB care engagement in our context. The first theme derived in our study, the fear of TB being a deadly disease, relates to our study’s target population being people with TB in the framework model (figure 2). The fear of TB being a deadly disease has been found in previous studies of people living with TB infection or disease.13 31 32Fear of being contagious is also common, especially in regard to infecting children and others in the household.13 33As TB is largely a curable disease, the participant’s perception of TB being deadly and very contagious leads to unnecessary worrying and anxiety. Increasing understanding of the disease, as suggested by Nuttallet alas an intended outcome of the framework, can challenge misconceptions and lessen fears related to TB. This is further demonstrated by our fourth theme, that the film challenged fears of TB being deadly and always contagious, constituting a mechanism to reduce stigma (figure 2). The participants described feeling safer, more relaxed and secure after understanding that TB is treatable, how the treatment is taken and that TB infection is non-contagious.

The consequences of stigma include reduced health-seeking behaviour and treatment adherence. This is supported by a quantitative evaluation of treatment completion rates of TB infection in Sweden, which showed that individuals of Somali origin had nearly four times higher risk of non-completion compared with people from European countries.8Examples of enacted stigma were reported in relation to Swedish healthcare personnel. Participants described how a lack of knowledge about TB symptoms hindered contact with healthcare, and fear of TB was sometimes expressed through discriminatory or distancing behaviours. Other studies have reported TB-related stigma among healthcare professionals,35 36highlighting persistent knowledge gaps about TB transmission and disease progression.

Increasing knowledge and awareness of TB among Swedish healthcare personnel may, according to our study, reduce enacted stigma experienced by people with TB and contribute to decreased patient delay in seeking healthcare. In the framework by Nuttallet al, one intervention pathway to reduce stigma targets TB-specific healthcare workers. However, our findings extend the framework by highlighting the need to engage also non-TB healthcare staff through educational interventions, as they too may influence stigma experiences and access to care for people with TB. Although structural racism has not been widely studied in the Swedish healthcare context, it has been acknowledged in the literature and by authorities such as the Equality Ombudsman,37and may intersect with TB-related stigma.

Our study also collated the participants’ views regarding the film. Valuable feedback was given, including that many participants had remaining thoughts about where they had acquired the infection. Thus, suggestions for improvement included more information about TB epidemiology and country-specific prevalence. Statistics about treatment success, reinfection rates and possible side effects could also be added before implementation. Co-designing patient education interventions with the presumed target group has the advantage of providing information easily apprehended by the target group in question.40Furthermore, the educational material consists of information valuable to patients, including topics that healthcare professionals might not have thought to be important.40 41Improving our film according to our participants’ suggestions is an important step before starting the implementation process.

As a research team, we maintained reflexive awareness of the sample’s heterogeneity, especially the inclusion of both individuals with TB infection and those with active TB disease. This awareness informed our coding and theme development, encouraging us to question whether our interpretations were shared or contingent on participants’ experiences with TB infection or disease. The team discussed our assumptions about the potential influence of clinical background on perceptions of the intervention, and how this might have influenced our interpretation of the data. These reflexive practices supported a more nuanced and transparent analysis, which was crucial given the heterogeneity in our sample.

A limitation was that the film was only available in four different languages, and the interviews were conducted in English and Swedish. Even though the participants spoke one of the interview languages, some nuances may have been lost. Another reflection included that JK was in the film, presenting information about TB. She also performed three of the interviews and possibly introduced acquiescence bias affecting the responses of these interviewees. Moreover, in some cases, the interviewers were treating physicians to the participants, which could have instituted a power difference. However, we made clear that the views of the participants were completely anonymous and did not affect their treatment. Participants did express negative reactions towards the film, showing that the possible power difference did not affect the results. Also, by posing questions about stigma, we could have insinuated the relationship between TB and stigma, but some participants were clear about having no fears or stigma. The inclusion of only one participant with TB disease limited the depth of insight into how individuals with differing clinical presentations may interpret the intervention. While this limits transferability to all populations affected by TB, we believe the diversity of experiences within the infection group still provides meaningful insight into how the intervention may be received and adapted in practice.

In our study, the educational film was perceived by people with TB to increase their understanding of TB symptoms, transmission routes and treatment. Increasing understanding of TB constitutes the intended outcome of intervention pathways to reduce stigma, as suggested by Nuttallet al’s theoretical framework.25The film also challenged misconceptions and fears related to TB, described as a mechanism of stigma reduction. Changes to the film, suggested by the participants, can further improve the film. Through a better understanding of TB, we anticipate a decrease in stigma and a potential increase in adherence to treatment,25effects that should be further investigated after implementation of the film.

We thank Brian Davies for the translation of quotes, Sofia Tzirita for proofreading the manuscript and correcting grammatical errors, Kristian Laache for the film production and Aisha Osman and Yosief Weldegabier for translation of the film to Somali and Tigrinya, respectively.