There is a reduction in the workload of medical residency in orthopedics and a perception that residents can improve their surgical skills without the need to expose patients to risks. Arthroscopies are among the most frequent surgeries in orthopedics and can be trained in a Virtual Reality environment. Our objective is to evaluate the ability of Virtual Reality to develop arthroscopic skills in medical students and orthopedic residents. We conducted the search on Pubmed, Scopus, Embase, and Web of Science platforms. Excluding duplicates, 521 articles remained. We use the Rayyan application to exclude articles outside the scope of the study, and three randomized articles that evaluated the arthroscopic performance of medical students or orthopedic residents with and without training in virtual reality were selected. Regarding time, a tendency towards a decrease in arthroscopic execution time was observed by individuals who trained in VR simulators. Regarding surgical skill, a significant improvement in arthroscopic execution was observed by individuals who trained in VR simulators. Virtual Reality simulators proved effective in developing arthroscopic surgical skills and were an effective alternative in training students and residents.Level of Evidence I; Systematic Review and Metanalyses.

Há uma diminuição da carga horária de residência médica em ortopedia e uma percepção que os residentes possam aprimorar suas habilidades cirúrgicas sem necessidade de expor os pacientes a riscos. As artroscopias estão entre as cirurgias mais frequentes na ortopedia e podem ser treinadas em ambiente de Realidade Virtual. Avaliar a capacidade da Realidade Virtual para desenvolver habilidade artroscópica em alunos de medicina e residentes. Foram realizadas buscas nas plataformas Pubmed, Scopus, Embase, e Web of Science. Excluindo as duplicatas restaram 521 artigos. Foi utilizado o aplicativo Rayyan para exclusão dos artigos fora do escopo do estudo e selecionados 3 artigos randomizados que avaliavam o desempenho artroscópico de alunos de medicina ou residentes em ortopedia com e sem treinamento em realidade virtual. Em relação ao tempo, foi observado uma tendência de diminuição no tempo de execução artroscópica por indivíduos que treinaram em simuladores de Realidade Virtual. Em relação a habilidade cirúrgica, foi observado melhora significativa na execução artroscópica por indivíduos que treinaram em simuladores de Realidade Virtual. Os simuladores em Realidade Virtual se mostraram eficazes no desenvolvimento de habilidades cirúrgicas artroscópicas e foram uma alternativa eficaz no treinamento de alunos e residentes.Nível de Evidência I; Revisão Sistemática e Metanálise.

Currently there is a tendency to decrease the hourly load of medical residency in the world, which privileges the well-being of the resident, avoiding abuses by some educational centers. On the other hand, there is a decrease in the time available to enhance your learning in some areas. What makes it necessary is a teaching instrument capable of increasing the effectiveness of learning without losing in quality.

Although there is still a long way to go, the field of VR in arthroscopy training has expanded rapidly despite the limited scientific evidence.6In addition, it could become an opportunity for effective training of the resident and without exposing the patient to risk.

This study sought the scientific basis to confirm that VR is effective in teaching and should be increasingly incorporated into residency programs.

To answer the research question, we need intervention studies (1) (2) in medical students or orthodontists (3) that compare the effect of knee arthroscopy training in VR and non-intervention (controls), reporting at least one of the following results – execution time and score (Global Rating Score-GRS and Fundamentals of Arthroscopic Surgery Training (FAST).

The systematic search was conducted on the platforms Pubmed (Medline), Scopus, Embase, and Web of Science. The search was carried out in August 2023 with the following combination: (("arthroscopy"[tiab] OR "Arthroscopic Surgery"[tiab] OR "Orthopaedic Surgery"[tiab])) AND (("simulation training"[tiab] OR "virtual reality"[tiab] OR "simulation training"[tiab] OR "Surgical Simulation"[tiab] OR "Residency Triangulation"[tiab] OR "VR simulation"[tiab])).

The mean, standard deviation and sample size were collected from the intervention and pre- and post-intervention control group for arthroscopic time analysis and arthroscopic ability score.

The meta-analysis was performed using the Software Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (Version 3.3.070; Biostat Inc). Two goals-analyses were performed: one for the time of the arthroscopy and another for the score of arthroscopic ability.

Legend: NR: not mentioned in the original article.

Legend: 1: Specified eligibility criteria; 2: Randomized allocation; 3: Hidden allocation; 4: Similar groups; 5: Blind subjects; 6: Blind Interventor; 7: Blind evaluator; 8: Sample loss less than 15%; 9: Analysis by intent to treat; 10: Statistics comparing groups; 11: Point measurements and variability data.

Other desk training models (physical parts simulating a knee or a cavity) are cheaper,18–20allow the development of psychomotor skills, but were not part of the scope of this study. Thinking of the reality of the country, these systems could be useful in training residents and an economically more viable alternative. This method can improve the teaching of arthroscopy and is suitable for use in most medical residency services in orthopedics.

There are several limitations to this study. First, the lack of randomized studies. The methods of evaluation of surgical skills are different from each other, which makes it impossible to use a larger number of articles. Another important point is that there are several different VR simulators for training, but each has its own characteristics that can lead to an intervention or evaluation bias.

The training of medical students and orthodontics residents through VR has been shown to be effective in improving the arthroscopic surgical skills of the knee.

We thank the Brazilian funding agencies for their financial support: CNPq (National Council for Scientific and Technological Development) (CNPq) 305981/2023-4 and CAPES (Coordination for Higher Level Personnel Improvement) Financing Code 001.

CNPq (National Council for Scientific and Technological Development) Code includes please Scientific Development Council (CNPq) 305981/2023-4 and CAPES (Coordination for Higher Level Personnel Improvement) Financing Code 001.