Cardiotoxicity is a significant challenge associated with common first-line breast cancer (BC) anti-neoplastic (CTx) treatments including anthracyclines (AC) and targeted immunotherapies, such as anti-Her-2 therapy. Non-Hispanic black/African American (NHB) women are at higher risk for CTx induced cardiotoxicity compared to Non-Hispanic White (NHW) women. To date, most study efforts to mitigate cardiotoxicity target large vessels and cardiac damage. However, impaired microvascular function may also be implicated. Further, although exercise interventions reduce systemic inflammation and cardiovascular risk, few cardio-oncology studies examine the effect of exercise on CTx cardiotoxicity, and none have quantified microvascular endothelial function. An additional gap is the paucity of studies focused on racial disparities. The Discovery and Elimination of Cardio-Oncology Disparities for Equity in the Heartland (DECODE Heartland) Center addresses these gaps with three overarching goals to: (1) Test the feasibility and efficacy of the Take Charge during Treatment (TCT) exercise intervention designed to mitigate the adverse effects of CTx; (2) Quantify differences on exercise capacity and quality of life (QoL), endothelial function and molecular differences in inflammation in NHB versus NHW BC patients before and following CTx; and (3) Examine the influence of socio-ecological factors (individual, interpersonal, systemic, environmental) on inflammation, microvascular endothelial function, QoL in response to the exercise intervention. NHB and NHW women diagnosed with non-metastatic BC, scheduled to receive AC and/or anti-Her2 therapy, will be recruited and randomized to participate in the TCT intervention or usual care. TCT is a virtual exercise program with weekly coaching sessions, six of which include supervised exercise. Assessments include surveys, dual X-ray absorptiometry, flow-mediated dilation, pulse wave velocity and analysis, VO2peak cycling test, fat biopsy, venous puncture blood draw, geocoding of patient addresses, and measurement of neighborhood characteristics. Assessments will be captured prior to treatment, post-intervention (16–20 weeks), and at follow-up/study completion (12–18 months post-diagnosis). This study reflects a first step in a research trajectory to identify upstream determinants of disparities and discern how behavioral strategies can assist diverse BC survivors to move through treatment toward better health, including reduced rates of cardiotoxicity following anti-cancer treatment.

Nearly 4 million breast cancer (BC) survivors live in the US alone, with increases expected as the population ages and BC care continues to improve. Survivors often experience long-term complications resulting from treatment that diminish their length and quality of life (QoL) [1]. Of these, cardiotoxicity is a significant challenge associated with common first-line BC anti-neoplastic therapy (CTx) treatments including anthracyclines (AC) and targeted immunotherapies, such as anti-Her-2 therapy [2]. For some, these complications may resolve once treatment is completed; for others, they can lead to long-term cardiac damage and elevated risk for major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) [2].

Not all women have seen equal benefit from treatment advances. Specifically, BC mortality rates are 40% higher for Non-Hispanic Black (NHB) compared to Non-Hispanic White (NHW) women [3]. In addition, NHB women are at higher risk for adverse treatment-related cardiac outcomes [4–6]. These disparities are thought to be driven by a combination of environmental factors and biological pre-dispositions or stress responses. These include experiences across socially constructed racial groups influencing access to high-quality screening and treatment, lifestyle behaviors, comorbidities, and high psychosocial stress among other factors [2,7–9].

The etiology of CTx-associated cardiovascular damage and effective prevention strategies are not well understood, and most studies have focused on managing and defining mechanisms of CTx damage to large vessels and the heart [10]. Impaired microvascular function has also been implicated in CTx-associated cardio-toxicity and as such is a powerful but clinically underused predictor of future MACE [2]. For example, sub-acute administration of AC drugs, such as doxorubicin (DOX), suppresses NO-mediated dilation in response to flow in human coronary microvessels in adults without cancer. Further, ex vivo exposure of these vessels to DOX virtually eliminated endothelial-dependent dilation [2]. Similarly, common anti-Her2 therapies such as Trastuzumab (TZM) can have major effects on endothelial cells. Although this has not been evaluated directly in human vessels, it has been shown that TZM reduces eNOS expression, NO production, increase production of ROS and angiotensin II. These mechanisms lead to endothelial dysfunction and impaired vasodilator function [11,12].

Extensive evidence shows that exercise interventions improve endothelial function, reduce systemic inflammation, and possibly reduce the incidence of MACE [13–15]. However, few cardio-oncology studies have utilized exercise to mitigate CTx cardiotoxicity, and none have quantified the potential for a contribution from microvascular endothelial dysfunction [10,16–21]. A further gap in cardio-oncology research is a paucity of studies focused on understanding and addressing disparities [9,22,23]. The Discovery and Elimination of Cardio-Oncology Disparities for Equity in the Heartland (DECODE Heartland) Center (Fig.1) was developed to address these gaps. The center is composed of three projects, a population science, clinical science, and basic science project, which are conducted synergistically with a clinical trial at the hub. This comprehensive center seeks to fulfill three overarching aims.

Test the feasibility and efficacy of an exercise intervention designed to mitigate the adverse effects of CTx.

Quantify differences on exercise capacity and quality of life (QoL) (Population Science Project), endothelial function (Clinical Science Project) and molecular differences in inflammation (Basic Science Project) in NHB versus NHW BC patients before and following CTx.

Examine the influence of socio-ecological factors (individual, interpersonal, systemic, environmental) on inflammation, microvascular endothelial function, QoL, and response to the exercise intervention.

DECODE is being conducted across two Midwest urban academic cancer centers and includes 88 women (44 NHB/ 44 NHW) diagnosed with non-metastatic BC, scheduled to receive AC and/or anti-HER-2 therapy, who are recruited and randomized to participate in the Take Charge during Treatment (TCT) intervention or usual care (Clinical Trial IDNCT05223322). Participants must meet the following inclusion criteria: (1) Adult (≥ 18 years) assigned female sex at birth, (2) Diagnosed with invasive non-metastatic BC, (3) Self-identify as NHB or NHW, (4) Receiving neo-adjuvant or adjuvant CTx that includes anthracyclines and/or targeted monoclonal antibody anti-Her2 therapy, and (5) Able to safely participate in moderate-intensity exercise and strength training based on MD approval. Participants will be excluded from the study if any of the following are true: (1) Unintentional weight loss > 10% in the past six months, (2) Currently pregnant or lactating, (3) Metastatic disease, (4) Diagnosed cardiovascular disease as evidenced by cardiomyopathy (reduced regional or global LV contractility), diastolic dysfunction grade 2 or above, symptomatic coronary artery disease, ejection fraction below 50%, (5) History of prior chemotherapy or targeted anti-her2 treatment in the past three years, and (6) Non-English speaking.

The DECODE Heartland center comprises three synergistic projects - Population Science, Clinical Science, and Basic Science - each designed to address complementary aspects of the overarching research goals. Each project has distinct primary and secondary outcomes, with integrated methodologies.

The primary outcomes of the population science project are exercise capacity (maximal exercise, VO2peak assessment) and QoL. Secondary outcomes of this project include measures of physical function and fitness, anthropometry and behavioral outcomes such as physical activity levels measured by accelerometry. The clinical science project focused on endothelial function as its primary outcome, assessing through functional evaluation of both microvasculature ex-vivo and large conduit vessels in vivo via brachial artery flow mediated dilation. Cardiac function and arterial stiffness are secondary outcomes of this project. The basic science project has the molecular cardiovascular risk profile as its primary outcome.

Briefly, eligible participants are approached by their provider to explore interest in the study. Participants who are interested are then contacted by research staff and, if willing to participate, consented. Upon consent, participants are scheduled for their baseline visit T1. Randomization occurs after the baseline visit (Fig.2). Surveys and physical assessments are completed prior to treatment (T1), post-intervention,16–20 weeks (T2), and follow up/study completion, 12–18 months post diagnosis (T3).

For patients who are getting only AC therapy (not any anti-her2 therapy), their T2 visit occurs after all chemo therapies are completed.

For patients that are receiving both AC therapy and anti-her2 therapies, the T2 visit occurs after the AC therapy has finished, but while the anti-her2 therapy is still ongoing.

For patients that are receiving only anti-HER2 therapies (not any AC or taxane therapies) the T2 visit occurs usually between 16 and 20 weeks post baseline visit but is not aligned within any completion of anti-cancer therapy cycles.

Note that if patient treatment plans are paused or delayed for any reason, the study team will modify the intervention timeline and research visit schedule to accommodate for those changes.

Feasibility and acceptability of the study are evaluated using the following measures: enrollment numbers, retention (percentage of participants that completed T2 and T3 visits), adverse events, adherence to the intervention (number of intervention coaching sessions completed), satisfaction with intervention as measured by satisfaction questionnaire, qualitative interviews with study team members (focused on recruitment, operational and logistic challenges of the study) and qualitative interviews with participants (focused on participant experiences, perceived impact, and engagement with the intervention). Measures of feasibility and acceptability will be calculated for each participant at each time point and summarized using descriptive statistics and graphical displays. Differences in feasibility and acceptability measures will be examined across strata (racial group, treatment group).

Participants are sent study questionnaires via REDCap [24] before each time point, through which they report a range of measures. These include demographic information (e.g. address, self-identified race and gender, education and occupational status), behavioral outcomes (QoL, fatigue, sleep, dietary intake and physical activity) and interpersonal socioecological factors (perceived discrimination, resilience, social support and perceived neighborhood social cohesion).

Data on neighborhood attributes are obtained via geocoding. Briefly, residential addresses collected at each time point are geocoded to latitude/longitude coordinates and assigned to Census Block Group, Census Tract, and Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA) to facilitate linkage with a wide range of neighborhood level measures. These measures include contemporary and historical redlining, local segregation, racial composition, social vulnerability index, residential mobility, urbanicity/rurality, air pollution, walkability, density of vegetation, tree canopy and landcover, and pharmacy access.

The study questionnaires and neighborhood socioecological measures are further described in Table1.

Relevant data related to the clinical diagnosis and treatment plan are extracted from the electronic medical record and confirmed by medical oncologist throughout the study period. This enables the monitoring of any new diagnoses, including cardiotoxicity, as well as the initiation of medications that could influence cardiac outcomes. These variables will be documented and considered in our analyses to account for potential confounding effects.

Participant demographic and cardiovascular history data are extracted from the electronic medical record at each testing time point and reviewed by their MD and the exercise physiologist for contraindications that would prevent the participant to safely complete maximal exercise testing. The contraindications include, but are not limited to, acute myocardial infarction within two days, unstable angina, moderate to severe aortic stenosis, resting hypertension with systolic > 200 mmHg or diastolic > 110 mmHg, or uncorrected medical conditions, such as significant anemia, important electrolyte imbalance, and hyperthyroidism.

Participants are measured twice with a portable stadiometer (height) and a digital scale (weight) wearing light clothes and no shoes. A 0.2 kg discrepancy in weight or a 0.5 cm discrepancy in height in the first two measurements will result in a third measurement. Dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) provides measures of body fat and lean mass. A certified DXA technologist performs and analyzes the whole body measurement using the same machine for each participant at each time point [25]. Participants are fasted for 6 + hours prior to measurement.

Handgrip strength is measured using a Jamar hydraulic handgrip dynamometer. Participants will complete three trials with the dominant hand. Participants complete a 30-second sit-to-stand test using a chair with no arms and a height of approximately 43 cm.

Peak oxygen consumption is evaluated using cycle ergometry to exhaustion. A graded protocol is utilized starting at 20 watts with 20 W increases every two minutes. VO2peak is measured by a mixing chamber metabolic system (PARVO Medics, US) and determined in the 60 s period prior to peak voluntary effort, in 15-second epochs. Maximal effort is defined as fulfillment of three of the following criteria: (1) A plateau in VO2max with an increase in work rate defined as less than 50 ml/min, (2) A maximal HR within 10 beats of predicted maximal heart rate (220-age), (3) A respiratory exchange ratio of greater than 1.15, (4) No increase in heart rate with an increase in work rate (less than three beats), or (5) A rating of perceived exertion of 17 or greater on the Borg scale [26,27].

The six-minute walk test (6MWT) is a sub-maximal exercise test used to assess aerobic capacity and endurance in a variety of clinical populations. Participants are instructed to walk as fast as possible for six minutes. The distance covered in meters is used to determine performance capacity. Participants are allowed to take breaks, if needed, but the timer does not stop. The minimally clinically important difference for breast cancer patients undergoing treatment is 54 m [28].

Objective measures of physical activity are collected using the activPAL accelerometer. Participants are instructed to wear the device for seven days, 24-hours per day and are provided a log to document any removal times and reasons. The activPAL accelerometer is wrapped in a nitrile sleeve and worn at the midpoint of the right thigh, held on by a Tegaderm patch [29]. The activPAL is a water resistant device, allowing it to be worn while showering and only requiring removal if submerging in water (e.g., swimming in a pool, taking a bath) [30].

Cardiac function is assessed at baseline and at the 12-month timepoint using echocardiography, evaluating the following variables: left ventricle ejection fraction, left ventricle mass, relative wall thickness, left ventricle systolic function, longitudinal strain, circumferential strain, transverse strain, radial strain, end-systolic elastance, left ventricle diastolic function, effective arterial elastance, end-systolic wall stress and ventricular-arterial coupling.

Arterial stiffness is assessed using carotid to femoral pulse wave velocity, which is calculated from simultaneous acquisition of pressure waveforms at the carotid artery via a high-fidelity pulse wave tonometer and at the femoral artery via a cuff. Aortic blood pressure and wave reflection is assessed using the volumetric displacement from a cuff inflated over the brachial artery.

Endothelial function is evaluated in microvasculature and in large conduit vessels. Microvascular function from gluteal and surgical fat biopsies is used to test the direct effect of clinically used chemotherapy on peripheral microvascular function. Isolated arterioles are dissected from the fat biopsy and transferred to a microscopic apparatus for continuous measurements of vascular diameter in response to flow or pharmacological agents, as previously described [31,32]. Briefly, the isolated arterioles (50–250 μm) are cannulated with glass micropipettes in an organ perfusion chamber and perfused with physiological salt solution (pH = 7.4, bubble with 5% CO2and 21% O2, at a temperature of 37 °C). After a 30-minute pressurization at 30 mmHg, followed by another 30 min at 60 mmHg, arterial diameter is measured at baseline, after a pre-constriction with endothelin-1 (ET-1, Sigma; 120pM) of up to 60% of baseline diameter, and during intraluminal flow corresponding to pressure gradients of Δ5–Δ100 cmH2O. Maximal dilation (% MaxD) at each pressure gradient is calculated as the percentage change using the following equation: % MaxD = (diameter at each pressure gradient – ET-1 pre-constricted diameter)/(max diameter over the course of experiment – ET-1 pre-constricted diameter) x 100. Endothelium-independent vasodilation is assessed at the end of each protocol using papaverine (PAP, Sigma;10− 4M).

Brachial Artery Flow Mediated Dilation (baFMD) is performed following a six-hour fasting period. After the participant has rested in the supine position for 15 min, a pneumatic cuff (Hokanson rapid inflation/deflation system) is placed around their forearm with the arm abducted 80°. Baseline brachial artery diameter and blood flow velocity through the artery is measured 3–5 cm proximal to the antecubital fossa per established guidelines [33]. The probe is positioned parallel to the vessel to visualize lumen-intimal interfaces. After baseline images are captured to a laptop using Vascular Imager (Medical Imaging Applications) and the established EKG-gated methodologies [33], the cuff is inflated to 225 mmHg for five minutes to occlude blood flow to the forearm and hand. To assess vasodilation, artery diameters and Doppler flow is continuously captured for three min post-cuff release and measured using edge-detection software (Brachial and Doppler Analyzer; Medical Imaging Applications). Sublingual nitroglycerin (0.4 mg) is used to assess endothelium-independent dilation. Percent baFMD is defined as 100% X (Max. diameter during reactive hyperemia - resting diameter)/resting diameter. Values are normalized to the shear stress area under the curve [33].

Blood (~ 20 mL) is collected in coded standard de-identified blood collection tubes (standard EDTA or heparin), one RNA Paxgene tube (3 ml), and one BD Vacutainer tube (10 ml). Samples are processed to separate peripheral blood mononuclear blood cells (PBMCs), RNA, plasma for cytokine and other cardiometabolic biomarker analysis, and immune cell distribution.

Plasma samples will be analyzed for 42 cytokines using the Isoplex platform via CodePlex Human Cytokine Storm Panel-8. Transcriptomic expression profiling of PBMC will be performed utilizing existing infrastructure (Mellowes Center for Genomic Sciences and Precision Medicine at MCW). RNA sequencing will be performed by Illumina on the NovaSeq sequencer. Mitochondrial DNA damage will be assessed in isolated vessels from biopsies and total PBMCs via a well-established PCR protocol [34,35]. Similarly, a PCR based method will be used to quantify levels of cell free mtDNA in plasma samples from study participants [34,36].

Following completion of baseline assessments, participants are randomly assigned to the TCT Exercise Intervention or the Usual Care Group stratified by race and treatment type (AC, anti-Her2, or both). Randomization is performed within each center.

Participants randomized to the usual care group are given information regarding exercise guidelines for cancer survivors undergoing treatment, adapted from the American Cancer Society and the American College of Sports Medicine. Following completion of the study (i.e., completion of T3), participants in the control group are provided: (1) the TCT discussion workbook, (2) a resistance band set, (3) an activity tracker, and (4) four individualized exercise sessions with a health coach, similar to resources provided to the intervention group.

Although the overarching goal is to examine the feasibility of the exercise intervention, requirements of the funder included providing a power calculation to support the study sample size. Because VO2peak would require the largest sample, this outcome was used to inform the power analysis. The power and sample size of this two-arm study of measurements pre- and post-intervention are based on a difference (between arms) of differences in pre- vs. post-measurements. With the planned sample size (after 15% attrition) of 37 patients per arm for VO2peak, we have 86% power to detect a standardized effect size of 0.71 (controlling Type I error at 0.05). Such an effect size is generally accepted to represent moderate effects, small enough for good precision and large enough to be practically meaningful. For a comparison of racial strata, we have 76% power to detect a standardized effect size of 0.71 (controlling Type I error at 0.05).

Measures of feasibility/acceptability will be calculated for each individual at each time point and summarized using descriptive statistics and graphical displays. Differences in feasibility and acceptability measures will be examined across strata (racial group, chemo- and immuno-therapy). For testing the effects of the TCT intervention and for disparities analysis, each outcome (exercise capacity measures, endothelial function, pulse wave velocity, molecular cardiovascular risk profile measures and QoL measures) will be calculated for each individual at each time point and summarized using descriptive statistics and graphical displays. Longitudinal regression models adjusting for racial strata and selected demographic covariates will be estimated to quantify change in outcomes across time points. Each patient will be compared to their own baseline to account for patient-to-patient variability at the start of the study.

Cardiotoxicity confers significant morbidity/mortality among women diagnosed with BC and is characterized by sizeable racial disparities. The DECODE Heartland Research Center recognized the need for innovative approaches to investigate and mitigate the biological impacts of racism; the complexity of the problem demanded a truly multi-disciplinary team science approach. With this novel translational approach, we seek to identify factors associated with adverse treatment-related outcomes and test an exercise intervention to mitigate these adverse effects.

In this study, we test our central hypothesis that anti-cancer therapy elicits differential physical and cardiovascular outcomes across racial groups. We further hypothesize that participation in an exercise intervention during treatment could offer cardioprotective benefits and positively impact QoL and functional outcomes compared to usual care. Although there is evidence of the beneficial effects of exercise for breast cancer survivors [37–42], this is the first multi-disciplinary study to test the potential benefits of at-home virtual exercise intervention during treatment that addresses racial disparities and social-environmental factors on biomarkers, such as cardiorespiratory fitness (VO2peak), microvascular endothelial function, physical performance, QoL and molecular cardiovascular risk before/after/one-year following exposure to therapy with and without exercise. Given that CTx induced-cardiotoxicity among BC survivors may be in part mediated by the immune system and systemic inflammation [43–46], this pilot study will also test whether the molecular cardiovascular risk profile explains patient-specific differences in baseline microvascular function, and whether changes in these profiles following anti-cancer therapy predicts the severity of endothelial dysfunction and risk of CV events.

Racial disparities persist in BC outcomes and are increasingly linked to cardiotoxicity associated with CTx. For example, in a study of 216 BC patients receiving TZM, Black/AA women were at higher risk for cardiotoxicity and for not completing their adjuvant treatment due to CV complications [6]. Notably, Black/AA women often enter their BC experience at higher risk for CVD with low PA levels, higher psychosocial stress, and multiple comorbidities likely to contribute to systemic inflammation and CVD risk [47–49]. Hence, addressing CV risk in this population and testing the hypothesis that social determinants of health - including race, experiences of discrimination, and residence in redlined neighborhoods – are significant predictors of BC patients’ baseline status, longitudinal changes, and differential responses to an exercise intervention is of value. Study completion will provide novel information on the feasibility of an exercise during treatment intervention and its potential efficacy in mitigating the toxic effects of CTx on exercise capacity and QoL among a cohort of Non-Hispanic Black and Non-Hispanic White BC survivors. Further, this study’s approach for examining disparities uses a social-ecological model of disease with an explicit focus on racism/discrimination.

This study reflects a first step in a research trajectory to identify upstream determinants of disparities and their impact on patient’s pathophysiological stress response (to CTx and other) and discern how behavioral strategies can assist diverse BC survivors avoid adverse effects of treatment while setting them on a path toward better health outcomes. Exploring such mechanisms in clinical settings could help improve equity in the clinical oncology practice and integrate refined exercise prescriptions as part of standard cancer care protocols, focusing on improving diverse BC survivors overall QoL, including reduced rates of cardiotoxicity following anti-cancer treatment.