Clinical research is an integral component of orthopaedic practice with the purpose of advancing the field and improving patient care. The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery (JBJS) is a well-respected journal with a high impact factor and considerable influence on clinical practice. To our knowledge, there has been no systematic evaluation highlighting the variety of research published in this journal. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to evaluate trends in characteristics of articles published in JBJS from 2012 to 2022, including type of study, level of evidence, author information, and country of publication.

Articles published inJBJSbetween 2012 and 2022 were retrieved from theJBJSArchives. Title, level of evidence, description of the study as delineated in the abstract, first author degree, number of authors, and country of publication were recorded for each published article.

A total of 2668 articles were published inJBJSfrom 2012 to 2022. The proportion of preclinical studies published per year significantly decreased (P= 0.0025), whereas no statistically significant change was observed in the proportion of clinical studies (P= 0.34). A significant increase was noted in the proportion of database studies published (P= 0.00012). Studies classified as level II decreased over the study period (P= 0.029), whereas level III increased over the study period (P= 0.034). The average number of authors per article was 6 ± 3 authors with a significantly increasing trend over the study period (P= 0.0043). The proportion of first authors who were MD or equivalent decreased (P= 0.025), whereas first authors who were non-MD or non-PhD equivalent increased (P= 0.0068).

The publication trends inJBJSover the past decade demonstrate the changing landscape of orthopaedic research as it aims to address the burden of musculoskeletal injury and disease.

It is not clear whether the previously mentioned publication trends hold true for orthopaedic literature. In 2021, submissions to theJournal of Bone and Joint Surgery(JBJS) were approximately 76.7% scientific articles and 23.3% reviews, editorials, forums, or other.6Of these submissions, approximately 18% of the scientific articles and 50% of the reviews were accepted for publication.6Furthermore, previous reports have demonstrated a continued increase in the quantity of RCTs published inJBJSfrom 1988 to 2022.7-9These trends suggest high productivity among orthopaedic researchers. As the field of orthopaedics continues to expand and change over time, the type of research that is published and the characteristics of its authors can also be expected to change.

Therefore, the purpose of this study was to classify the characteristics ofJBJSpublications, including the type of study, level of evidence (LOE), and author information and evaluate these trends over time. We hypothesize that the proportion of nonoriginal data published and proportion of first authors that are non-MD or equivalent increases over the study period.

All articles published inJBJSfrom January 2012 to December 2022 were reviewed. Only papers categorized as “Scientific Articles” were included for data extraction. This excluded any papers categorized as “Guest Editorials,” “Current Concepts Review,” “The Orthopaedic Forum,” or “Commentary and Perspective.” Articles from the following journals were not included:JBJSReviews,JBJSOpen Access,JBJSEssential Surgical Techniques,JBJSCase Connector, andJBJSJOPA.

Titles and digital object identifiers of articles from all issues of volumes 94 to 104 (2012 to 2022) ofJBJSwere collected. For each paper meeting inclusion criteria, the journal information, type of study, LOE, author information, and country of origin were recorded. The type of study was classified as clinical, preclinical, or other (Table1). Clinical studies were further sub classified as original data, database, or nonoriginal. Preclinical studies were further subclassified as biomechanical, cellular, or anatomic. Level of evidence was reported on a scale from I to V. Author information included the degree of the first author (MD, DO, international doctorate, MD/PhD, PhD, or non-MD/DO) as well as the number of authors. The senior author information was used to determine the country in which the study was based.

Statistical analysis was performed using the R statistical package (Version 4.3.1, The R Foundation for Statistical Computing). Continuous variables were described with mean and standard deviation while categorical variables were described with frequencies and percentages. Pearson chi squared analysis or the Fischer exact test was used to determine whether there is an association between publication year and frequencies of key outcomes over the course of the study period, including type of study, LOE, degree of first author, and country of publication. Univariate linear regression analysis was used to determine whether key outcomes, including type of study, LOE, degree of first author, number of authors, and country of publication, can be predicted based on publication year. Trends over the course of the study period were analyzed for each outcome including, type of study, LOE, degree of first author, number of authors, and country of publication. For type of study, each specific category was analyzed separately. Statistical significance was set toPvalue of 0.05.

There were 2668 articles published inJBJSbetween January 2012 and December 2022 that were included in the study. Overall, the most common type of study was clinical original data (62%), which was also the most common type of study for each year included (Table2). Most articles were level IV evidence (26.2%; Table3). The overall average number of authors per paper was 6.2 ± 2.6. Most first authors had a MD degree or equivalent (73.8%) and were from the United States (62.0%; Table4).

Over the course of the study period, the proportion of preclinical studies published per year had a significant downward trend (P= 0.0025,R2= 0.66), whereas there was no statistically significant change in the proportion of clinical studies (P= 0.34,R2= 0.10; Figure1and Table5). Although there was no overall change in the clinical studies category, the proportion of database studies published significantly increased (P= 0.00012,R2= 0.82). A subanalysis of RCTs did not demonstrate a significant change over the course of the study period (P= 0.26,R2= 0.14). There were not enough clinical nonoriginal articles to complete a regression analysis. Within the preclinical category, the proportion of cellular studies published significantly decreased (P= 0.039,R2= 0.39). No significant change was observed within the biomechanic or anatomic studies.

Graph showing trends in study types of publications from 2012 to 2022.

There were statistically significant changes in the LOE of articles published during the study period; level II decreased (P= 0.029,R2= 0.43), whereas level III increased (P= 0.034,R2= 0.41; Table5). The other LOE articles did not significantly change.

The average number of authors per article was 6.2 ± 2.6 authors with a significantly increasing trend over the study period (P= 0.0043,R2= 0.61; Figure2, Table5). The proportion of first authors who were MD or equivalent decreased (P= 0.025,R2= 0.44), whereas first authors who were non-MD or non-PhD equivalent increased (P= 0.0068,R2= 0.58; Figure2).

Graph showing authorship trends in publications from 2012 to 2022.

This investigation reflects the publication trends ofJBJSover the course of a decade. The overall proportion of clinical research publications did not change significantly, whereas the proportion of preclinical studies significantly decreased. A notable increase was seen in database studies, level III studies, average number of authors per article, and first authors who were non-MD or non-PhD equivalents during the study period.

An analysis reviewing clinical articles published in nine orthopaedic journals found that 11.3% were level I evidence.13Although the analysis was published 20 years ago, the findings of our study exhibit a similar trend with 11.2% of the included articles being of level I evidence. Level I studies have a higher mean number of statistical tests when compared with lower-level studies.14This discrepancy in statistical tests is important to recognize when reviewing articles, as it can indicate the generalizability of an article's results. More recent analyses have demonstrated a concerted effort to increase level I evidence, with podium presentations at both the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons and American Association of Hip and Knee Surgeons meetings with increasing rates up to 17% and 11.8%, respectively.15,16The endeavor of expanding level I research is encouraging as a well-known weakness in the orthopaedic literature is its tendency to contain retrospective studies with a lower LOE. Although we found a statistically significant decrease in proportion of level II studies and increase in proportion of level III studies, there was not a strong model fit (R2) for either. Furthermore, the strength of evidence is important in clinical decision making, but all studies, regardless of LOE, should still be examined for inherent biases, methodological errors, and unclear reporting. Randomized controlled trials represent the study design with the highest LOE and are commonly used as the basis for recommendations in the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons clinical practice guidelines. However, previous reports found that 40% of RCTs published inJBJSfrom 1988 to 2000 and 47% of those published from 2001 to 2013 were of high quality.8This finding demonstrates that all research should be interpreted with a critical lens.

The average number of authors per article was 6.2 ± 2.6 authors with a significantly increasing trend over the study period (P= 0.0043,R2= 0.61; Table5). The proportion of first authors who were MD or equivalent decreased (P= 0.025,R2= 0.44), whereas first authors who were non-MD or non-PhD equivalent increased (P= 0.0068,R2= 0.58) as suspected. Our results demonstrate a similar trend to other literature. A 70-year analysis of the top 10 orthopaedic journals found that the number of authors increased significantly over time from 1.4 authors in 1946 to 5.7 authors in 2019, representing an average relative increase of 4.3% per year.17Interestingly,JBJShad one of the lowest average numbers of included authors over this period, with a mean 3.7 authors.17The increase in average number of authors per article may be explained by several phenomena, including (1) emergence of large-scale clinical multicentered trials and group authorship; (2) number of articles being used as a metric for scholarly impact regarding academic promotion and reputation; and (3) medical student involvement in research.

The rate of group authorship increased from virtually 0% in 1946 to over 15% by 2019, with group authorship being most prevalent in journals that placed restrictions on the total number of authors allowed per manuscript.17Most articles with a high number of authors credited for contribution are collaborative, large multicenter trials, such as the MultiCenter anterior cruciate ligament Revision Study groups (average of 192 authors per publication) or the Science of Variation Group (average of 134 authors per publication).17Despite the changing landscape of authorship, it still remains the primary metric by which academicians are evaluated, affecting promotion and reputation. The potential implications of this culture seem to be authorship inflation and dishonest authorship practices.18,19Regarding who qualifies for authorship, the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors has developed guidelines covering authors' roles and requirements.20However, persistent expansion of authorship raises concerns regarding whether International Committee of Medical Journal Editors recommendations are being adhered to, leading to unwarranted authorship. A similar phenomenon may exist among applicants to orthopaedic surgery residency or fellowship.

The strengths of this study were the comprehensive manual search of theJBJSArchives, defined classifications for included articles, and the 10-year duration of the study period.

Although this study strove to accurately represent the publication trends ofJBJS, it should be interpreted with consideration of the following limitations. This investigation only evaluates the trends of a single journal, which limits the generalizability of these findings. Future research should assess other high-impact, orthopaedic journals to determine any comparable trends. The quality of reporting of the included studies may have hindered the evaluation of the true LOE. Notably, most the included studies self-reported LOE. However, when the LOE was not reported it was up to the discretion of the study team to assign one as necessary. The impact of this was mitigated by using criteria set forth by the Center for Evidence Based Medicine. Furthermore, the senior author reviewed any articles in which the study team could not determine a LOE.

This investigation reflects the dynamic environment of orthopaedic research by presenting publication trends ofJBJSover the course of a decade. There have been notable changes in the types of studies being published and who is publishing them. As the research community grows, future endeavors should focus on conducting high-quality investigations and maintaining authorship integrity.