This proposed work is presenting the approximation of higher-order (HO) underwater robotic vehicle (URV) controller with the help of multi-point matching technique by incorporating greywolf optimization algorithm (GWOA). The performance of URV system is affected by external and internal dynamics. The proper momentum of URV system is achieved by designing a controller. The URV can be effectively operated by control action of controller. The URV controller is approximated to comparatively lower-order (LO) to propose an efficient, effective and economical controller for HOURV system. The approximation is accomplished with the help of expansion parameters of HOURV controller and its desired LOURV controller. The errors between these expansion parameters of HOURV controller and its desired LOURV controller are minimized using multi-point matching. The multi-point matching is depicted in the form of objective function (OF). The constructed OF is minimized by exploiting GWOA by fulfilling the steady-state matching condition and Hurwitz stability criterion, as constraints. The effectiveness of proposed approach of multi-point matching is verified by comparing the proposed LOURV model with LOURV models obtained with the help of other approximation approaches. The applicability of proposed LOURV controller is evaluated and validated by analyzing responses and tabulated data obtained in the results. Additionally, the statistical data of performance error values (PEVs) are provided in tabulated form along with its bar plot.

Keywords:Approximation, Expansion-parameters, Greywolf optimization algorithm, Lower-order model, Multi-point matching, Underwater robotic vehicle controller.

In this modern era, due to technological development, learning based approaches are employed in several domestic, engineering, industrial, biomedical, aerospace, security, etc. fields with the help of artificial intelligence and machine learning based tools1,2. In these areas, robotic is evolved as omniscient and premier branch of science. Robotics is one of the most significant and important field of research due to its usability and wide applications3.

In the momentum based robot design, robots are classified as linear momentum based robot and axial momentum based robot4. These robots can be utilized in ground applications, over-ground applications, surface-water applications, underwater applications, etc.5. In these applications, most of the robotic systems are deployed as non-holonomic robotic systems6. In robotic vehicles, the number of dependent states and its degree-of-freedom are different due to non-holonomicity of robotic systems. In case of underwater and floating type robotic systems7, the degree-of-freedom and dynamics are different due presence of various state variables. Due to which the analytical approach and mathematical modelling applied for underwater and floating type robotic systems are divergent in comparison to grounded and aerial robotic systems.

In8, Kadam and Tiwari designed the controller for autonomous underwater robotic vehicle (URV). In this article8, fourth order transfer function in terms of depth with respect to displacement is manifested, and its controller is proposed. Since, the manifested URV transfer function is affected by time-lag due to uncertainty, the linearized third order URV transfer function is obtained and control design is presented for URV system in8. The effective and comparatively more efficient controller design can be employed by proposing the comparatively lower-order (LO) URV controller for higher-order (HO) linearized URV system. So, the linearized third order URV controller transfer function can be further utilized for approximation in to desired order of reduced order model. However, the controller design for comparatively lesser order system is quite easier and economical, since the several advantages and merits are associated with reduced order models9. The advantages of obtaining LO model for HO system are as follows: analytical and mathematical designing of controller becomes easier, complexity in obtaining control laws becomes lesser, inversion of system matrices in the presence of system dynamics is simpler, economical due to less complication in control design, comparatively minimal simulation time, etc. In general, several order reduction approaches of obtaining LO models are available as Padè approximation, stability equation based reduction, Routh approximation, factor division reduction, etc., for fixed coefficient systems and interval modelled systems. In literature10, by addressing system uncertainties and external disturbances effectively through adaptive neural networks and layered control strategies is also presented as approximation strategy. In11, the authors extended the concept to HO uncertain nonlinear systems, incorporating active disturbance rejection to improve robustness and transient performance. Some of the other approximation approaches, generally utilized by researchers are Markov parameter and time-moment matching based approach, eigen vector based state space approximation, parametric error minimization based approach, uncertain nonlinear and time-varying system approximation with active disturbance rejection12, truncation based method, Hankel’s normbased approach, multi-point matching based approach, data-driven based reduction, etc. In literature, the described approximation approaches are exploited in the attainment of comparatively LO model for HO system in several applications such as aerospace application13, bio-medical application14, converter design application15, systems engineering application16, robotics application17, etc.

LO model for a HOURV controller is obtained by employing multi-point matching method.

In multi-point matching, FATFs are obtained using coefficients of HOURV controller and its desired LOURV model for minimization of errors.

To perform error minimization, an OF is constructed with the help of expansion parameters of HOURV controller system and its LOURV model.

The desired expansion parameters are selected such that the response of LOURV model must be matched with the response of HOURV controller system in terms of steady state and transient responses.

The determination of desired LOURV model of order two is done by minimizing the framed OF with the help of GWOA.

Minimization of OF is fulfilled by satisfying constraints of zero SS error and HCS.

For result validation of proposed LOURV model, comparative analysis is also done with the models ascertained by other approximation methods such as differentiation approximation19, factor division approximation20, mixed approximation methods21by incorporating Routh approximation, direct truncation, etc.

This proposal is presented by bifurcating the proposed work in different sections: the available literature on URV system and their control design are discussed in section “Related work” as a literature review. Further, in section “Mathematical modelling of underwater robotic vehicle controller”, mathematical modelling by incorporating state space matrices of linearized URV controller is presented. Furthermore, methodology of reduction of HO system to LO model is discussed in section “Problem formulation” as problem formulation. Additionally, minimization approach using GWOA is demonstrated in section “Greywolf optimization algorithm”. Moreover, in section “Numerical solution: approximation of URV controller, results and discussion”, HOURV controller is approximated to second order URV model. This section is also presenting the obtained results and its discussion. Finally, in section “Conclusion”, presented work is concluded on the basis of findings.

The conceptualization and implementation of underwater robotic vehicle (URV) by employing mathematical modelling and designing are evolved on the basis of utility, design criterion, area of application, vehicle dynamics, control design, economic design and operation, etc. In general, the URV are classified as single-body type URV and multi-body type URV based on vehicle utility22. Some of the classification are done by concerning the design criterion as bio-mimetic shaped, glider shaped, torpedo shaped, etc.23. However, the area of applications of URV in surface-water, under-water, submerged applications, URVs are also categorized based on distance from the surface water i.e. heave level24. The bifurcation of URV is also employed by considering their mode of operation. In this category, autonomous type URV and remote operated URV are classified25, generally. In literature, special types of URVs are also designed as URV-TWINBOT26(TWINBOT stands for twin robot which is utilized for co-operative underwater intervention), URV-COBOTS (COBOTs signifies collaborative-robots)27, etc.

Some of the researchers exploited their work by presenting a survey on various types of URV designs and their recent developments. In28, Wang et al. presented a comprehensive summary on bio-mimetic types URV and their distinguish control strategies, in details. Similar review is also done in29by Connor et al. by incorporating detailed analysis on sensors and communication technologies involved in the operation of swarm based URV systems. Later, detailed analysis on URV sensors and URV communication technologies is also provided in30and31by Cong et al., and Hoeher et al., respectively. Aditionally, specifically designed underwater robotic system such as multi-robotic URV, underwater gliding type robots, exo-skeleton type wearable robots for different underwater marine applications are also available in the literature32. Moreover, the recent developments in URV, different applications of URV, issues and challenges associated with URV are discussed in details by Wibisono et al. in33.

In URV, the issues and challenges related to linear and axial momentum control34, trajectory tracking, hurdle clearance, hydrodynamic forces, buoyancy effect, vehicle dynamics, etc. can be overcome by proposing a comparatively better controller for URV body. The appropriate control design is one of the prime criterion for accurate and precise operation of URV. The design and control of underwater robot for specific applications have been explored by various researchers in literature. In35, several technological developments on URV are presented by discussing their types, applications, design and control, etc. for autonomous mode. The navigation control and robust motion control of URV are discussed by Shi et al., and control design approach are presented by Liu et al., respectively in36and37. Similarly, in38, Bejarbaneh et al. presented the robust control design for autonomous URV using linear-matrix-inequality exploiting particle-swarm optimization.

Some of the researchers presented their work on trajectory tracking of autonomous URV. In39, Guerrero et al. presented the control design strategy based on adaptive disturbance observer for autonomous URV trajectory control. Further, Manzanilla et al. discussed and presented, integral sliding mode control based trajectory control for URV, in40. Furthermore, in41and42, the tracking control scheme using observer based barrier Lyapunov functions, and sensor based detection of coverage degree with target identification are deployed, respectively. In43, Heshmati-alamdari et al. proposed the nonlinear model predictive control scheme (NMPCS) for position control of URV system. The robust stability analysis is also performed for under-actuated URV system by incorporating experimental results in43. Similarly, NMPCS is also utilized in44for trajectory tracking of URV manipulator system. In addition, trajectory tracking of URV system is employed by incorporating active fault tolerant control scheme based on adaptive interval observer by Wang in45.

In literature numerous control design methods46are adapted by researchers to demonstrate the significance of control dynamics, degree-of-freedom, momentum, etc. of URV for different applications. Since, in autonomous URVs, the control design is most important to balance the degree-of-freedom of vehicle body, some of the researchers exploited their work on analysis and design of control dynamics of URV body by incorporating fuzzy and machine learning based approaches. In47, Liu et al. discussed and presented the control strategy using fuzzy approach for trajectory identification. In similar fashion, machine learning based double deep Q-network assisted deep deterministic policy gradient algorithms are utilized for trajectory tracking and phase shift design of URV exploiting re-configurable intelligent surface technique in48by Mei et al. Further, in49, fuzzy based motion and trajectory control is implemented for specially designed intelligent ocean-I (IO-I) prototype URV system by Kong et al. Similar type of fuzzy based adaptive controller is also utilized for trajectory control of URV system in50by Lakhekar et al. Furthermore, implementation of adaptive trajectory tracking control is done by Wang et al. in51for linear and angular momentum control. The fuzzy implementation in URV manipulator as a prototype system for marine application with vision and motion based controls are also available in52. Additionally, machine learning based approaches are also identified for designing and trajectory control of URV controller. The deep reinforcement learning with improved convolution network is employed for trajectory tracking of URV system in53by Chu et al. The deep learning approaches implemented for surface-water robotic vehicle are discussed in32in detail. In32, Qiao et al. presented a survey on deep learning approaches implemented for surface-water type robotic vehicles used in marine application. The machine learning approaches presented in32can be further utilized for better control design of URV systems over other classical control strategies. Some of the researchers provided the significant importance to control strategies on vision based controllers for URV systems. In54, vision based sensing system is implemented with light weight object detector embedded system for URV application by Wang et al. Moreover, specially designed URV prototype system named as Shark is developed in55by Hong et al. by incorporating vision based controller for inspection system along withcontroller for URV body control.

Thus, the better URV control design can be proposed by combining the suitable control design approaches as discussed previously for trajectory tracking, speed and motion control, heave controller, vision based control, etc. In the next section, mathematical modelling of URV controller is done and presented in details.

The momentum of underwater robotic vehicle (URV) is controlled by different hydrodynamic forces working on URV body. The URV is affected by six degree-of-freedom. These are surge, roll, sway, pitch, heave, and yaw. These forces are working on URV body for controlling forward and backward linear momentum, rolling around axis, swinging motion, steepness, dive force, and yawing across depth, respectively. All the hydrodynamic forces with degree-of-freedom are demonstrated in Fig.1.

where,sis the Laplace operator,denotes the numerator of HOURV controller in terms of depth, andis depicting the denominator of HOURV controller in terms of stern displacement of URV. The presented URV controller transfer function is of order three. This third order URV controller is further utilized for approximation in section “Numerical solution: approximation of URV controller, results and discussion”. In the next section, the problem formulation is presented to depict the reduction process.

The expansion parameters of HO system and its LO model are obtained by matching around considered multi-points. Suppose,nnumber of multi-points are considered for matching to obtain the desired LO model of orderr, wherenis such thatnfor better matching.

In the OF framed in (23), the weights are also associated to provide proper importance to each sub-objective based on the effect of multi-points on steady-state (SS) and transient state characteristics of LO model with respect to HO system. The values of associated weights are provided with equal importance of each sub-objectives. After assigning the weights, the desired LO model’s coefficients are manifested by minimizing the fitness function formulated in (22). In this process of minimization, satisfying the SS matching, and ensuring the Hurwitz criterion of stability (HCS) are considered as two prime constraints. These constraints are respectively depicted in (24) and (25).

The matching of SS is incorporated to ensure the zero SS error as given in (24). However, HCS as stated in (25), is providing stable LO model.

The associated weights with fitness-function shown in (22) are selected such that weights must be normally distributed among each sub-objectives. Thus, the resultant fitness-function is constructed by assigning the weights. The minimization of resultant fitness function is accomplished by incorporating the greywolf optimization algorithm (GWOA). The description of GWOA is presented in section “Greywolf optimization algorithm”.

Mirjalili et al. introduced the greywolf optimization algorithm (GWOA)60. GWOA is a population-based meta-heuristic algorithm inspired by social behavior and hunting strategy of grey wolves. The hierarchy followed by wolves in the pack is based on the domination behavior depicted by members of greywolf pack.

The GWOA begins with an initial population of wolves as candidate solutions. These are randomly distributed in the search space. The wolves’ positions are then iteratively updated to improve the quality of solutions. At each iteration, the algorithm simulates the social hierarchy within a wolf pack, consisting of an alpha, beta, and delta wolves. The alpha wolf represents the best solution found so far, while the beta and delta wolves correspond to the second-best and third-best solutions, respectively. The alpha wolf leads the hunting process by exploring promising regions in the search space. However, the beta and delta wolves perform local searches. The updated position of each wolf is determined by its proximity to the prey, which represents the optimal solution, as well as random exploration. Through a balance of exploration and exploitation, GWOA gradually converges towards an optimal or near-optimal solution. The GWOA terminates when a specified termination criterion is met, such as reaching a maximum number of iterations or achieving a desired level of solution quality. GWOA is applied to various optimization problems, and shows promising effect on obtaining effective and better solutions, efficiently. The pseudo code of GWOA is provided in Table1.

where,represents the current iteration,is the coefficient for exploration following the negative slope of [2, 0] such thatforandThe coefficientis such thatfor[0, 1]. Further,is the position of the-th wolf,is the position of the prey,is the position of the alpha wolf,is a random vector in the range [0, 1]. Similar definition can be considered for other wolves i.e.andFurthermore,is a random vector defined for the position of prey in the range [0, 1].

In (38), the associated weightsfor1 to 4 are considered, such that the equal importance are provided to each sub-objectives. In this work, the weights were chosen uniformly to assign equal importance to each of the four sub-objectives. This decision was made to ensure a balanced trade-off between transient response and SS response at the selected multi-points, thereby maintaining consistency in performance across the approximation of HOURV system in terms of LOURV model. The equal weighting strategy is specifically adopted to prevent bias towards any single performance criterion, and to evaluate the baseline effectiveness of the proposed approximation under uniform influence of each sub-objective. This approach aligns with prior studies where equal weights are used as a starting point for evaluating multi-objective behavior in the absence of clearly dominant criteria. Since the weights are equal, so importance provided to each sub-objective is uniformly considered, which indicates that there is moderate sensitivity among each sub-objective. The weight calculation constraint is given in (39).

The greywolf optimization algorithm (GWOA) is chosen in the minimization of the framed OF under defined constraints, due to the advantages associated with GWOA in handling multi-objective, nonlinear optimization problems, particularly those involving conflicting criteria such as transient and steady-state accuracy. GWOA offers a good balance between exploration and exploitation by adapting its hierarchical leadership-based hunting behavior, which helps in effectively navigating the search space without premature convergence. This issue often encountered with algorithms like particle swarm optimization (PSO), genetic algorithm (GA), jaya optimization algorithm (JOA), student psychology-based optimization (SPBO), etc. The main highlights of GWOA are its simplicity, presence of fewer tunable parameters, ease of implementation in search space, also make it robust and computationally efficient for optimization problems. Furthermore, preliminary comparative simulations revealed that GWOA achieved faster convergence and produced lower-order models with improved fidelity as compared to PSO, GA, JOA, SPBO, for the same set of multi-point matching conditions. Its primary limitation is that, like other population-based algorithms, it may become computationally expensive for very high-dimensional spaces or suffer from stagnation in late iterations if diversity is not maintained. However, based on presented multi-objective problem structure and simulation outcomes, GWOA demonstrated consistent and reliable performance, justifying its use within the scope. In the support of GWOA, convergence curve is also provided in Fig.2.

Comparison of Convergence Curve in Determination of LOURV model.

The weighted OF shown in (40) is minimized using greywolf optimization algorithm (GWOA) by satisfying zero SS error and Hurwitz criterion of stability (HCS) constraints as defined in (24) and (25), respectively. To solve (40), constraints (24) and (25) are changed to the constraints redefined in (41) and (42), respectively.

The superiority and efficacy of proposed LOURV model of order two as obtained in (43) is compared with the models ascertained by incorporating other approximation approaches such as differentiation (Diff) approximation, factor division (FD) approximation, and FD-Diff based mixed approximation. Along with these approximation approaches some other mixed approach of approximation are also utilized in inclusion with Diff and FD approximations as Diff-Routh approximation (Diff-RA), Diff-direct truncation (Diff-DT) approximation, FD-RA, FD-DT approximation.

Similarly, LOURV models of order two by employing Diff-RA and Diff-DT approaches are demonstrated in (45) and (46), respectively.

Further, FD-RA and FD-DT approaches are implemented to obtain the second order LOURV models as depicted in (48) and (49), respectively.

Furthermore, the FD-Diff based mixed approximation is employed to ascertained the LOURV model as provided in (50).

In the support of proposed second order LOURV model as obtained in (43) for HOURV system shown in (30), step-response accompanying impulse and Bode-responses are presented. The suitability of proposed LOURV model manifested in (43) over other models depicted in (44)–(50) for HOURV system is defended by providing the error-response. The step and error-responses of LOURV models and HOURV system are provided in Fig.3. In Fig.3a, it can be clearly observed that the response of proposed LOURV model is close to the response of HOURV system in comparison to other LOURV models of (44)–(50). The error-response depicted in Fig.3a for proposed LOURV model (43) with respect to HOURV system (30) is comparatively better as compare to error responses plotted in Fig.3b–h for models (44)–(50), respectively. This proves that the error-response of proposed LOURV model (43) is comparatively better and acceptable with respect to HOURV system (30).

Step-response of HOURV controller and its LOURV model besides error response.

Similar observation is also found in Fig.4for proposed LOURV model (43) with respect to HOURV system (30). The impulse-response provided in Fig.4a for proposed LOURV model (43) shows better representation in comparison with the responses plotted in Fig.4b–h. In addition to this, Bode-response is also provided for further analysis of proposed LOURV model (43) obtained for HOURV system (30) in Fig.5. In Fig.5, the magnitude and phase responses of proposed LOURV model (43) are closely matching the magnitude and phase responses of the HOURV system expressed in (30) in comparison with the models obtained in (44)–(50). Thus, the impulse and Bode-responses as depicted in Figs.4and5, respectively, are representing the better depiction of transient and frequency responses in the support of proposed LOURV model with respect to HOURV system (30). In these responses also, the characteristics of proposed LOURV model is comparatively suitable for HOURV system in comparison to models of (44)–(50).

Impulse-response of HOURV controller and its LOURV model.

Bode-response of HOURV controller and its LOURV model.

Additionally, the specifications of time-domain (STD) and performance error values (PEVs) of proposed LOURV model (43) and other LOURV models as presented in (44)–(50) with respect to HOURV system are also provided in tabulated form for comparative analysis, and better explanation of proposed LOURV model. The STD are shown in Table2whereas Table3is providing the information about PEVs. Table2is provided in the support of presented step responses which provides numerical values of all STD to prove the efficacy of proposed LOURV model. Similar observation is found in Table3, since the PEVs of proposed LOURV model is comparatively superior over other models of (44)–(50). In the support of the PEVs of the proposed LOURV model, analysis of variance for PEVs is done. In this statistical test, F-statistic and p-value are calculated to determine the significance level. A higher F-statistic indicates significant variance within the groups. Similarly, p-value signifies the probability of observing the null hypothesis. The p-value, typically less than 0.05 is indicating in the support of strong statistical significance by rejecting the null hypothesis. Since, the F-statistic and p-value as presented in Table4, are statistically significant. In Table4, it can be observed that F-statistic range from 17.260 to 25.664, which are considerably high for all PEVs. Moreover, PEVs yielded low p-valuesThus, statistical data confirm that the proposed LOURV model (43) exhibits statistically significant improvement for respective HOURV system (30).

Statistical analysis in the support of proposed LOURV model considering PEVs.

The graphical depiction of PEVs of proposed LOURV model and other LOURV models are also deployed in terms of bar plot in Fig.6. In Fig.6a–f, it is visible that the proposed model (43) is holding the minimum value of PEVs in comparison to LOURV models provided in (44)–(50). From Table3and Fig.6, it can be observed that the proposed LOURV model as obtained in (43), holds the minimum PEVs in comparison with other LOURV models presented in (44)–(50) with respect to HOURV system.

Performance error value plot of LOURV models with respect to HOURV system.

Hence, it can be concluded from responses and comparative analysis of tables’ data that the proposed LOURV model (43) is depicting the similar properties of HOURV system (30) which also prove the adequacy of proposed LOURV model.

Due to higher degree of freedom, approximation approaches can be implemented for other robotic applications such as surface robot including linear momentum based and axial momentum based, aerial robot, unmanned robotic vehicles, floating robotic vehicle, etc.

In the field of bio-medical engineering, various bio-medical instruments can be design efficiently by incorporating appropriate approximation technique.

Some of the work on approximations can be also exploited for micro-electronics mechanical systems (MEMSs) for providing economical circuit design.

The systematic learning process such as analytic hierarchy process, simple-additive-weighting method, R-method, multi-attribute utility and value theory, TOPSIS (Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) method, graph-theory, grey-relational analysis, etc., can be implemented for obtaining better approximated model.

Additionally, multi-point matching can be implemented with weight determination approach by implementing learning based approach.

Further, control design can also be done by employing different control design methods by incorporating the machine learning approach. By including the possibility of integrating the proposed LOURV controller with embedded platforms or real-time control hardware, in future work, computational feasibility and validation can be done under hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) testing scenarios. Furthermore, as a future work direction, the uncertainty in HOURV system due to variation in system dynamics can be addressed to propose an interval modelled URV system for detailed analysis of system and its controller.