Soft materials capable
of controlled shape changes near ambient
temperature are of interest for active devices that interact with
living organisms. In this study, we achieve such functionalities by
synthesizing responsive elastomers based on polydiethylsiloxane (PDES).
Unlike conventional silicones, PDES elastomers are mesomorphic. Without
any reinforcing additives, the mesophase improves the toughness of
PDES to 8 times that of neat polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) elastomers
and 4 times that of Sylgard 184. Uniaxially stretched mesomorphic
PDES elastomers undergo reversible shape changes under a bias load
in response to temperature, generating 14% contractile strain on heating
from 0 to 40 °C. The utility of PDES elastomers as actuators
is enhanced by fabricating them into twisting actuators and describing
strategies to minimize hysteresis during shape change cycles. The
combination of toughness, actuation near ambient temperature, and
environmental stability suggests that PDES could be attractive for
biomedical devices where soft actuators interface with living organisms.

Polymeric, reversibly shape-changing materials face several
challenges
that limit their broader application. Degradable shape-changing materials
are suitable for short-term applications such as drug delivery,,tissue scaffolds,,and biodegradable robots.,Few materials can achieve controlled, reversible shape transformations
while maintaining mechanical integrity and functionality over extended
periods of time in harsh environments. This limitation constrains
their use in long-term applications, including implantable medical
devices that can replace or augment human muscles,,and robots that operate under prolonged
environmental stresses. In addition,
many reversibly shape-changing materials exhibit low actuation stress
and strain,,along with significant reductions
in the modulus upon actuation. In the case of thermally responsive
materials, actuation often requires high temperatures, making it challenging to apply such materials
for applications involving interactions with living organisms. Collectively,
these challenges highlight the critical need to further develop soft,
reversible, shape-changing materials to enable broader and more practical
applications.

Mesomorphic silicone elastomers are promising
candidates for soft,
reversible shape-changing materials that address the key limitations
of existing systems. The most commonly used silicones are elastomers
based on poly­(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS), but this amorphous material
is relatively unresponsive to changes in environmental conditions.
In contrast, poly­(di-n-alkylsiloxanes) substituted
with ethyl up to hexyl side chains form mesophases that are absent
in PDMS and offer intriguing properties.−The elastomers
exhibit mesophases identified as conformationally disordered crystals
(condis crystals).,−In particular, uniaxially stretched
polydiethylsiloxane (PDES) elastomers function as thermally responsive
actuators as they undergo phase transitions between the condis crystal
mesophase and the isotropic phase.,−Although the shape changes of PDES are reminiscent of those observed
in LCEs, as both rely on phase transitions from ordered to disordered
states to drive actuation, PDES and LCEs are fundamentally different.
While the mesophase of LCEs stems from rigid, rodlike molecular segments, the condis crystal mesophase is found in polymers
with high chain flexibility.,,,Another key advantage of PDES
elastomers lies in the chemical stability of the silicone elastomers.
The chemical inertness of silicone elastomers ensures stability in
vivo,,supporting their potential uses in long-term
applications.

Several significant gaps in the research of PDES elastomers
limit
the current utility of these materials in engineering applications
despite the demonstrated promise. For example, systematic control
of material formulation and its effect on the actuation behavior is
missing. Research on PDES has primarily focused on synthesizing high-molecular-weight
PDES and understanding its fundamental physics. PDES elastomers were
often prepared through peroxide vulcanization, yielding elastomers
with a somewhat uncontrolled cross-link density. PDES elastomers were also synthesized by end-group cross-linking,
allowing for better control over the cross-link density, but in these
cases, the cross-link density was often fixed. Thus, systematic studies for tailoring PDES formulations
to achieve a range of thermal and mechanical properties remain underdeveloped.
Furthermore, despite the promise for actuators, the shape change of
PDES elastomers has been limited to uniaxial strain, leaving more
complex modes of actuation unexplored.

Here, we synthesize and
characterize PDES elastomers with controlled
thermal and mechanical properties (Figurea). Our approach for synthesizing PDES is
suitable for making a range of elastomers and does not require an
elaborate apparatus or extreme conditions. A systematic approach for
synthesizing PDES elastomers with controlled cross-link densities
is adapted from typical strategies to synthesize PDMS elastomers,,thereby providing a tunable range of thermal and mechanical properties.
It has been well established that materials exhibiting strain-induced
phase transformations offer improved mechanical toughness. Similarly, PDES elastomers are found to outperform
commercially available silicone products in terms of toughness. The
PDES elastomers are fabricated with two distinct actuation modes:
(1) contraction and expansion and (2) twisting and untwisting. Accelerated
aging studies clearly indicate that PDES elastomers demonstrate enhanced
resistance to both oxidation and hydrolysis compared to polyester
LCEs and semicrystalline shape memory polymers. This combination of
properties indicates promise for soft actuators requiring environmental
stability.

(a) Comparison of PDES-based silicone from this work to conventional
PDMS-based silicone. (b) Synthesis of a linear PDES copolymer followed
by cross-linking into a PDES elastomer. The resulting PDES elastomers
are transparent elastomers, as shown in the picture with illustrated
molecular structures. Scale bar: 5 mm.

As a
first step toward fabricating PDES elastomers, linear, vinyl-functionalized
PDES copolymers were synthesized by anionic ring-opening polymerization
of cyclic siloxanes (Figureb). The synthesis of linear PDES copolymers was performed
by modifying a previously described method. The cyclic monomer, hexaethylcyclotrisiloxane (D3Et), was polymerized with (CH3)3SiOK
as the initiator andN,N-dimethylformamide
(DMF) as the promoter. A small amount of 1,3,5-trivinyl-1,3,5-trimethylcyclotrisiloxane
(D3Vi) was added as a comonomer to synthesize
linear PDES with vinyl side groups, which served as cross-link sites
for preparing elastomers in the subsequent step. The molar ratio of
D3Etto D3Viwas set at
98:2. This method of synthesis was chosen since it produced PDES of
a moderately high molecular weight. The mesophase in PDES is only
present when its molecular weight exceeds a critical threshold, which
is about 30 kg mol–1.−When the polymerization
time was extended from 5 to 24 h at 110 °C, the number-average
molecular weight of resultant PDES increased from 43 to 54 kg mol–1(Figurea). While both reaction times resulted in PDES with a molecular
weight over the critical threshold for forming mesophases, 24 h was
selected as the polymerization time for this study as it consistently
produced PDES around 54180 ± 671 g mol–1with
a yield of 70 ± 3% (n= 3).

(a) GPC spectra of linear
PDES copolymers with different polymerization
times. Polymerization times of 5 and 24 h yield PDES copolymers with
number-average molecular weights of 43 and 54 kg mol–1, respectively. (b)1H NMR spectra of linear PDES copolymers
in CDCl3, confirming the presence of ethyl and vinyl groups.
(c) DSC spectra of linear and cross-linked PDES elastomers, with the
image on the right providing a magnified view to highlight the presence
of Ti. (d) Storage modulus of cross-linked PDES elastomers as a function
of temperature. The phases corresponding to the crystalline phase
([Cr]), mesophase ([M]), and isotropic phase ([I]) are labeled. Consistent
with DSC data, phase transitions are observed in similar temperature
ranges.

The presence of vinyl groups on
linear PDES copolymers was confirmed
by1H NMR spectroscopy. Two main sets of peaks were observed
that correspond to protons from ethyl side groups (Figureb). Resonances corresponding
to protons in −Si­(CH2CH3)2O– were clearly observed at 0.90–0.99
ppm (a) and 0.47–0.56 ppm (b). A small set of peaks detected at 5.8–6.1 ppm correspond
to protons from vinyl side groups (c,d,e). The molar
ratio of each repeat unit (D3Et/D3Vi) was calculated to be 98.3/1.7, yielding the average
number of vinyl groups per polymer chain to be 8.9 ± 0.2 (n= 3). The calculated vinyl contents were used in subsequent
steps to determine the amount of cross-linkers required for synthesizing
elastomers at varying cross-link densities.

Linear PDES copolymers
exhibit crystallinity and mesophases below
room temperature. On heating, an overlap of two major peaks was observed
between −20 and −8 °C by differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) (Figurec). PDES is reported to exist in two crystalline forms, referred
to as α and β forms.,,The two peaks observed in DSC thermograms are attributed
to crystal melting peaks of α and β forming into a mesophase.
A peak corresponding to the melting of the mesophase into the isotropic
phase was not clearly observed from the DSC analysis.

Cross-linked
PDES elastomers were prepared by hydrosilylation in the presence of
a platinum catalyst. Vinyl groups from linear PDES copolymers and
Si–H groups from hydride-terminated PDMS cross-linkers react
at 65 °C to cross-link PDES copolymers into elastomers (Figureb), as confirmed
by a gel fraction of 93.0 ± 2.0% (n= 3). PDES
elastomers with a range of thermal, mechanical, and actuation properties
were fabricated by varying the cross-link density. The cross-link
density was controlled by adjusting the ratio of vinyl groups from
linear PDES copolymers and Si–H groups from cross-linkers.
The molar ratios of vinyl to Si–H groups were set at 100/40,
100/60, and 100/80, with the resulting elastomers referred to as 40,
60, and 80% cross-linked PDES elastomers, respectively. The presence
of the mesophase in these PDES elastomers was confirmed by DSC (Figurec). In addition to
two crystal melting peaks, the melting of the mesophase was clearly
observed in 40% cross-linked PDES elastomers around 8 °C. The
transition temperatures observed from DSC agree with the transition
temperatures observed from dynamic mechanical analysis (Figured). The storage modulus was
measured as a function of temperature for 40% cross-linked PDES elastomers.
The elastomers show an abrupt drop in the storage modulus at −20
°C, which corresponds to the crystal melt transition temperature
of PDES elastomers. A smaller drop in the storage modulus is observed
between 0 and 10 °C, which is the transition temperature from
the mesophase to the isotropic phase. After the transition into the
isotropic phase, PDES elastomers have a storage modulus of 92.7 ±
2.8 kPa at 20 °C (n= 3).

PDES
elastomers with varying cross-link densities demonstrate different
mesomorphic behaviors and mechanical properties. The Young’s
modulus of PDES elastomers increases with the increasing cross-link
density (Figurea,Table S1). As the cross-link density increases
from 40 to 80%, the Young’s modulus increases from 113.3 ±
15.5 to 370.5 ± 26.1 kPa (n= 3). PDES elastomers
have excellent toughness compared to PDMS elastomers with a comparable
Young’s modulus (Figureb). As neat PDMS usually presents poor mechanical properties,
commercially available PDMS products such as Sylgard 184 are engineered
materials that contain reinforcing fillers such as silica. It is noteworthy that PDES elastomers without
reinforcing fillers provide a mechanical performance similar to or
surpassing that of engineered PDMS elastomers. The toughness of 80%
cross-linked PDES was 8 times higher than that of neat PDMS and 4
times greater than that of Sylgard 184 with a comparable Young’s
modulus. PDES elastomers with a lower cross-link density (60% cross-linked
PDES) also demonstrate toughness 12 times higher than neat PDMS and
3 times higher than Sylgard 184 with a comparable Young’s modulus.
PDES elastomers can exhibit high toughness up to 1.35 MJ m–3without having reinforcing additives. We attribute the toughness
of PDES elastomers to strain-induced mesophase formation. The impact of mesophases on improved mechanical
properties has been observed in different mesomorphic materials such
as poly­(lactic acid),and poly­(ethylene terephthalate). The strain-induced mesophase formation is also
reminiscent of the improved toughness seen in natural rubber from
strain-induced crystallization. PDES
elastomers with varying cross-link densities provide a range of failure
strengths in addition to the modulus and toughness (Figurec). The failure strength of
PDES elastomers increases with the increasing cross-link density,
while the failure strain remains nearly constant at 400%. The failure
strain of PDES elastomers exceeds that of neat PDMS and Sylgard 184,
while remaining below that of Ecoflex 00–30.

(a) Representative stress–strain
curves from uniaxial tensile
tests of PDES elastomers with varying cross-link densities, conducted
at 20 °C. The failure point is marked on each curve. (b) Ashby
plot of toughness versus Young’s modulus, highlighting the
enhanced toughness of PDES elastomers compared to neat PDMS and Sylgard
184 at similar moduli. (c) Ashby plot of failure strength versus failure
strain, demonstrating the mechanical performance across different
formulations. (d) Representative stress–strain curves of PDES
elastomers at 10 °C, revealing distinct plateaus during loading
and unloading cycles. (e) Images taken at different stages of unloading
at 10 °C, showing the initiation and propagation of the renecking
process. Scale bar: 2 mm. (f) Wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) patterns
of PDES elastomers at 10 °C under different uniaxial strains.
With the cross-link density fixed at 40%, unstretched PDES (left)
exhibits isotropic patterns, which transform into anisotropic patterns
under 350% stretch (right). (g) Change in the scattered intensity
collected perpendicular to the direction of stretch as a function
of the scattering vector with increasing strain at 10 °C.

The mechanical properties of PDES elastomers are
significantly
influenced by the temperature. To understand the influence of temperature
on the mechanical properties, uniaxial cyclic loading and unloading
tests were carried out on 60% cross-linked PDES elastomers at different
temperatures (Figure S1). When the PDES
elastomer was uniaxially stretched by 320% over its initial length
at 10 °C, a small plateau was observed between 200 and 250% strain
(Figured). The appearance
of the plateau is associated with the formation of the aligned mesophase
under uniaxial tension.,It has been reported
that the plateau during the loading cycle indicates PDES transitioning
from an amorphous to an aligned mesophase, accompanied by neck formation.
In our studies, no necking was observed with increased loading, with
elastomers homogeneously stretched across the sample. In contrast,
the phase transition was clearly visible during the unloading cycle
(Figuree,Video S1). While being unloaded, PDES elastomers
transitioned from an aligned mesophase back to an amorphous phase.
This transition created two distinct regions to appear in the sample,
with narrower areas being in the aligned mesophase and wider areas
being in the amorphous phase. During unloading, the amorphous regions
emerge randomly across the sample with varying numbers of initiation
points. The onset of the plateau in the stress–strain curve
during unloading marks the beginning of this renecking, where wider
amorphous regions emerge alongside the aligned mesophase. As unloading
progresses, these amorphous regions expand until the entire sample
transitions to the amorphous phase, marking the end of the plateau.
Larger, more pronounced plateaus were observed at 0 °C. When
the temperature was increased to 30 °C, the plateaus were not
observed in either the loading or the unloading cycles. The appearance
of the plateau due to strain-induced phase transition is not unique
to the PDES elastomer; it is a common phenomenon across various material
systems including shape memory alloys and natural rubbers, which undergo strain-induced crystallization. Additionally, the temperature had a significant
impact on the hysteresis between loading and unloading cycles. As temperature increased,
hysteresis decreased, becoming nearly absent at 30 °C (Figure S1). The effect of temperature on mechanical
properties and hysteresis was also observed in 40% cross-linked PDES
elastomers (Figure S2).

Mechanical
stretching induces aligned mesophase formation in the
PDES elastomers. In unstretched PDES elastomers, unaligned mesophases
are present and melt around 8 °C (Figurec,d). When PDES elastomers
are mechanically stretched at 10 °C, stretching leads to an increase
in the melting temperature of the mesophase and promotes the formation
of aligned mesophases, as evidenced byFigured–g. Under no strain (ε = 0%,
10 °C), PDES elastomers exhibited isotropic scattering patterns,
indicative of the amorphous, isotropic phase (Figuref, left). Upon stretching (ε = 350%,
10 °C), scattering patterns became anisotropic, indicating the
formation of an aligned mesophase. The phase transition was accompanied
by an increase in the order parameter from approximately 0 to 0.82
(Figure S3a). The phase transition of PDES
elastomers was strain-dependent. The effect of strain on phase transition
was studied by measuring the scattered intensity along the meridian
(perpendicular to the direction of stretch) as a function of the scattering
vector,q, at varying strains (Figureg). As the strain increased, a sharp 110
peak emerged atq= 0.8 Å–1, corresponding to adspacing of 7.85 Å, as
opposed to the amorphous scattering with adspacing
of 8.16 Å. In addition, the amorphous scattering peak observed
atq= 1.55 Å–1in the unstretched
sample (ε = 0%) disappeared with the increase in strain due
to an increased anisotropy in the stretched sample. This change occurred
since the 111 reflection (Figuref, right) appears only along azimuthal angles near
the equatorial (Figure S4). The positions
of the two anisotropic reflections are in strong agreement with the
moduli of plane normals reported previously by several groups.,WAXS results are consistent with results from uniaxial cyclic loading
and unloading tests (Figured), confirming that mechanical stretching induces phase transitions
in PDES elastomers from the amorphous phase into the aligned mesophase.

Stretched PDES
elastomers are thermally responsive actuators. Amorphous PDES elastomers
were uniaxially stretched by 250% and cooled to 0 °C to generate
the mesomorphic material (Figurea). The mesomorphic PDES elastomers were prepared in
this way and maintained with a bias load contract uniaxially as the
mesophase melts with increasing temperature. We first study the generation
of stress in PDES elastomers, while maintaining a fixed length (isostrain).
PDES elastomers with the highest cross-link density (80% cross-linked
PDES) show the highest blocking stress of 0.52 ± 0.01 MPa on
heating (n= 3). The magnitude of stress generated
at a fixed strain of 250% decreased with an increasing cross-link
density. Lower contractile stresses of 0.37 ± 0.03 and 0.21 ±
0.03 MPa were produced in 60 and 40% cross-linked PDES elastomers,
respectively (n= 3). Control PDMS elastomers (Ecoflex
00–30) also undergo thermally reversible shape changes under
a bias load as would be expected for any elastomer. However, amorphous PDMS only produces one tenth of the
maximum actuation stress of 80% cross-linked PDES elastomers (contractile
stresses: 0.05 ± 0.01 MPa) over the same temperature range. Repeated
thermal cycling demonstrates the reversibility of the actuation behavior
of PDES elastomers (Figureb). PDES elastomers were cycled 4 times between 0 and 40 °C,
with the actuation stress remaining constant throughout the cycles.

(a) Contractile
stress generated by PDES elastomers with varying
cross-link densities. The presence of a mesophase in PDES enhances
contractile stress compared to PDMS. (b) Reversibility of actuation
evaluated by cyclic testings, showing consistent actuation stress
over four cycles. (c) Structural transition of PDES elastomers in
response to temperature changes. WAXS was performed on 40% cross-linked
PDES elastomers under a fixed uniaxial strain of 350%. The scattered
intensity along the meridian was measured as a function of the scattering
vector during heating and cooling to capture the temperature-dependent
structural changes. (d) Hysteresis in actuation is controlled by partial
melting of the mesophase, reducing hysteresis to near zero when heated
only up to 20 °C.

The PDES elastomers synthesized
in this study exhibit an actuation
behavior comparable to previously reported systems, but there are
important new insights. Important initial efforts to characterize
PDES elastomers did not provide a systematic approach to control the
cross-link density and used a variety of cross-linking mechanisms.,In addition, the phase transition temperature was sometimes reported
to be near 100 °C under large stresses. However, there are unclear
aspects of these efforts, such as the molecular weight of PDES before
cross-linking. Other elastomers prepared by cross-linking the end
groups of linear, moderate-molecular-weight PDES provide sufficient
details for direct comparison. PDES elastomers
in our study demonstrate slightly broader actuation temperature ranges,
but the phase transition temperatures are very similar. Cross-linking
exclusively at the chain ends tends to produce more uniform polymer
lengths between cross-links, which may lead to narrower actuation
temperature ranges. We note that the prior report showed a higher
actuation strain, but with a lower elastic modulus. Again, the focus of that important effort was not systematic
control of the cross-link density. Here, tuning the cross-link density
strongly influences the stress generated from actuation (Figurea). The effect of
the cross-link density on the actuation behavior extends beyond the
magnitude of stress generated. Hysteresis between heating and cooling
cycles varies with the cross-link density, with 80% cross-linked PDES
elastomers showing the lowest hysteresis, while lower cross-link densities
lead to increased hysteresis. We cannot rule out the fact that the
degree of mesophase formation is also affected by the cross-link density
over this range.

The mesophase of PDES elastomers forms and
melts in response to
temperature changes. WAXS patterns were collected during the heating
and cooling cycle of the PDES elastomer under a fixed strain of 350%.
Upon heating from 10 to 40 °C, the intensity of the 110 peak
decreased, indicating the melting of the aligned mesophase into the
amorphous phase (Figuresc,S3d). The melting of the aligned
mesophase on heating is supported by the decrease in the order parameter
(Figure S3c). When the PDES elastomer was
heated 20 °C immediately after stretching at 10 °C, the
110 peak intensity slightly increased, possibly due to the somewhat
slow kinetics of mesophase formation. During subsequent cooling, the
110 peak intensity increased again (Figure S3d), with the most pronounced intensity and alignment observed at 0
°C, confirming the reformation of the aligned mesophase (Figurec). Hysteresis was
observed in both the 110 scattered intensity and the order parameter
during the thermal cycle, aligning with the hysteresis observed in
isostrain tests (Figuresa andS3).

Hysteresis in
actuation cycles of PDES elastomers can be controlled
by partially melting the mesophases during heating cycles. PDES elastomers,
regardless of the cross-link density, exhibit hysteresis during actuation
cycles (Figurea).
From a practical perspective, hysteresis between heating and cooling
cycles complicates the use of a responsive material as an actuator.
In semicrystalline shape memory polymers, hysteresis in actuation
cycles can be controlled by partially melting crystalline regions
during heating. In this approach, the remaining crystallites function
as latent templates for crystallization. We hypothesized that the same approach can be used for controlling
the inherent hysteresis observed in PDES elastomers. To validate the
hypothesis, 60% cross-linked PDES elastomers were heated to different
temperatures to vary the extent of mesophase melting (Figured). When heated to 40 °C,
where the mesophase was fully melted, the hysteresis between the heating
and cooling cycles was the largest. In contrast, when the mesophase
was partially melted at 20 °C, the elastomers exhibited almost
no hysteresis. These results demonstrate effective control over the
hysteresis of PDES elastomers through partial mesophase melting, highlighting
their potential for actuators where controlling hysteresis is critical.

Unaxially stretched PDES elastomers undergo contraction upon heating
and elongation upon cooling under a constant bias load (isostress).
Contractile strain produced from 80% cross-linked PDES elastomers
is 14% over a temperature window of 0 to 40 °C (Figurea) with a bias stress of 410
kPa. As expected, control PDMS elastomers (Ecoflex 00–30) show
a much smaller contractile strain of 4% with no abrupt changes in
the slope of the strain as a function of the temperature plot during
isostrain tests. For 60 and 40% cross-linked elastomers, the prestretching
stress was not high enough to be maintained throughout the test due
to instrument limitations. Thus, isostrain results of 60 and 40% cross-linked
PDES elastomers are not included.

(a) Actuation strain of PDES elastomers
under uniaxial stretching,
undergoing contraction and elongation in response to temperature.
The presence of a mesophase enhances strain compared with PDMS elastomers.
(b) Schematic illustrating the fabrication process of twisting actuators
and their thermally responsive twisting and untwisting behaviors.
(c) Photographs capturing the thermally responsive actuation of twisting
and untwisting actuators. Scale bar: 1 cm.

The utility of PDES elastomers can be expanded
by fabricating the
materials into twisting actuators. Twisting actuators were fabricated
by building bilayer structures, where 250% stretched PDES elastomers
serve as an active layer and unstretched PDMS elastomers function
as a passive layer (Figureb). After fabrication, the bilayer-based actuator adopts a
twisted form once the external load is removed. This twisted form
is dictated by the amount of recovered strain and the aspect ratio
of the bilayer, as has been observed previously. The bilayer-based actuator exhibits thermally responsive
twisting and untwisting actuation driven by the phase transitions
of the PDES elastomers. Upon cooling, the active layer of the PDES
elastomer expands along the long axis. As a result, the length of
PDES and PDMS becomes better matched, causing the actuator to untwist
(Figureb,c). On heating, the PDES elastomer contracts and
drives the actuator to twist (Figureb,c,Video S2). Since the thermally responsive shape changes of the PDES
elastomer as the active layer are reversible, twisting and untwisting
actuation of the bilayered actuators is also reversible in response
to temperature.

PDES elastomers are environmentally stable
when exposed to accelerated
hydrolytic and oxidative conditions. Silicones are known to have good
environmental stability, which makes them desirable materials for
applications, such as long-term implantable biomedical devices. PDES
elastomers with a 60% cross-link density show 0 ± 0.2% and 0
± 0.1% change in the mass after 15 days in accelerated hydrolytic
and oxidative conditions, respectively (n= 3). (Figurea,b). These conditions
are thought to represent over 6 to 7 months in vivo based on the comparison
to studies on poly­(carbonate urethanes). The environmental stability of PDES elastomers was further validated
by analyzing changes in the actuation performance before and after
degradation (Figurec). There is no significant change in the blocking stress (p= 0.6279, one-way ANOVA) or temperature range of actuation
after simulated degradation, demonstrating that PDES elastomers show
good hydrolytic and oxidative stability.

(a) Mass changes of PDES
elastomers under accelerated hydrolytic
degradation. (b) Mass changes under accelerated oxidative conditions.
(c) Actuation stress remaining largely unchanged before and after
degradation. (d) PDES elastomers exhibiting no mass loss, whereas
LCEs and SMPs showing a decline after 15 days under accelerated oxidative
conditions.

The environmental stability of
PDES is notable compared to other
types of shape-changing materials. Semicrystalline SMPs, which are
capable of reversible shape change with a bias load and are often
polyesters (e.g., cross-linked poly­(ε-caprolactone-diacrylate)
(PCL)), are vulnerable to hydrolytic and oxidative conditions, making
them suitable for biodegradable devices. While many LCEs provide some resistance to degradation in hydrolytic
conditions due to the intrinsic hydrophobic nature, LCEs still degrade
to varying degrees.,In vitro degradation tests comparing
the dry mass retention of representative SMPs, representative LCEs,
and PDES elastomers confirm the excellent environmental stability
of the PDES elastomers (Figured). After 15 days under accelerated oxidative conditions,
PDES elastomers retained 99.8 ± 0.3% of the initial mass, whereas
both LCEs and SMPs exhibit a larger mass loss, with 89.3 ± 1.3
and 76.4 ± 3.0% mass remaining, respectively. The environmental
stability of PDES elastomers offers advantages, particularly in biomedical
applications where biostability is critical. PDES-based elastomers
and actuators could be promising candidates for developing implantable
medical devices where long-term biostability is essential, contributing
to the device durability over extended periods.

There is a need to develop
responsive materials
that undergo controlled
changes in form at temperatures near room temperature or physiological
conditions that are environmentally stable. Here, we describe a formulation
strategy for PDES elastomers, whose unique mesophases impart them
with excellent toughness and shape-changing abilities near ambient
temperature. These silicones lack any mesogen typically associated
with liquid crystalline materials. We demonstrated approaches to systematically
control the cross-link density, which controls the actuation stress
and strain magnitude. While the shape change of these materials is
hysteretic on heating and cooling, partial melting of the mesophase
can be used to eliminate the hysteresis. The PDES elastomer temperature-responsive
actuators are capable of contracting and elongating or twisting and
untwisting with temperature change. PDES elastomers exhibited excellent
environmental stability compared with other shape-changing materials.
We envision PDES elastomers as promising candidates for a wide range
of applications, particularly in biomedical applications.

Hexaethylcyclotrisiloxane
(D3Et; purity: 97%), 1,3,5-trivinyl-1,3,5-trimethylcyclotrisiloxane
(D3vi; purity: 97%), the hydride-terminated poly­(dimethylsiloxane)
cross-linker (1000–1100 g mol–1), and the
linear PDMS copolymer (4–5 mol % vinylmethylsiloxane, 800–1,200
cSt) were purchased from Gelest, Inc. Potassium trimethylsilanolate
((CH3)3SiOK; purity: 96%) was purchased from
Ambeed.N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF;
purity: 99.9%), toluene (anhydrous, purity: 99.8%), and chloroform
were purchased from Fisher Scientific. Karstedt’s catalyst
(∼2% of Pt in xylene) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Glacial
acetic acid (purity >99.7%) was purchased from Thermo Scientific
Chemicals.
Sodium hydroxide pellets (NaOH) were purchased from Fisher Chemical.
2,2-(Ethylenedioxy)­diethanethiol (EDDT), 1,3,5-triallyl-1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6­(1H,3H,5H)-trione
(TATATO), Irgacure 369 (I-369), Irgacure 819 (I-819), butylated hydroxytoluene
(BHT), triethylamine (TEA), cobalt chloride (CoCl2; purity:
97%), PCL-diol (Mn–10 kg mol–1), 4-dimethylaminopyridine, triethylamine, acryloyl
chloride, 2,2-dimethoxy-2-phenylacetophenone (DMP), andN-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone (NVP) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The
liquid crystal monomer 1,4-bis-[4-(6-acryloyloxyhexyloxy)­benzoyloxy]-2-methylbenzene
(RM82) was purchased from Daken Chemical. The Sylgard 184 PDMS kit
was purchased from Electron Microscopy Sciences. Ecoflex 00–30
and Ecoflex 00–35 Fast were purchased from Smooth-On. All chemicals
used in this study were used as received without further purification.

A monomer
solution of D3Et(7 mL, 21.8 mmol) and D3vi(120
μL, 0.449 mmol) was prepared and stirred. (CH3)3SiOK (1.3 mg, 10.1 μmol), DMF (30 μL,
0.387 mmol), and the monomer solution (3 mL) were added to a 25 mL
round-bottom flask. The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature
for 1 min and then heated to 110 °C. The polymerization was carried
out for 24 h under dry nitrogen. After the reaction time, acetic acid
(350 mg) was added to quench the reaction. Toluene (8 mL) was added
to the mixture to reduce the viscosity. After 10 min of stirring at
room temperature, the mixture was transferred to a 50 mL centrifuge
tube, and 30 mL of deionized water was added. The tube was centrifuged
at 4000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature. After centrifugation,
the top layer containing the polymer was collected. This process was
repeated 4 times to neutralize the polymer chain ends and to remove
the potassium salt/promoter complex. The polymer was then precipitated
via centrifugation using methanol. This process was repeated 5 times
to remove any unreacted monomers and oligomeric byproducts. The precipitated
polymer was collected and then dried in a vacuum chamber at room temperature
for 24 h.

PDES
elastomers were synthesized via the hydrosilylation of vinyl groups
of linear PDES copolymers and Si–H of the cross-linker in the
presence of a platinum catalyst. In a 5 mL vial, the linear PDES copolymer,
the cross-linker, Karstedt’s catalyst, and toluene were added
and stirred using a Thinky Mixer for 2 min. Both Karstedt’s
catalyst and the hydride-terminated (dimethylsiloxane) cross-linker
were used as a stock solution. Karstedt’s catalyst stock solution
was prepared by adding 5.8 μL of Karstedt’s catalyst
solution in 2 mL of toluene. The cross-linker stock solution was prepared
by dissolving 45 μL of the cross-linker in 400 μL of toluene.
For 100 mg of PDES, 50 μL of Karstedt’s catalyst stock
solution and 100 μL of toluene were added. After stirring the
mixture, the desired amount of the cross-linker stock solution was
added and stirred using a Thinky Mixer for 3 min. The mixture was
cast on the glass slide coated with Rain-X and then thermally cross-linked
at 65 °C for 48 h to ensure complete cross-linking. During cross-linking,
the top surface was left exposed so that toluene could evaporate during
the process.

The twisting actuator was prepared by attaching
the PDMS elastomer
onto the prestretched PDES elastomer. 60% cross-linked PDES elastomers
were cut into dimensions of 1.3 × 3 × 0.21 mm3. The PDES elastomer was stretched by 250% at room temperature, with
both ends of the actuator taped. On the top of PDES, the PDMS elastomer
was attached using Ecoflex 00–35 Fast. The PDMS elastomer was
made with Sylgard 184 at a weight ratio of 10:1 base to cross-linker.
After curing of Ecoflex 00–30 Fast at room temperature, tapes
were removed, resulting in a twisted actuator. For the actuation test,
the twisting actuator was slightly stretched by a load (12 g). The
actuator was first cooled to 12 °C inside the fridge and then
heated to 40 °C using a heat lamp. The cycle was repeated multiple
times to evaluate the reversibility of the actuation.

Neat PDMS elastomers
were synthesized via hydrosilylation. Linear PDMS copolymers containing
vinyl side groups (200 mg) were mixed with the hydride-terminated
PDMS cross-linker and Karstedt’s catalyst stock solution (100
μL). Karstedt’s catalyst stock solution was prepared
by adding 5.8 μL of Karstedt’s catalyst solution in 2
mL of toluene. The PDMS cross-linker was added at 6 and 9 wt % for
synthesizing neat PDMS elastomers with low and high cross-link densities,
respectively. After stirring using a Thinky Mixer for 2 min, the mixture
was cast on a glass slide and thermally cross-linked at 65 °C
for 48 h to ensure complete cross-linking.

PDMS elastomers based
on Sylgard 184 were prepared by mixing the Sylgard 184 base and curing
agent. The weight ratio between the base and curing agent was set
at 20:1 and 30:1 for preparing PDES elastomers with high and low cross-link
densities, respectively. After degassing the mixture in a desiccator
under vacuum, the mixture was cast on a glass slide and thermally
cross-linked at 110 °C. PDMS elastomers based on Ecoflex 00–30
were prepared by mixing the Ecoflex 00–30 base and curing agent
at a weight ratio of 1:1. After degassing the mixture in a desiccator
under vacuum, the mixture was cast on a glass slide and cross-linked
at room temperature.

LCEs were synthesized by two-step reactions.
First, Michael addition
of acrylate mesogens and thiol chain extenders was carried out to
synthesize the liquid crystal oligomer. RM82, EDDT, and TATATO were
mixed in a molar ratio of 0.8 (RM82):1 (EDDT):0.2 (TATATO). The mixture
was combined with 2 wt % BHT, 3.5 wt % photoinitiator with a ratio
of 0.25 (I-819):0.75 (I-369), and 1 wt % TEA. The mixture was stirred
and oligomerized for 3 h at 65 °C. Following the first reaction,
the oligomer was sandwiched between glass slides coated with Rain-X.
The oligomer pressed between glass slides was heated and cooled 3
times to remove the alignment. The oligomer was photo-cross-linked
at room temperature under 365 nm ultraviolet (UV) light under an intensity
of 10 mW/cm2(Excelitas Technologies, OmniCure LX500 UV
LED) for 10 min per side to produce the polydomain LCE film.

Thermoresponsive, cross-linked PCL-DA (Mn–10 kg mol–1) films were chosen to serve
as SMPs. PCL-DA was synthesized by acrylation of PCL-diol in accordance
with a prior report. Films were prepared
by dissolving PCL in dichloromethane (0.15 g mL–1). The photoinitiator solution (10 wt % DMP in NVP) was then added
at 15 vol %, mixed atop a shaker plate (1 min, 200 rpm), and pipetted
into a silicone mold (d–50 mm xt–2 mm, McMaster-Carr) secured between glass slides. The mold
was then cross-linked over a UV plate (UV-Transilluminator, 6 mW cm–2, 365 nm) for 5 min, flipping halfway through. The
films were dried under vacuum (5 h, 30 in. Hg, room temperature) and
then annealed at 85 °C (1 h). After resting for 5 h, the films
were cut with a razor blade into their final dimensions (3 ×
3 cm2).

Differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC) was performed using a TA Instruments DSC
2500 differential scanning calorimeter. A sample of approximately
10 mg was loaded into an aluminum hermetic DSC pan. The sample was
first cooled to −90 °C and then heated to 100 °C.
The temperature ramp was repeated for three cycles at a rate of 10
°C/min. Thermal analysis was repeated 3 times (n= 3).

Mechanical
analysis of materials was carried out by a dynamic mechanical analyzer
(DMA) (TA Instruments, RSA-G2). For quasi-static tensile testing,
rectangular strips of PDES elastomers with dimensions approximately
2.5 × 7.5 × 0.4 mm3were loaded and stretched
at a constant linear rate of 0.13 mm/s. To measure the blocking stress,
the sample was first stretched by 250% at room temperature. Under
a constant strain of 250%, the temperature was ramped from room temperature
to 0 °C at a rate of 3 °C/min. After the mixture was cooled
to 0 °C, the temperature was ramped to 40 °C. This process
was repeated to measure the cyclic blocking stress. For actuation
strain measurements, the sample was first stretched by 250% at room
temperature, and then the temperature was cooled to 0 °C. The
force at 0 °C was maintained, and the sample was heated to 40
°C at a rate of 3 °C/min. This process was repeated to measure
the cyclic actuation strain. For dynamic mechanical analysis, PDES
elastomers of dimensions approximately 4.85 × 15.8 × 0.45
mm3were loaded and tested in tensile mode at 1.5% strain
at 0.25 Hz and heated from −40 to 30 °C at a rate of 3
°C/min. All tests were repeated 3 times for each composition
(n= 3).

All gel fraction tests were performed 3 times
for each composition (n= 3).

whereMfinalis
the final mass after the sample is patted dry andMinitialis the initial dry mass. Samples were returned
to the medium after measurement. A comparison of the environmental
stability of PDES elastomers, LCEs, and SMPs was performed by measuring
the change in dried mass before and after degradation (Figured). Samples were removed from
the accelerative oxidative media after 15 days and dried in a vacuum
chamber for 3 days. The final dried mass was compared to the initial
mass to evaluate the extent of degradation for each material.

Molecular
weights of PDES polymers were determined by gel permeation chromatography
(GPC). Samples were dissolved in tetrahydrofuran for 24 h at room
temperature with a concentration of 3 mg/mL and then analyzed in a
TOSOH Ambient Temperature GPC system with a 0.1 mL/min flow rate.

Molecular structures (including
the molar fraction of the vinyl content) were determined with1H NMR spectroscopy (Avance Neo 400 MHz spectrometer) with
CDCl3as the standard. The molar ratio of each repeat unit
in the PDES copolymer was determined by the proportion of the integral
area of (c + d + e)/b. The calculated
molar ratio was compared to the number-average molecular weight measured
by GPC to determine the number of repeat units in PDES copolymers.

WAXS was collected using a
Xeuss 3.0 system from Xenocs (Soft Matter Facility, Texas A&M
University). The sample temperature and strain were controlled using
a Modular Force Stage system (MFS-350 with a 2N load cell, Linkam)
connected to a T96-S controller (Linkam). The incident X-ray wavelength
was λ = 1.54189 Å. Full Debye–Scherrer rings were
integrated over 120 s intervals on a DECTRIS Si 1 M Eiger photon-counting
area detector at different temperatures and tensile strains.

Self-developed MATLAB-based scripts leaning on concepts from a previous
report were used to analyze the stored
images. The data analysis relies on the image processing of the recorded
diffracted patterns. To reduce noise and artifacts from air scattering,
the background intensity, taken at the exact same experimental conditions
without the presence of the sample, was subtracted from the recorded
patterns. To calculate the scattered intensity of each reflection,
we rebinned the two-dimensional (2D) detector images from orthogonal
to polar spaces using azimuthal integration intervals of dϕ
= 1° and radial intervals of dq= 0.005 Å–1. Additional noise reduction was achieved by averaging
the signal over two 10°intervals around the
fiber axis (meridian) for evaluating peaks along the scattering vector,q, and a 0.04 Å–1interval for evaluating
intensity distributions along the azimuthal angle, ϕ.

Quantitative analysis of the emerging mesophase peak intensity
was performed by fitting Voigt profiles to the averaged peaks after
subtraction of the scattering profile at 0% strain, in which the sample
is completely isotropic. This was performed by using the MATLAB Voigt
model fit subroutine. The fitted peaks
were then integrated to obtain the intensity values.

This work was supported
by the National Science Foundation
under Grant Nos. 2330040 and 2147830 (T.H.W.). The authors would like
to thank Seokmin Kang (Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University)
for the helpful discussions. Use of the Texas A&M University Soft
Matter Facility (RRID:SCR_022482) and the contribution of Dr. Peiran
Wei are acknowledged.

The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.macromol.5c01221.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.