Complex contagion models that involve contagion along higher-order structures, such as simplicial complexes and hypergraphs, yield new classes of mean-field models. Interestingly, the differential equations arising from many such models often exhibit a similar form, resulting in qualitatively comparable global bifurcation patterns. Motivated by this observation, we investigate a generalised mean-field-type model that provides a unified framework for analysing a range of different models. In particular, we derive analytical conditions for the emergence of different bifurcation regimes exhibited by three models of increasing complexity—ranging from three- and four-body interactions to two connected populations which simultaneously includes both pairwise and three-body interactions. For the first two cases, we give a complete characterisation of all possible outcomes, along with the corresponding conditions on network and epidemic parameters. In the third case, we demonstrate that multistability is possible despite only three-body interactions. Our results reveal that single population models with three-body interactions can only exhibit simple transcritical transitions or bistability, whereas with four-body interactions multistability with two distinct endemic steady states is possible. Surprisingly, the two-population model exhibits multistability via symmetry breaking despite three-body interactions only. Our work sheds light on the relationship between equation structure and model behaviour and makes the first step towards elucidating mechanisms by which different system behaviours arise, and how network and dynamic properties facilitate or hinder outcomes.

The development and analysis of contagion models on higher-order networks over the last few years opened up new directions of research to understand spreading processes on networks; cf. Battiston et al. (2020), Bick et al. (2023), Ferraz de Arruda et al. (2024). In classical epidemic models on networks contagion acts along an edgebetween nodesiandj. By contrast, the probability of a susceptible nodeibecoming infected in a network with higher-order interactions depends on the orderof a simplex/hyperedgethat represents a-body interaction involvingi. For example in case of simplicial complexes—as illustrated in Fig.1—the rate of infection of susceptible nodeiis significantly increased by routes of infection via 2- and 3-simplices. Note that complex contagion induced by simplices/hyperedges is in addition to the pairwise contagion dynamics. While three distinct nodesi,jandkmay be connected in a triangle of pairwise links, the existence ofindicates complex contagion. Ifis part of a simplicial complex (i.e., it satisfies the closure relation that,,are also present), the complex contagion implies an additional infection pressure onto a susceptible node whose neighbours are infected, see Fig.1. More generally for hypergraphs, each hyperedge exerts infection pressure that typically takes the formwithIbeing the number of infected nodes in the hyperdege and parameters(St-Onge et al.2021,2022; Ferraz de Arruda et al.2020). Note that this allows for any number of infected nodes within the hyperedge to cause infection in contrast to simplicial contagion where all nodes in the simplex apart from the susceptible node have to be infectious for the excess contagion to be activated.

Complex contagion through higher-order interactions yields dynamical phenomena one may not expect if contagion is only pairwise. In contrast to traditional pairwise contagion, which is typically characterized by the disease free state losing stability to an endemic state in a forward transcritical bifurcation, contagion on higher-order networks can show hysteresis/bistability. For example, the disease-free and an endemic equilibrium may co-exist or there could be multistability between two endemic equilibria (strictly positive steady states). For example in Iacopini et al. (2019), the authors show analytically that the transition is discontinuous and that a bistable region appears where healthy and endemic states co-exist. Similarly, in Ghosh et al. (2023), the authors construct a one-dimensional model starting from an ensemble model based on the degree of the nodes. After a number of averaging assumption, their one dimensional mean-field model also displays discontinuous transition and bistability. Even more complicated behaviour is observed for contagion dynamics on hypergraphs. In Ferraz de Arruda et al. (2023), the authors show that their model has a vast parameter space, with first- and second-order transitions, bistability, and hysteresis. Finally, the authors of Kiss et al. (2023) show rigorously that the limiting mean field model of an exact complex contagion model with arbitrary simplicial complexes on a fully connected network reduces to a single differential equation which displays bistability and multistability with two strictly positive endemic steady state co-existing.

From a mathematical viewpoint, modelling of complex contagion on general structures can be done either (a) considering the entire system at once, referred to as top-down, or (b) starting at the node-level and building up to pairs, triples and so on, referred to as bottom-up (Kiss et al.2017). For the top-down approach, the state of microscopic dynamics of susceptible/infected/susceptible (SIS) contagion model at the individual level is given by anN-dimensional vector of zeros and ones (Bodó et al.2016; Kiss et al.2023), leading to a Markov chain on a state space withelements. In the case of the bottom-up one starts with the evolution equations for the states of the nodes. These of course depend on the joint probabilities of pairs, the states of the pairs on the other hand depend on the states of the triples and so on. This induces a hierarchy of dependencies with the number of required equations becoming difficult to manage and analyse. In a desire to break these dependencies, higher-order moments are approximated by node-level quantities leading to so-called individual-based mean-field models (Kiss et al.2017; Van Mieghem et al.2008). To allow for analytical and/or numerical treatment, both the exact bottom-up and top-down models require closures. However, the bottom-up model has some advantages in that the contact structure is evident in the equations and the order at which closures are performed and the closure relationships themselves are more easily accessible. In general, closures lead to low dimensional systems of differential equations where bifurcation analysis can be employed to reveal possible behaviours and their corresponding parameter ranges.

whereare scaled rates of infection viai-simplices andis the rate of recovery. From the models above, it is evident that all right hand sides are polynomials where the coefficients encode the underlying structure and the complex contagion mechanism. To put it simply we argue that even if models models A, B and C may have been derived based on different assumptions, from a mathematical viewpoint these differential equations are of the same type and can be analysed within the same framework.

Motivated by these observations, in this paper, we provide general classification results for the possible dynamical behavior of a wide class of complex contagion dynamics. Specifically, we focus on a class of vector fields that encompass many different models including Models A, B, and C above. This approach allows us to elucidate commonality between models and to map out explicitly the dependence between equation structure and model outcome. We highlight how model behaviour depends on contact network parameters including pairwise and higher-order interactions that contribute to complex contagion dynamics. We start from the simplest possible one-population model, in the sense that all nodes are topologically equivalent (meaning that on average they partake in the same number of links, 2-simplices, 3-simplices, hyperedges of various sizes and so on). This allows us to give a full mathematical characterisation of possible outcomes and outline whether critical bifurcation points depend on higher-order structure. We then move to two-population models where nodes are of two types; that is in terms of how they connect within their own population and with the other. The main findings of the paper are the identification of two distinct mechanisms of how bistability and multistability arises as well as linking system-level behaviour to constraints on the network structure.

The paper is structured as follows. In Sect.2, we introduce the general class of equations for SIS dynamics on hypergraphs and simplicial complexes and outline how they can be derived from individual-based models. Section3focuses on single population models that can be reduced to a single dynamical equation and identifies what interaction order is necessary for bistability. In Sect.4we consider two-population models for symmetric and near-symmetric coupling. Here multistability can already arise in the presence of triplet interactions. We conclude with a discussion and identify potential future work in Sect.5.

Consider a set ofNnodes that we simply enumerate by. Ahyperedgeis specified by a subset; the number of distinct nodesis the order of a hyperedge. The set of nodes together with a setof hyperedges form ahypergraph. Each-uniform subhypergraphthat contains the edges of orderincan be identified with an adjacency tensorin the usual way: For example,if.

Asimplicial complexis a hypergraph that satisfies the additional closure relation: Ifthen for anywe have. In this case, the hyperedge is asimplex. As an example, consider for a given graph with adjacency matrixthe simplicial complex one obtains by adding a simplex for each clique. For a three-simplexwe then have.

for, wheredenotes the recovery rate common to all nodes.

First, while we consider polynomial interactions here, for a hyperedgeHof order, one could also consider more general interaction functions. Specifically, the interaction pressure throughontoiwould be proportional to, whereis the vector of states with indices inH.

whereis the rate of recovery andis a background infection rate. The outer summation cycles through all the hyperedges that vertexbelongs to. The inner summation works out the probability of the hyperedge being in state with at leastinfectious nodes, this is a hyperedge specific threshold for the number of infected nodes needed to cause an infection. Finally,is a cardinality-dependent rate of infection. In this formulation the infection pressure is still in the stochastic (non-mean-field) form enabling to explicitly account for the dependence on the number of infected nodes in a hyperedge.

for. Note that the indexhcycles across hyperedges of a given order. In particular, in the equation above, the first summation cycles over all pairs (2-hyperedge), the second and third ones cycle over all 3- and 4-hyperedges, respectively. We give a concrete example to illustrate specific instances of these general model equations.

The other equations follow in a similar way and we do not give them explicitly.

for. It is worth noting that in this particular example, we chose to neglect interactions among five or more nodes even if the corresponding fully connected cliques are present.

where running indices are to be considered moduloN.

We note that in Example2.3every link is a two-hyperedge. Moreover, every three and four cliques (i.e. fully connected subgraph) is a 3- and 4-hyperdege, respectively. In this case every sub-set of a hyper-edge is also a hyper-edged. This is of course not always necessary as it is shown in Example2.2, where despite all four nodes being in a 4-hyperedge does not imply the existence of the four possible 3-hyperedges.

Since the individual-based mean-field equations for a large number of nodesNare challenging to analyse, further dimension reduction must be employed. This can be carried out by assuming homogeneity: Each node has the same number of neighbours and that it is part of the same number of two-body, three-body, and higher-order multi-body interactions; the actual number of interactions can be and it is usually different for different interaction orders. This allows us to reduce theN-dimensional system to one single differential equation and the same argument was used to derive equations including (1.1), (1.2) and, (1.3). In the following, we discuss such reductions to low-dimensional systems in more detail.

Three dimensional cubic lattice with faces of the cubes as hyperedges:,,.

Note that a fully connected network of sizeNhas parameters,,and corresponds to Model C. The choices above and those in models given by Eqs. (1.1), (1.2) and (1.3) are summarised in Table1.

where the coefficientsare typically a product between the transmission rate within a simplex/hyperedge withq-body interactions and the number of such simplices a typical node belongs to. However, when formulating models we find that terms are better understood if the alternative formulation in Eq. (2.6) is used. Both formulations are used throughout the paper.

forand a parameter. The maximal polynomial degreethat depends on the maximal order of the multibody interactions. Moreover, the coefficientsare directly related to the properties of the underlying hypergraph as forpopulation above.

A caricature of a network consisting ofpopulations is depicted in Figure 3. We analyse bifurcations in such a two-population model explicitly in Section 4. We specifically do this for the case of two symmetrically-coupled populations, meaning that the number of links and three-body interactions are identical in both populations as well as the coupling between the two, see Section 4.1. Additionally, we will also discuss the asymmetric case in Section 4.2.

We now focus on the simplest class of models whose dynamics are given by a single differential equation, that is, (2.8) for. This includes networks where all nodes are topologically equivalent. We identify all possible qualitative dynamics of these models and determine the bifurcations that lead to bistability, hysteresis, multistability, and how they depend on the network parameters.

that depends on a parameter. Assume thatis an equilibrium for all, that is,. Ifis a solution ofand,then the system undergoes a transcritical bifurcation at. Depending on the sign of the higher derivatives, the transcritical bifurcation is one of the four types depicted in Fig.4.

For a one-dimensional mean-field equation, the derivatives of the vector field now determine the possible bifurcations of the disease free state. We first consider interactions given by two-body and three-body interactions.

withthe disease-free steady state undergoes a transcritical bifurcation when. Furthermore, this can be of two types: (i) ifthen a forward bifurcation results, and (ii) ifthen the transcritical bifurcation is of backward type and the systems exhibits bistability as shown in Fig.5.

According to the general theorem about the transcritical bifurcation and using the sign conditions in Fig.4, we have forward transcritial bifurcation at, when. Similarly, the bifurcation is backward when.

Differentiatingwith respect toyyields that the bifurcation curve has a fold point (saddle-node bifurcation) withwhen. This fold point lies in the relevant domain (when, i.e., when the transcritical bifurcation is of backward type. This completes the proof of the statement.

If, then the quadratic term vanishes, leading to asymmetry. This means that the trivial state loses stability in a pitchfork bifurcation. Furthermore, this is an example of how three-body interactions can change the type of pitchfork bifurcation; cf. Kuehn and Bick (2021).

For fixed transmission rates through links and 2-simplices as well as fixed recovery, the condition above gives a constraint on the density of links, and implicitly 2-simplices, needed for bistability. The immediate interpretation of this result is that the same disease unfolding on communities with different contact patterns can lead to different outcomes.

Our result can also be used to re-derive the bifurcation conditions for the models cited in Sect.2.2. For example, for the model up to 2-simplices in Kiss et al. (2023), our Proposition predicts that the bifurcation occurs at, that is. For bistability our Proposition requireswhich translates towhich is exactly as reported in Kiss et al. (2023).

We now consider interactions given by two-body, three-body and four-body interactions and determine the bifurcations. The different possibilities for the transcritical bifurcation characterize the possible contagion dynamics.

If, then the bifurcation curve has a fold point leading to bistability between the disease-free and the endemic steady state for certain values of the parameter, see top- and bottom-right panels in Fig.6.

Ifand, then the bifurcation curve has no fold point, hence either the disease-free or the endemic steady state is stable for any value of the parameter, see bottom-left panel in Fig.6.

Ifand, then the bifurcation curve has two fold points, leading to two stable endemic branches. That is, bistability may occur between two endemic steady states for certain values of the parameter, see top-left panel in Fig.6.

The different cases are shown in Fig.6. We note that two subfigures are shown for the case. The difference between them is in the value of, namely, there is an inflection point on the unstable branch when.

According to the general theorem about the transcritical bifurcation and using the sign conditions in Fig.4, we have forward transcritial bifurcation at, when. Similarly, the bifurcation is backward when.

Differentiatingwith respect toyyields that the bifurcation curve has a fold point,, when. The shape of the bifurcation curve depends on the second derivativeas well. It has an inflection point when. That is we have an inflection point when, leading to the bifurcation curves shown in Fig.4and completing the proof of the statement.

We note that an important feature of such models is that the transcritical bifurcation point is not affected by the inclusion of the higher-order contagion terms. For both the cubic and quartic case, the transcritical bifurcation occurs at. However, the inclusion of the higher-order infection term changes the global bifurcation picture and leads to bistability, a phenomenon that is not observed in classical susceptible-infected-susceptible models.

For the square lattice with diagonals on a torus we have,,. Thus,andand the bifurcation diagram is like that in the bottom right of Fig.6. That is bistability occurs between the disease-free and the endemic steady state.

The triangle lattice on a torus is characterized by,,. This impliesand, and thus the bifurcation diagram is like that in the bottom left of Fig.6. That is, there is no bistability for this network.

For the three dimensional cubic lattice with squares as hyperedges we have,,. Thus,and. The bifurcation diagram is like that in the top left of Fig.6. That is bistability may occur between two endemic steady states.

We note that introducing higher order contagion up to-body interactions, as shown in Eq. (2.7), the degree of the polynomial inywill be. The coefficients of such a polynomial can have alternating signs if the infection rates for different hyperedge sizes are chosen appropriately. Then applying the Cartesian rule for the existence of positive roots of the polynomial, there can bepositive steady states, corresponding to the positive roots of the polynomial. That is, the higher the order of contagion, the more complicated the bifurcation structure of the dynamics can be.

This is a specific case of the general model Eq. (2.8) forpopulations.

In this section, we consider the possible bifurcation diagrams in the-plane, wherewithdenoting the number of nodes in populationi. In contrast to one-population networks, where multistability requires the existence of 3-simplices (cf. Sect.3), we show that multistability is already possible with 2-simplices (triangles)—at the expense of a more complicated network structure. We first consider two symmetrically coupled populations and then analyse the dynamics if the symmetry is broken.

Assume symmetric coupling, that is,,, and. Then the system has a-symmetry that acts by permuting the indices of the populations. The symmetry implies that the set where the states of both populations are equal,, is dynamically invariant; cf. Golubitsky and Stewart (2002). Thus, to analyse the dynamics of (4.1), we can first consider the dynamics onand then the dynamics transverse to.

with a polynomial vector field. Note that the SIS model (4.1) is a special case with,,,, and. Note that any point inis asymmetric state, that is, the state of both populations take the same value. Any point inwe refer to as anasymmetric state.

Depending on the parameter values there may or may not be a fold point for.

The first eigenvalue corresponds to linear stability with respect to perturbations withinthat reduce to the one-dimensional system discussed above. The second eigenvalue on the other hand corresponds to linear stability with respect to perturbations transverse to. Its zeros indicate bifurcations that give rise to nontrivial equilibria off. Due to the symmetry, such bifurcations are generically of pitchfork type.

We can compare the two eigenvalues to get insight into the relationship of bifurcations within and transverse to. Note that for, the sign ofdetermines whetheror. Specifically, if, we haveand the stability of any equilibrium withinimplies stability in the full system (4.2). This also means that any stable equilibrium withinfirst loses stability within(in a transcritical bifurcation) before it can lose stability in the transverse direction.

if. Moreover, the sign of(the quadratic term in (4.3)) determines the type of transcritical bifurcation: It is of forward type whenand it is of backward type for.

We can see thatas. As the solution to a quadratic equation, the type of bifurcation of the trivial equilibrium also determines bistability: There is a fold point forif. In this case, bistability occurs, i.e., for certain values ofthe larger endemic steady state is stable together with the trivial steady state. The following theorem summarizes the results about the bifurcation diagram of the symmetric model.

Transcritical bifurcation occurs in two symmetric populations (4.2) atgiven in (4.7). The shape of the bifurcation curve of non-trivial steady states depends on the parameters that determine the higher-order interactions as follows.

If, then thebifurcation diagram is of forward type and the non-trivial steady state is stable.

If, then thebifurcation diagram is of backward type and it has a fold point. The non-trivial steady state on the lower branch (below the fold point) is unstable, while the non-trivial steady state on the upper branch (above the fold point) is stable.

The statement of the Theorem can be translated to the language of phase portraits as follows. The number and stability of symmetric steady states (i.e.,) is determined by the theorem. In the first case, when, there are two ranges of the bifurcation parameter. If, then the only symmetric steady state is the disease-free one,, and it is a globally stable node. If, then the disease-free steady state is unstable and there is a globally stable non-trivial symmetric steady state. In the second case, when, there are three ranges of the bifurcation parameter, see Fig.7. Denoting bythe fold (or turning) point of the bifurcation curve, the first region is, where the only symmetric steady state is the disease-free one, and it is a globally stable node. In the second region,, there are three symmetric steady states: the disease-free, an unstable non-trivial steady state, which is a saddle and a stable non-trivial steady state, which is a stable node. Finally, in the third region,, the disease-free steady state is unstable and there is a globally stable non-trivial symmetric steady state. Thus the bifurcation diagram in Fig.7translates to three different phase portraits. These are not shown here since the non-symmetric steady states, which also appear in the phase portrait, will be determined below. We refer to Fig.8where the phase portraits for the case ofis presented together with the non-symmetric steady states.

The goal now is to find a solutionfor which (4.8) yields a positive value of, i.e.,.

It is easy to check that the bifurcation curve, parameterised by the above two equations (note thatis the independent variable) is monotone in theplane. Pitchfork bifurcation points, and hence symmetry breaking bifurcation, occur along this curve. The implicit relation betweenandgiven by the parametrisation in terms ofcan also be expressed as a direct relation between the two variables, namely we can introduce a functionsuch that. Using this curve, we can complete the characterisation of the bifurcation diagrams in the-plane as it is presented in the theorem below.

The parameter planecan be divided according to the shape of thebifurcation diagram as follows.

If,then thebifurcation diagram is of forward type and there is no pitchfork point.

If,then thebifurcation diagram is of backward type and there is no pitchfork point.

If,then thebifurcation diagram is of backward type and there are two pitchfork points, and two branches of non-symmetric solutions.

Can there be bistability between two nonsymmetric endemic steady states for the SIS dynamics (4.1)? The pitchfork bifurcations discussed above give rise to nonsymmetric steady states, but these may not necessarily be stable close to the bifurcation point.

For the SIS dynamics(4.1),any pitchfork bifurcation of the symmetric branch of equilibria(4.8)withinis subcritical. That is, the emerging branch of nonsymmetric equilibria are unstable near the bifurcation point.

hold. Henceis varied in the interval [] and this is restricted further by the upper and lower bound conditions onz.

As these equations are typically not accessible analytically, we can compute thesolution curve numerically for fixed parameters,,,and. Here we show a concrete example rather than attempting a full characterization. Fig.7shows a situation corresponding to the third case in Theorem4.2, when there are two pitchfork points. The non-symmetric steady states are computed by using the algorithm detailed above. Numerical computation shows that the branch of non-symmetric steady states connects the two pitchfork points, as it is shown in Fig.7. Moreover, it turns out that this branch might have anS-shape, hence there are five regions ofthat yield different phase portraits. In the third region forwe can have six non-symmetric steady states, hence the total number of steady states is nine. Two symmetric steady states (blue dots in Fig.8) are stable nodes, and one is an unstable node (red dot). Four of the non-symmetric ones are saddles (magenta dots) and two of them are stable nodes (blue dots B and D). The phase portrait is shown in the top panel of Fig.8. As we can see, there are four stable steady states (blue dots), and the boundary between their basins of attraction are formed by the stable manifolds of the saddle points (shown with magenta dots). The time dependence is shown in the bottom panel of Fig.8, where four solutions starting from the four different basins are plotted. The solutions are denoted by the letter corresponding to the stable steady state to which they converge.

Now we return to the SIS dynamics (4.1) for a general network without forcing symmetry. Specifically, we consider perturbations away from symmetric coupling to gain insight into the dynamics and bifurcations. This allows to exploit the fact that the conditions for bistability remain approximately true as the invariant subspace breaks. Indeed, the hyperbolic part of the branches are preserved while the pitchfork bifurcations may split into bifurcations that appear more generically (saddle-node/fold bifurcations).

These equations can be solved numerically to determine branches of equilibria. Specifically, solve the quartic equation innumerically for a given value of. Then (4.14) can be used to compute. Hence the equilibrium curve in the-plane can be obtained semi-analytically parametrised byas follows. The value ofis varied in an appropriate interval and the values ofare obtained by solving numerically the quartic Eq. (4.15a). The different solutions of this equation will lead to different branches of the bifurcation curve.

To illustrate the dynamics, we used parameter values close to those in Fig.7; hence this case can be considered as a perturbation of the symmetric case. The bifurcation curve belonging to non-symmetric parameter values is shown in the top panel of Fig.9. The symmetryandof the parameter values is broken by choosing,and,that can be considered as a small perturbation of the symmetric case. We can see that the pitchfork curves splits into more generic bifurcations. The number of fold points along the branches remains the same as in the symmetric case but an isola appears in the bifurcation diagram. One can see from the bifurcation diagram that there is a domain ofvalues for which there are 8 non-trivial steady states, three of them are stable, four are saddle points and one is unstable with two-dimensional unstable subspace. The phase portrait corresponding tois shown in the bottom panel of Fig.9. This phase portrait is qualitatively equivalent to that shown in the top panel of Fig.8.

One can observe that there are no foci and centers in the phase plane. The reason for this is that systems (4.1) and (4.2) are monotone dynamical systems. In general, a systemis monotone, if the sign conditionshold when, see Section 3.3 in (Kiss et al.2017) for more details. Differentiating the first equation of (4.1) or (4.2) with respect toand the second one with respect toyields that this assumption is fulfilled. Monotone dynamical systems cannot have periodic orbits, hence this is true for our systems in general and not only for those parameter values used in Fig.9. Moreover, trajectories tend to stable nodes for any choice of the parameters.

Reduced mean-field equations give valuable insights into disease spreading on networks that are challenging to obtain from high-dimensional state evolution. Here we focused on a class of models called individual-based mean-field models which arise from considering a bottom-up approach, starting from the evolution equations for the probability of nodes being infected at timet. Breaking the dependency on higher-order moments early, results in anN-dimensional systems of differential equations which can be simplified toMequations as long as nodes in any of theMpopulations are topologically equivalent: The populations themselves can differ but equivalence is necessary within each individual population. Note that the insights we obtain go beyond fully homogeneous populations: Standard hyperbolicity considerations imply that one would expect similar dynamics if the homogeneity is broken (cf. Sect.4).

The low-dimensional equations we consider are not unique to the reduction approach we used; they also encompass other reduced models proposed in the literature, particularly those involving the application of downward closure. This highlights that one expects to see global dynamical behaviour that is qualitative similar across model equations. The explicit expressions of how the model parameters relate to the network properties gives explicit insights into how network structure—and in particular the presence of higher-order interactions—affect the dynamics. Interaction order has a direct influence on the possibility of multistability for one population: We showed that models with up to three-body interactions can only give rise to either a transcritical transition or bistability and this is in line with findings in Kuehn and Bick (2021). Models with four-body interactions however, show richer behaviour with the previous two possible outcomes being complemented by a multistability regime where two strictly non-zero endemic steady states can co-exist. Furthermore, we investigated a coupled two-population model with up to three-body interactions only. Here, we showed that symmetry breaking, a well studied phenomena in population dynamics, yields a possible route to multistability between endemic steady states. It is clear that the order of interaction affects the degree of the polynomial, with higher-order interactions leading to polynomials of higher degree. This in turn leads to richer behaviours, in our case up to four stable states, and this could present opportunities for further investigation.

Our insights serve as a valuable guide as to what qualitative behaviour one may expect and where (in parameter space) it may arise. Of course, these models only serve as an approximation of microscopic models such as individual-based stochastic models whose number of possible states scale exponentially in the number of individuals. Indeed, given that individual-based mean-field models apply the closure early; at the level of pairs, it means that it misses out some of the important local correlations. Standard results that relate exact and approximate models are typically over finite time (rather than asymptotics); see, for example, Wormald (1995,1999); Sclosa et al. (2024). One typically expects that good agreement is possible away from bifurcation points. In fact, direct simulations show that the agreement between exact and approximate model can be surprisingly good. While our mean-field models are thus instructive to understand how network structure shapes the contagion dynamics, a direct comparison with stochastic simulations are beyond the scope of this article.

Complex contagion through higher-order interactions shape the dynamics and make it richer compared to classical transmission models. In this paper, we provide a first step towards a mathematical classification of possible dynamics as well as an understanding of the more subtle interactions between structure and dynamics. However, there is further scope to extend this work to addressing questions around overlap between higher-order structures (Malizia et al.2023,2023; Burgio et al.2024) and adaptivity (Burgio, et al.2023) as well as extension to variations of SIS model by including multiple disease classes leading to models such as SEIS, SIRS or even contact tracing. Furthermore, a fruitful direction is to derive rigorous bifurcation results for 4-body and higher interactions. Note that such extensions should be driven by a well-defined underlying research question, rather than the mere application of existing tools to marginally adjusted models. Finally, we believe that our approach and results underscore the utility of bifurcation theory as a powerful tool for elucidating potential system dynamics and enhancing the understanding of how and why certain outcomes are either promoted or constrained.

P.L. Simon acknowledges support from the Hungarian Scientific Research Fund, OTKA Grant No. 135241, from ERC Synergy Grant No. 810115 - DYNASNET and from the National Research, Development and Innovation Office in Hungary (RRF-2.3.1-21-2022-00006).