Depression is often linked to reduced facial expressivity and to biases in recognizing others’ emotions. Whether subthreshold depression (StD)—a putative prodromal stage—shows comparable alterations remains unclear. We recorded 10‑second self‑introduction videos of Japanese undergraduates (ratees;n= 64) and obtained subjective impression ratings from a separate group (raters;n= 63). Both groups completed the Beck Depression Inventory‑II (BDI‑II). Raters’ depressive tendency was not associated with their impression ratings (p> .10, Benjamini–Hochberg corrected). In contrast, ratees with StD (BDI‑II = 11–20) received significantly lower scores on positive items—expressive, natural, friendly, likeable—than healthy ratees (BDI‑II = 1–10; partial η² = 0.18–0.70). Automated analysis with OpenFace 2.0 showed higher presence/intensity of AU01 (Inner Brow Raiser), AU05 (Upper Lid Raiser), AU20 (Lip Stretcher), AU25/26/28 (mouth‑opening AUs) in StD faces; five of these AUs correlated with BDI‑II after false‑discovery‑rate correction (q < 0.05). Subthreshold depression was associated with muted positive expressivity and distinct eye‑ and mouth‑movement patterns, but did not bias observers’ first‑impression judgements. The observed AU signatures may aid early identification of individuals at risk for clinical depression. Together, our findings suggest that subthreshold depression is associated with alterations in facial expressivity, particularly in positive expressions, while not significantly influencing how others perceive those expressions.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-15874-0.

Subthreshold depression (StD) is a state of mild depression at a level that does not meet the diagnostic criteria for depression but is considered a risk factor for developing depression in the future1. A continuum between StD and depression has been noted2and many studies have examined the similarities and differences between StD and depression3. A better understanding of subthreshold depression may aid in the early identification of individuals at risk of developing clinical depression4.

Depressed individuals often exhibit reduced facial expressivity5,6. A meta-analysis by Bylsma et al. found that depressed individuals are more likely to show expressions of sadness and less likely to show positive expressions like smiling7. A study by Girard et al. reported that depressed individuals make more contemptuous expressions and smile less, suggesting that reduced positive expressivity may function as a self-protective mechanism aimed at avoiding social rejection or exclusion8. Facial expressivity is commonly evaluated by trained experimenters using the Facial Action Coding System (FACS), a comprehensive framework to categorize human facial movements9. The fundamental components of FACS are facial emotion recognition Action Units (AUs), namely the movement of specific facial muscles reflecting distinct momentary changes in facial appearance. FACS is itself based on specific changes in facial muscles and can characterize facial actions that constitute an expression irrespective of emotion. Although initially performed by human coding, the subjectivity and time intensiveness of human-performed coding has led to the adoption of FACS into computer automated systems10resulting in the appearance of a variety of automatized facial behavioral analysis tools. Previous studies have identified facial action units such as AU12 (Lip Corner Puller) and AU15 (Lip Corner Depressor) as key indicators of depressive affect8,11. However, cross-cultural research indicates that East Asian individuals tend to exhibit lower baseline expressivity compared to Western populations12,13potentially modulating the manifestation of depression-related facial cues.

Previous studies have shown that the evaluation of facial expressions can be used to predict depression and other neuropsychiatric disorders such as anxiety and stress. However, whether StD, a risk factor for developing depression in the future, is associated with facial expressions and their recognition, remains unknown.

Here, we used short self‑introduction videos of Japanese undergraduates to examine the facial expressions of healthy individuals and individuals with StD, with a focus on the potential use of facial expressions to identify subclinical depressive symptoms. To examine subjective impressions of the facial expressions of StD people in social communication situations, facial expressions were rated by evaluator participants (raters). We then investigated whether there was any difference in rating scores between healthy and StD raters. Since it has been shown that depressed people have problems recognizing the facial expressions of others14we also measured the depressive tendencies of the evaluator and examined the relationship between impression rating scores of facial expressions and the depressive tendencies of the evaluator. Videos were also analyzed by the OpenFace 2.0 analysis tool kit to extract the characteristics of people with StD. We combined raters’ subjective impression scores with OpenFace‑based AU metrics to test three hypotheses: Hypothesis 1 – Ratees with StD will show reduced positive‑valence AUs (e.g., AU12_r) and altered brow/eye AUs relative to healthy peers. Hypothesis 2 – Raters will evaluate StD faces as less expressive, natural, friendly, and likeable. Hypothesis 3 – Raters’ own BDI‑II scores will not systematically bias these complex impression ratings. By clarifying the associations (not causal effects) between StD and facial expression/impression, we aimed to refine early‑detection markers for depression in culturally specific contexts.

Sixty-four evaluated participants were included in the study, consisting of 24 males, 38 females, and 2 with no response (average = 20.58 years old, SD = 2.51). Participants with “no response” were participants who chose not to disclose their biological sex on the demographic form. Participants were divided into two groups based on BDI-II score, with BDI-II scores between 1 and 10 considered healthy and those between 11 and 20 considered to indicate mild mood disturbance or borderline clinical depression and categorized as StD. The healthy group (BDI-II: 1–10) comprised 42 participants (15 males, 26 females, and 1 with no response) and the StD group (BDI-II: 11–20) comprised 22 participants (9 males, 12 females, and 1 with no response). All participants completed the study.

Sixty-three evaluator participants were included in the study, consisting of 20 males, 42 females, and 1 with no response (average = 20.48 years old, SD = 1.91). After classification by BDI-II score, the healthy group (BDI-II: 1–10) consisted of 35 participants (11 males, 23 females, and 1 with no response) and the StD group (BDI-II: 11–20) of 28 participants (9 males, 19 females, and 0 with no response). All participants completed the study.

In our experimental setup, we asked healthy and StD evaluator participants to rate their subjective impressions of healthy and StD evaluated participants. With this setup, we wanted to answer 2 questions: (1) do StD evaluated participants receive different subjective impression ratings compared to healthy participants, and if yes in which items; and (2) do StD evaluator participants give different impression ratings compared to healthy evaluators, i.e., is their impression rating affected by their own depressive tendency. To answer these questions, we conducted two-way ANOVA in a − 2 depressive tendencies of the evaluator (between: StD vs. healthy) X 2 depressive tendencies of the evaluated (within: StD vs. healthy) design, with the dependent variable being the average rating score for each item.

First, we considered the positive items, namely expressive, natural, friendly and likable. For “how expressive a person looks” no significant effect of depressive tendencies was observed for those who evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.44, partial η2 = 0.01,p=.51). In contrast, a significant effect of depressive tendencies was seen for those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 140.64, partial η2 = 0.70;p<.001). In addition, no significant interaction was seen between depressive tendencies of those who evaluated and depressive tendencies of those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.53, partial η2 = 0.01,p=.47) (Fig.1a).

Subjective impression ratings for positive items: (a) how “expressive”, (b) how “natural”, (c) how “friendly”, andd) how “likeable” a person looks in a 10-second self-introduction video using a five-point Likert scale (1: not at all applicable, 2: rather not applicable, 3: cannot say either way, 4: rather applicable, 5: very applicable). Evaluated participants and evaluator participants were divided based on their scores for the Japanese version of Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II). The healthy group consisted of participants with BDI-II scores of 1–10, and the subthreshold depressed (StD) group consisted of participants with BDI-II scores of 11–20. Data are shown as means and standard errors.

For “how natural a person looks”, no significant effect of depressive tendencies was seen for those who evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.39, partial η2 = 0.01;p=.53). However, a significant effect of depressive tendencies was seen for those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 13.42, partial η2 = 0.18;p<.001). In addition, no significant interaction was seen between depressive tendencies of those who evaluated and depressive tendencies of those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 1.37, partial η2 = 0.02;p=.25) (Fig.1b).

For “how friendly a person looks”, no significant effect was seen for depressive tendencies of those who evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.04, partial η2 = 0.00;p=.84). Again, however, a significant effect of depressive tendencies was seen for those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 90.06, partial η2 = 0.60;p<.001), while no significant interaction was again seen between depressive tendencies for those who evaluated and depressive tendencies for those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.52, partial η2 = 0.01;p=.47) (Fig.1c).

Regarding “how likable a person looks”, no significant effect of depressive tendencies was seen for those who evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.37, partial η2 = 0.01;p=.55). However, a significant effect of depressive tendencies was seen for those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 125.21, partial η2 = 0.67;p<.001). Finally, no significant interaction was seen between depressive tendencies of those who evaluated and depressive tendencies of those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.00, partial η2 = 0.00;p=.99) (Fig.1d).

Next, we considered the negative items, namely stiff, nervous and fake. For “how stiff a person looks”, no significant effect of depressive tendencies was seen for those who evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.50, partial η2 = 0.01;p=.48) or for those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 1.86, partial η2 = 0.03;p=.18). Further, no significant interaction was seen between depressive tendencies of those who evaluated and depressive tendencies of those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 1.02, partial η2 = 0.02;p=.32) (Fig.2a).

Subjective impression ratings for negative items: (a) how “stiff”, (b) how “nervous”, and (c) how “fake” a person looks in a 10-second self-introduction video using a five-point Likert scale (1: not at all applicable, 2: rather not applicable, 3: cannot say either way, 4: rather applicable, 5: very applicable). Evaluated participants and evaluator participants were divided based on their scores for the Japanese version of Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II). The healthy group consisted of participants with BDI-II scores of 1–10, and the subthreshold depressed (StD) group consisted of participants with BDI-II scores of 11–20. Data are shown as means and standard errors.

Similarly, for “how nervous a person looks”, no significant effect of depressive tendencies was seen for those who evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.01, partial η2 = 0.00;p=.91) or for those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.04, partial η2 = 0.00;p=.85). Further, no significant interaction was seen between depressive tendencies of those who evaluated and depressive tendencies of those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.00, partial η2 = 0.00;p=.98) (Fig.2b).

Finally, for “how fake a person looks”, no significant effect of depressive tendencies was seen for those who evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.01, partial η2 = 0.00;p=.92) or for those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 1.50, partial η2 = 0.02;p=.22). Further, no significant interaction was seen between depressive tendencies of those who evaluated and depressive tendencies of those who were evaluated (F(1,61) = 0.00, partial η2 = 0.00;p=.97) (Fig.2c).

We used OpenFace 2.0, an automated facial analysis tool, to evaluate 18 AUs detectable in the faces of the participants. Profiles of AU presence for the healthy and StD groups are shown in Fig.3. Profiles of AU intensities for the healthy and StD groups are shown in Fig.4. Several AUs showed statistically significant or marginally significant group differences. Specifically, AU05_r (Upper Lid Raiser) reached statistical significance (p=.03), while AU20_r (Lip Stretcher), AU01_c (Inner Brow Raiser), AU20_c (Lip Stretcher), AU23_c (Lip Tightener), and AU26_c (Jaw Drop) showed marginal significance (p-values ranging from 0.045 to 0.077). These AUs primarily involve movements of the upper face and mouth which are commonly implicated in depressive facial expression profiles. We then conducted correlation analysis to evaluate if any of the AUs correlated with the BDI-II scores of the participants shown in the videos. Among the 18 AUs analyzed, we found significantly positive relationships between AU05_r (Upper Lid Raiser), AU20_r (Lip Stretcher), AU01_c (Inner Brow Raiser), AU25_c (Lips Part), AU26_c and AU26_r (Jaw Drop), and AU28_c (Lip Suck) and BDI-II score (Table1). Correlation coefficients for the correlation of AUs and BDI-II scores for the complete set of 17 AU_rs and 18 AU_cs are shown in Supplementary TableS1. While none of the 35 AU–BDI correlations survived false discovery rate (FDR) correction using Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) (q > 0.05), we had hypothesized based on prior literature that AUs related to eye and mouth movement (e.g., AU01, AU05, AU20, AU25, AU26, AU28) would show differences in subthreshold depression. When applying the BH procedure to only these six AUs, q-values were at or below 0.05, suggesting these may warrant further investigation in future studies with larger samples.

Facial Action Unit presence (AU_c) profiles of healthy and subthreshold depressed (StD) participants based on a 10 s self-introduction video as estimated by OpenFace 2.038 software. Participants were divided based on their scores for the Japanese version of Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II). The healthy group consisted of participants with BDI-II scores of 1–10, and the subthreshold depressed (StD) group consisted of participants with BDI-II scores of 11–20. AU_c stands for the presence or absence of an Action Unit. This is a binary measure in which 0 indicates that the Action Unit is not present and 1 indicates that the Action Unit is present. AU_c is measured once per individual frame and the values are summed over the total number of frames. Thirty frames per second were acquired over a total of 300 frames equal to 10 s. Significant and marginally significant p-values are indicated (independent samples t-test).

Facial Action Unit intensity (AU_r) profiles of healthy and subthreshold depressed (StD) participants based on a 10-second self-introduction video as estimated by OpenFace 2.038 software. Participants were divided based on their scores for the Japanese version of Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II). The healthy group consisted of participants with BDI-II scores of 1–10, and the subthreshold depressed (StD) group consisted of participants with BDI-II scores of 11–20. The units for AU_r are given in a normalized range representing the strength of the facial action, where 0 indicates no activation and higher values indicate stronger activation. Data are shown as means and standard errors. Note: AU28_r intensity was not available for computation in OpenFace 2.0. Significant and marginally significant p-values are indicated (independent samples t-test).

Pearson`s product-moment correlation coefficients of action unit intensity (AU_r) and action unit presence (AU_c) for correlation with Beck depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) scores.

This study on the differences between subclinically and non-depressed individuals concerning facial activity/impression ratings and the relationship between level of depressive symptoms and facial movements has two main findings. First, positive impressions about facial expressions may be influenced by the presence of depressive tendencies in the person whose face is evaluated. Faces of StD participants were subjectively rated significantly lower on the trait-based impression adjectives expressive, natural, friendly, and likeable than the faces of healthy peers. In contrast, no differences in subjective ratings were found for the items stiff, nervous or fake. Our findings are consistent with previous work showing reduced positive facial expressions in depressive populations. Specifically, in the present study StD participants were rated as less expressive and likeable, and showed altered AU patterns involving the mouth and eyes. Second, for all adjectives tested, there were no significant differences in the subjective impression ratings made by healthy raters versus StD raters. This absence of a rating bias in the observer group suggests that impression differences likely reflect ratee expressivity rather than rater interpretation. Notably, our results were specific to positive traits — negative adjectives like “fake” or “stiff” did not differ between groups — indicating an attenuation of positivity rather than an increase in negativity. These findings suggest that subthreshold depression is associated with alterations in facial expressivity, particularly in positive expressions, but without significant influence on how others perceive these expressions.

Further, automated analysis with OpenFace 2.0 revealed that six AUs primarily involved in movements of the upper face and mouth (AU01 (Inner Brow Raiser), AU05 (Upper Lid Raiser), AU20 (Lip Stretcher), AU25/26/28 (mouth‑opening AUs), which are commonly implicated in depressive facial expression profiles11,15–20or associated with tension, discomfort or forced smiles21–23were significantly or marginal significantly more present/intense in StD participants than in healthy participants. Five of these AUs correlated with BDI‑II score after false‑discovery‑rate correction. Parikh et al. used a combination of seven AUs (AU01 + AU02 + AU04 + AU05 + AU20 + AU26 + AU28) to map emotional expression fear in healthy and depressed individuals24. It is interesting to note that among these AUs, six were more present in StD participants, and five showed a significant correlation with BDI-II score in the present study. We therefore speculate that subthreshold depression might be related to fear. Together, our results suggest subtle but consistent differences in facial dynamics associated with depressive symptom severity, even in non-clinical populations, which may represent early markers of affective disturbance visible in these populations.

This study has several limitations. First, depressive symptoms were assessed solely via self-report (BDI–II), and no structured clinical interviews were conducted to confirm diagnostic categories. Second, although subthreshold depression may reflect an early stage in a clinical continuum25our findings should not be generalized to major depression without further evidence. Third, the cultural specificity of our sample (Japanese undergraduates) may limit generalizability to other populations, particularly in relation to baseline expressivity norms12,13,26,27. Finally, the impression adjectives used, while relevant for first impressions, may not capture all dimensions of social judgment relevant in clinical or interpersonal contexts.

In conclusion, this study found that differences in facial expressions between subthreshold depressed and healthy individuals can be identified by an untrained observer as a lack of positivity and can also be estimated by automatic facial expression analysis based on movement of the eyes and mouth of a person. Although we did not directly test the association between specific facial Action Units and positive impression ratings, the observed group differences suggest a potential relationship between reduced eye and mouth movement and diminished social impression in individuals with subthreshold depression. In the future, it will be interesting to see if studies using deep learning approaches to clarify facial expression tendencies in videos collected from people with depression might lead to early interventions for depression. It would also be interesting to collect data in many different cultural spheres and examine the cultural differences in facial expressions and their perceptions in subthreshold depressed individuals.

The study was designed as an independent measures study. Experiments were carried out from May to July 2022 (self-introduction videos) and from September to October 2023 (facial expression rating). Care was taken to ensure that evaluators and evaluated participants did not know each other and had not met before. As this point was considered critical, we separated the video taking sessions from the video rating sessions both by time and place. All experiments for self-introduction videos were carried out in a quiet experimental room at Waseda University’s main campus (Tokyo), while all experiments for facial expression rating were carried out one and a half years later at the university’s Tokorozawa campus (Saitama).

Sample size was calculated using G*power28under the conditions of an effect size of 0.4, α of 0.05, and power (1 − β) of 0.95. The estimated number of participants required was 21 for each group. Participants were recruited from among undergraduate students of Waseda University using flyers posted around campus and recruitment e-mails. To be included in the study, participants had to be of Japanese nationality, raised in Japan, healthy, and with no history of taking psychedelic medication throughout life. Individuals currently receiving treatment for any psychiatric condition, including anxiety or mood disorders, were excluded based on self-report. Although no structured clinical interviews were conducted, all participants completed a mental health screening questionnaire to ensure the absence of psychiatric diagnoses at the time of participation. Participants with a BDI-II score > 20, indicating moderate or severe depression, were to be excluded from the data analysis. In fact, there were no candidate participants with a BDI-II score > 20. Participation in the study was renumerated with 1000 Yen (approximately US$7) per participant and had no impact on course credits or performance evaluation. Participants were allowed to take part in only one of the experiments, either by preparing a self-introductory video or by rating facial expressions.

Depressive symptoms were evaluated using the Japanese version of the Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI-II)29which consists of 21 items which are answered using a 4-point Likert scale. Participants were instructed to report symptoms experienced over the past two weeks, in line with standard BDI-II administration. This instrument assesses a broad spectrum of depressive symptoms across emotional (e.g., sadness, irritability), cognitive (e.g., guilt, self-criticism), behavioral (e.g., social withdrawal), and somatic (e.g., sleep disturbance, appetite loss) domains. The internal consistency of the BDI-II in this study was high (Cronbach’s α = 0.81 for ratees, 0.83 for raters). Previous validation studies have also demonstrated excellent psychometric properties of the Japanese version, including high internal consistency (α = 0.87), test-retest reliability, and both convergent and discriminant validity29.

At the beginning of the study, all participants received a briefing by the same experimenter, but were not given any detailed information related to the aims or significance of the study. They were only given the information necessary to perform their task, such as preparing the video or rating facial expressions using the Likert scale. All participants were asked to fill in the BDI-II before proceeding to the experiments.

Evaluated participants were asked to prepare a short video. Each video consisted of the participant’s face from their shoulders up introducing themselves. All ratees recorded a 10-second self-introduction video under standardized conditions with a neutral background and direct gaze in the same room under the same lighting conditions, and all of them wore a white T-shirt. Participants were asked to introduce themselves for about one minute while looking straight into the video camera. It took evaluated participants about 15 min to finish making the video. Although evaluated participants were asked to make a 1-minute video, we reasoned that the evaluator participants should make their judgement based on their first impression of the face they saw in the video. For this task, a shorter video was desirable. Based on a previous study which used 10-second video clips for facial expression evaluation30in this study the first 10 s of each video were cut out and 16 such clips were arranged into one set. Finally, four such sets were made. Participant videos for each set were chosen and arranged such that the four sets were equivalent in terms of gender ratio and depression tendency.

For subjective impression rating, one set of 16 video clips was presented to the evaluator participants at a time in a quiet room with no distractions. When the videos were presented to the evaluator participants, the audio was muted. Before watching the videos, evaluator participants were asked to rate seven items on a paper-based 5-point Likert scale (1: not at all applicable, 2: rather not applicable, 3: cannot say either way, 4: rather applicable, 5: very applicable), namely how (1) expressive, (2) natural, (3) stiff, (4) nervous, (5) fake, (6) friendly, and (7) likable each person looks. We selected the positive items expressive, natural, friendly, and likeable in line with previous studies investigating impressions of others31,32and based on prior work in face evaluation and first-impression studies33–35. Emotion-specific terms like ‘happy’ or ‘sad’ were deliberately avoided to reduce potential emotional priming and semantic bias36,37. We selected the negative items stiff, nervous, and fake based on the thinking that they can be regarded as opposites to the positive items (i.e., natural ⇔ fake, expressive ⇔ stiff, and friendly ⇔ nervous). The sequence of tasks was as follows: watch video 1 (10 s) > rate how expressive (2 s) > rate how natural (2 s) > rate how stiff (2 s) > rate how nervous (2 s) > rate how fake (2 s) > rate how friendly (2 s) > rate how likable (2 s) > look at a fixation point in the center of the screen (1 s) > watch video 2 (10 s), etc. After watching a video for 10 s, participants were asked to look at a paper on the desk to evaluate the face they had watched. The order of the questions on the paper was fixed and a beep sound was played every 2 s to move to the next question. Participants were asked to circle a number from 1 to 5 for each question. The 2 s were long enough for participants to answer so that no one missed answering the question. After all questions pertaining to one video were answered, a fixation point was presented for 1 s with a beep sound, then the next video was presented. After participants had completed rating one 16-video set, they were asked to take sufficient rest and then move on to rate the next 16-video set until they had rated a total of 64 participants. The order of the four sets of video clips was randomized to control for order effects. The subjective impression rating experiment was completed in about 30 min.

For facial Action Units (AU) estimation, we used the OpenFace 2.0 facial behavior analysis toolkit38. OpenFace is a fully open-source real-time facial behavior analysis system which includes facial landmark detection, head pose tracking, eye gaze and facial AU estimation. The software was developed to work particularly well on videos. OpenFace provides AU intensity (e.g., AU12_r) for 17 (except for AU28 [Lip Suck]) and AU presence (e.g., AU12_c) for 18 AUs, namely AU1 (Inner Brow Raiser), AU2 (Outer Brow Raiser), AU4 (Brow Lowerer), AU5 (Upper Lid Raiser), AU6 (Cheek Raiser), AU7 (Lid Tightener), AU9 (Nose Wrinkler), AU10 (Upper Lip Raiser), AU12 (Lip Corner Puller), AU14 (Dimpler), AU15 (Lip Corner Depressor), AU17 (Chin Raiser), AU20 (Lip Stretcher), AU23 (Lip Tightener), AU25 (Lips Part), AU26 (Jaw Drop), AU28 (Lip Suck), and AU45 (Blink). Participant videos (10-second cut) were uploaded into OpenFace 2.0. Thirty frames per second were acquired over a total of 300 frames, equal to 10 s. AU intensity for 17 AUs and AU presence for 18 AUs were estimated.

The relationship between the tendency toward depression and the tendency toward impression rating was evaluated by two-way ANOVA in a − 2 depressive tendencies of the evaluator (between: StD vs. healthy) X 2 depressive tendencies of the evaluated (within: StD vs. healthy) design, with the dependent variable being the average rating score for each item (how expressive, how natural, how stiff, how nervous, how fake, how friendly, and how likable). Independent samples t-tests were conducted to compare facial AU activation between participants with high versus low subthreshold depression scores. Correlation analysis between facial AUs (intensity and/or presence) and BDI-II score was performed using Pearson`s product-moment correlation coefficient. False discovery rate correction was done using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. All data analyses were conducted using JASP 0.18.1.039.P-values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We would like to thank Kenji Tomita for excellent experimental support. Writing and editing assistance was provided by Dr. Katrin Ishii-Schrade of Dmed (http://www.dmed.co.jp) under contract with the author. This work was supported by The Jacob and Malka Goldfarb Charitable Foundation.