Changing climate and complexity in ecological landscape can potentially expand the geographic distribution of mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) to adapt and transmit various vector-borne diseases, including malaria.Anopheles stephensiis a potential urban malaria vector in the Indian subcontinent. Temperature and nutrients are the important environmental stressors, which influence the life cycle and vectorial competence of mosquitoes.

Three experimental setups were designed in the laboratory by exposingAn. stephensito low-temperature (LT) at 4 °C for eggs and 18 ± 1 °C for larvae to adults, high-temperature (HT) at 35.5 ± 1 °C for all life stages, and low nutrition (NT) at 33 mg/100 larvae. Baseline assays were conducted before each experiment. Stress was induced to eggs, larvae, pupae and adults for 8 consecutive generations, whereas vectorial competence and chromosomal inversion experiments were performed on adult females at the 8th generation. Parameters of life-history traits, including fecundity (number of eggs), egg hatchability (fertility), developmental time, longevity of adults, sex ratio, egg and wing morphometrics, and pupal mass were measured for fitness status. The LT, HT and NT lines were infected with in vitro culturedPlasmodium falciparumparasites to compare the vectorial competence. Ovarian polytene chromosomes of the three stressed lines were analysed to check the structural differences on the chromosomal arms for adaptation due to stress conditions. The predictive mathematical modelling using linear regression was analysed to estimate the number of generations required for the stressed lines to become normal comparable to the control lines.

Fecundity, egg hatchability, egg-to-adult developmental time, longevity of adults, egg and wing morphometrics, and pupal mass were decreased in HT and NT lines, whereas these parameters were increased in the LT line. The mosquitoes of HT and NT lines developed faster from egg to adult emergence (~ 7.5 and 11 days, respectively), whereas the duration was longer (~ 25 days) in the LT line. The oocyst infection rates ofP. falciparumincreased by 1.46 folds in HT, 1.28 folds in LT, and 1.15 folds in NT lines, respectively, compared to the control line. Paracentric inversions were observed on 2 locations on the 3L chromosomal arm of the NT line. Furthermore, the predictive linear model suggested faster adaptation of LT than HT and NT lines.

The present transgenerational laboratory-based study onAn. stephensiprovides novel insights into the effects of stressors on the life cycle, egg and wing size, vectorial competence, chromosomal inversions and adaptation. These findings aid in assessing malaria incidence trends and help in developing suitable intervention measures.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12936-025-05402-w.

Climate change, rapid globalization, and natural disasters are matters of great concern as they might amplify the abundance and dispersal of insect vectors, significantly affecting disease transmissions [1–3]. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO), in its Global Annual to Decadal Climate Update (GADCU), observed a 98% probability that the 5-year mean environmental temperature for 2023–2027 will be higher than the previous 5 years (2018–2022) [4]. Climate change could increase mosquito habitat favourably in many regions and it affects greatly on mosquito species abundance, geographical invasions, developmental stages, behaviour change, and thus enhance disease risk. Vector-borne diseases (VBDs) have increased globally. In recent years, major outbreaks of VBDs transmitted by mosquitoes such as malaria, dengue, chikungunya, yellow fever and Zika have caused troubles to human populations, claimed lives and challenged public health [5,6].

According to the World Malaria Report 2024, climate change is one of the major threats responsible for new malaria cases worldwide. Approximately 263 million cases were recorded globally, resulting in more than 597,000 deaths annually [7].Anopheles stephensiis the important urban malaria vector in the Indian subcontinent and Middle East [8]. Recently, it has emerged as an invasive vector in Africa competent in transmitting bothPlasmodium falciparumandPlasmodium vivaxparasites. The range ofAn. stephensiis expanding in 8 countries of the African continent – Djibouti (2012), Ethiopia and Sudan (2016), Somalia (2019), Nigeria (2020), Ghana, Kenya and Eritrea (2022) [9].

Studies revealed that environmental stressors such as temperature and nutrients are the most important factors affecting mosquitoes by altering their life cycles, habitats, behaviour, biting habits and pathogen transmission [10–13]. Few studies explored that the suboptimal temperatures, crowding, and starvation reduced the length of the gonotrophic cycle, fecundity (number of eggs), larval growth, adult mosquito size, longevity, and ultimately affecting vectorial competence [14,15]. Similarly, the larvae ofCulex pipiens,Aedes aegyptiandAedes albopictusreared under insufficient nutrition and extreme temperature conditions have observed reduced number of eggs, smaller egg size and decreased adult size [16–18]. Studies revealed that various pathogen infectivity affected differently regulated by larval diets [19,20]. In a recent laboratory study onAn. stephensiinfected withPlasmodium bergheishowed that higher temperature and low nutrition altered the larval fitness and adult survivability suggesting malaria transmission risk [21].

One of the most significant cytogenetic mechanisms is chromosomal inversions that have been frequently involved in local adaptation in many insects [22]. The adaption indicates the role of a trait that affects fitness, which is measured by an individual’s reproductive success over generations. In natural populations ofAn. stephensi, most inversions are based on strong and significant correlations between their frequencies and several phenotypic traits. It allows them to survive and reproduce better in its local environment [23].

Mathematical models for predicting the effects of climate change on vector survivability are of great use in the field of epidemiology in developing effective vector management strategies. Various studies have shown the impact of temperature on the distribution and dynamics of disease in view of climate change [24]. The present study highlighted the effects of temperature and nutritional stress on the transgenerational life-history traits, fitness, vectorial competence, chromosomal inversions and probable adaptation rates ofAn. stephensi. This study describes the insights into the probable implications of two stressors onAn. stephensiin urban settings.

The present study was carried out in the insectary from April 2021 to November 2023. In the first phase, baseline assays were performed to determine the optimal conditions for carrying out the temperature and nutrient stress experiments. Based on the baseline data, three independent stress experiments were designed such as low temperature (LT), high temperature (HT), and nutritional deficiency (NT) along with their respective controls. To find out the effect of stressors on mosquitoes, the following parameters were examined for 8 consecutive generations (G1to G8): (a) life-history traits (e.g., fecundity, egg hatchability (fertility), duration time of eggs to adults, sex ratio, and adult longevity), (b) morphometrics of eggs and (c) wings, and (d) pupal mass. Studies on (e) vectorial competence and (f) chromosomal inversions were performed using female adults at generation 8 (G8). Additionally, (g) a linear model was developed using 8-generation life-history trait data.

Two laboratory-colonized strains ofAn. stephensi,i.e., T2from Chennai (13.018410°N, 80.223068°E) and T6from Bangalore (12.972442°N, 77.580643°E) cities were used in these studies.T2was used for low- and high-temperature stress (LT and HT) experiments, whereas T6was used for nutritional stress (NT) experiments along with their respective control lines. These two strains are well characterized and do not find any significant differences between them [25,26]. Rearing of these two strains were similar and followed previous published protocols [27,28].

Three sets of ovicups containing ~ 250–300 eggs in each cup were kept in a 4 °C incubator to induce lower temperature stress. Each ovicup was removed from the incubator at 24, 48 and 72-h intervals, so that the effect of different stress can be assessed separately. The percent of egg hatchability was recorded.

Five sets of assays were performed at temperature 30.5, 32.5, 35.5, 36.5, and 40 °C, respectively, to fix the optimum temperature. Approximately 230–250 eggs were taken in each set of experiment. The percent of egg hatchability was recorded.

Around 100 3rd and 4th instar larvae were exposed to six doses of larval food (e.g., 10, 15, 23, 33, 46, and 75 mg) to determine the optimal amount of food required for larvae to grow and survive. Food was added every alternate day and water was changed twice till pupation. Larval mortality was recorded for each dose.

For each experimental study, 5 gravid females were selected randomly from the respective colony cages. Approximately 400–500 eggs were collected and divided into 2 sets. One set was used for the experimental study and the other for the control.

Same protocol was followed to maintain all the corresponding control lines. In each tray (L39 x B30 cm), 100 larvae were reared in 750 ml reverse osmosis (RO) water. The larvae were provided with 230 mg larval food. Eggs, larvae and pupae were reared at 29 ± 1 °C in the larval room separately. Around 85–90 adults were kept in each BugDorm cage (4S2222, L24.5 × W24.5 × H24.5 cm) provided with 10% sugar solution followed by a blood meal on day 5 using Haemotek blood feeding device. Five randomized full-fed females were taken, and eggs were collected from them. The adults were maintained in the adult room at 28 ± 1 °C and RH at 75 ± 5% with a photoperiod of 12 h:12 h light and dark cycles [27,28]. The temperature differentiation of larval and adult rooms was maintained because water temperature in larval tray always observed 1 °C less. Fecundity, egg hatchability, duration of eggs to adult emergence, sex ratios, and adult longevity of the control lines were recorded for 8 generations.

Based on the baseline assay, the eggs were incubated at 4 °C for 48 h. Then the hatched larvae, pupae and adults were reared at 18 ± 1 °C with the prevailing RH of 64%. The same process was followed for consecutive 8 generations (G1to G8). The rearing of larvae to adults were followed as mentioned in the control lines. Fecundity, egg hatchability, duration of eggs to adults, sex ratios, and adult longevity were recorded.

Based on the HT baseline assay, egg, larva, pupa, and adult stages were incubated at 35.5 ± 1 °C with the prevailing RH of 54%. The rearing of larvae to adults were followed as mentioned in the control lines. All the parameters were recorded as mentioned in the LT line.

Larval stressBased on the baseline assay, the larval food was provided with 33 mg/100 larvae. Food was provided every alternate day for 4 days till pupation. Water was changed twice,i.e., on day 4 and 6, to ensure the complete removal of extra food. Fecundity, egg hatchability, duration of eggs to adults, sex ratios, and adult longevity were recorded.

Adult stressIn the experimental set, the adults that emerged from stressed pupae were provided with plain autoclaved water without sugar solution. On day 5, alive females were given blood meal to obtain eggs and continued for the next generations. The rearing of adults was maintained as per the standard protocol. All the parameters were recorded as mentioned in the LT and HT lines.

Eggs from 5 randomly selected females of both experimental (LT, HT and NT lines) and control lines were counted following the earlier published protocols [28,29]. After 24-h of oviposition, fresh eggs were collected on a wet filter paper, which was placed on a glass slide. The eggs were measured under the microscope using a stage and ocular micrometre (Unilab GE-34, Binocular Research Microscope, India) at 100X magnification. Egg ridge number, length and width of both eggs and egg floats were measured.

Fully developed 6–7 days old 10 males and 10 female mosquitoes were randomly selected from the experimental LT, HT and NT lines and respective control lines of each generation (G1to G8). The mosquitoes were anaesthetized on CO2pads, and the right wing was removed using dissecting needles under a Stereo Microscope (Olympus, SZX2-ILLK, Germany) following the method of Ghosh et al. [30,31]. The data were recorded using Leica Application Suite X (LAS X) software.

Prior to experimentation ~ 24–30 h old 30 female pupae were randomly selected based on the method of MR4 [32]. Pupae from each batch were taken in a strainer, dried properly after soaking on a filter paper and weighed on an electronic balance and recorded the pupal mass following the methods of Armbruster and Hutchinson [33].

Vectorial competence was performed among LT, HT and NT stress lines along with the control, and the infection was estimated using in vitro culturedP. falciparumparasites.

Plasmodium falciparum(PfNF54 Line E) was procured from BEI resources (MRA-1000). The in vitro culture was initiated by seeding 0.15–0.2% asexual parasitaemia and 5% haematocrit in 10 ml complete RPMI medium based on the inhouse standard protocol published by Ghosh et al. [27]. The culture was maintained in an atmosphere of 5% O2, 5% CO2and 90% N2for 16–18 days with daily media change. For the mosquito feeding experiment, staggered cultures (14- and 17-day old) were selected based on their stage-V gametocytaemia and exfagellation activities (above 10 exflagellating centres per 40 × field) [34].

One day before SMFA, 5–6-day-old fresh adult female mosquitoes were collected randomly from the three experimental and control cages at generation 8 (G8). Approximately 40–50 female mosquitoes were kept in each cup in two replicates. Totally, 6 cups were set for 3 experimental and 2 cups for control lines. Mosquitoes were given 5% D-glucose overnight in dark conditions until feeding. Mosquitoes were starved removing the sugar cotton 4 h prior to SMFA [35]. They were fed with stage-VP. falciparumgametocytes using an artificial glass feeder through parafilm membrane. The gametocyte density was 3–5% at 1:1 male and female ratio. A sample of the infective blood was examined under a light microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ni-U upright microscope, Model SC600, Japan), and exflagellation was recorded. After 30 min of blood-feeding, all the cups containing fully engorged mosquitoes were placed inside an environmental chamber maintaining temperature at 26 °C and 75% RH for 8–9 days (Percival I-30VL insect chamber, Perry, IA, USA). Mosquitoes were fed with fresh wet cotton balls soaked in 10% D-glucose and 0.05% para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) solution daily. The midguts of infected mosquitoes were dissected from each batch of 8 sets on day 9 post-feeding for oocysts after staining with 0.1% mercurochrome soln. Oocyst numbers per midgut were recorded under a light microscope under 100X magnification.

Ovarian polytene chromosomes from the semi-gravid females were prepared from the LT, HT and NT stressed lines along with their control lines at the 8th generation according to the method of Ghosh et al.[27,30,36]. Using a microscope, the slides were checked for chromosomal inversions at 400X magnification (Nikon Eclipse, Model SC600). The inversion photomap was followed according to the earlier methods of Sharakhova et al.[37], Coluzzi et al. [38], and Mahmood and Sakai [39].

A linear model was developed based on the transgenerational data on the fitness rates of mosquitos under stress and control conditions. The model was used to describe the linear relationship between the response variables (number of eggs, pupae, larvae, and adults) and the predictor variables (the number of generations) for 1–8 generations. The impact of varied stress conditions (elevated temperature, low temperature, and nutrition stress) on the response variables compared to their respective control groups was studied. The linear assumption was deemed appropriate because the focus was on assessing the direct, additive effects of the number of generations across stress conditions. This choice aligns with the study’s focus on identifying the generational patterns of adaptation. The model’s assumptions, such as linearity and independence of errors, were considered appropriately given the dataset and research objectives. The linear model was analysed following the equation:Yi=β0+βiXi+ε, whereYiis the number of eggs/pupae/ larvae/adults;Xiis the number of generations (i=1 to 8),β0​ is the intercept (the value ofYwhenX= 0),β1​ is the slope (the change inYfor a one-unit change inX) andεis the error term. The study identifies the generations required for optimal adaptation under each stress condition by comparing the equations derived from their control groups.

The study identified the generations required for optimal adaptation under each stress condition by comparing the equations derived from their control groups ofAn. stephensiover 8 generations. Exploratory analysis and predictive modelling have been carried out in the present study. Chi-square (χ2) test,F-test and independent samplet-tests were carried out to determine the mean and variance and the association between the control and experimental lines for all the developmental stages of the mosquitoes. The egg and wing measurements were calculated following t-test analysis for independent or correlated samples using Vassar Stat software (http://vassarstats.net/). The Mean, Standard Error of the Mean (SEM), Standard Deviation (SD),P-value andF-value were compared between stressed mosquito samples and their corresponding control lines. The non-parametric Mann–Whitneyt-test was performed on pooled oocyst counts per midgut from infected mosquitoes of experimental and control sets using GraphPad Prism 10.0 (ignoring uninfected mosquitoes). The linear models were developed for each life-stage scenario; Root Mean Square Error and R2 were calculated to assess model accuracy. Karl Pearson’s correlation coefficient was computed to explore the relationship between stress and control conditions at each developmental stage. The developed linear models used the number of generations necessary to adapt to the control conditions (R software, version 4.1.3).P-value > 0.05 was considered statistically non-significant (NS).

The results of baseline assays of LT, HT and NT lines are explained in Table1A–C and Fig.1A–C.

Significant differences were observed in the mean number of eggs (306.06 ± 38.46,P= 0.03), larvae (269 ± 32.8,P= 0.02), pupae (249.12 ± 40.77,P= 0.008) and adults (230.37 ± 40.33,P= 0.008) of the LT line; eggs (282.31 ± 14.7,P= 0.02) and larvae (242.5 ± 21.41,P= 0.04) of the HT line; and eggs (217.25 ± 16.06,P= 0.03) of the NT line when compared with their corresponding control lines [(P> 0.05 indicates NS); Supplementary Table S4].

Furthermore, in the gonotrophic cycle of LT adult females, the oviposition time (egg maturation) was prolonged (4 days), and the frequency of blood meal uptake was 3 times compared to the control line (3 days and 4 times), respectively. The same values in the HT and NT lines were 1.5 days and 2 times compared to their control lines (3 days and 4 times), respectively. The sex ratio (M:F) of the LT line was 1.54:1 (control, 1.4:1), whereas of the HT line 1.44:1 (control, 1.49:1) and of the NT line 1.04:1 (control, 1.42:1), respectively. The developmental time (duration) of egg-to-adult stages of LT, HT and NT along with their control lines are shown in Fig.2A–C. Significant differences were observed in eggs, larvae, pupae and adults when compared between HT and LT lines (see Supplementary Table S5). In the NT line, the sex ratio (M:F), number of male and female adults, number of survived adults till day 5, and the frequency of blood meal taken by adult females are shown in Supplementary Table S6.

The eggs were boat-shaped, black in colour, and blunt at both anterior and posterior ends. No change was observed in the structure of eggs of the stress lines. Egg measurements in LT, HT and NT and their control lines are shown in Supplementary Tables S7–S9.

However, when compared between LT and HT lines significant differences were observed in the EL (P= 0.003) and EFL (P< 0.008) except the EW (P= 0.44) and EFW (P= 0.17) that was non-significant.

The results of wing measurements of LT, HT and NT, along with their control lines, are presented in Table6and Supplementary Tables S11–S13.

The wings of LT were significantly larger in size, whereas the wings of HT and NT were significantly smaller when compared to their control lines. The wing length of LT males ranged from 2.7 to 2.93 mm (2.8 ± 0.03;P= 0.04) and HT males, 2.39 to 3.02 mm (2.83 ± 0.07;P= 0.01). In NT males, it was 2.4 to 2.5 mm (2.67 ± 0.03P= 0.0001). The wing width in LT females ranged from 0.79 to 0.95 mm (0.83 ± 0.02;P= 0.008), and in HT females from 0.61 to 0.71 mm (0.72 ± 0.02;P= 0.03). The wing length of HT females (P= 0.01), and NT females (P= 0.04) were significantly different. Significant differences were observed in wing length and width of both LT and HT males and females.

The results of vectorial competence at the 8th generations of all the 3 experimental lines are presented in Table8and Fig.4. The percent positive midguts and percent oocyst rates were calculated from all the lines. It was observed that the oocyst rate was significantly higher in HT line (Median = 16; SEM = 18.32 ± 2.67), followed by LT line (Median = 5; SEM = 26.31 ± 3.3) and NT line (Median = 4; SEM = 28.44 ± 3.35) compared to the control line (Median = 1; SEM = 19.81 ± 1.94), respectively. The oocyst infection rates have increased by 1.46 folds in HT, 1.28 folds in LT, and 1.15 folds in NT lines than the corresponding control line. The non-parametric Mann–Whitney test between the HT and the control lines showed a significant difference (P< 0.0001), non-significant in LT (P< 0.06) and NT (P< 0.08) lines compared to the control lines. However, there were variations in the prevalence of infection observed among the stress lines of LT (71.42%), HT (85.11%) and NT (63.89%) compared to the control line (55.76%) (Fig.4).

Chromosomal inversion study at the 8th generation revealed that 11 out of 40 gravid females (27.5%) from the NT line showed chromosomal inversions. Inversion break points were observed on the 3L arm at 2 locations, 39A–39C and 42A–44C (Fig.5and Supplementary Fig. S1). No inversions were observed in the polytene chromosomes of LT and HT lines (Supplementary Table S15).

In this study, 2 sets of linear models were developed from the 4 variables (number of eggs, pupae, larvae, and adults) under different conditions (high temperature, low temperature, and nutrition stress). The first set corresponds to the specific conditions, while the second represents the respective control groups. Further, the equations are compared with their control groups to identify the generations required for optimal adaptation in the corresponding stress condition.

The values obtained from this comparison of linear model reveal the number of generations required to adapt to the given stressors. The slope of these stress lines was extrapolated to identify the adaptive rate. Considering the adult stage, it will take 21 generations for LT, 144 generations for HT and 4354 generations for NT lines, respectively, to gain the normal stage (Table9). A strong correlation was observed in the LT line followed by HT line compared to control conditions. Also, a weak correlation between low nutrition and control lines was found in stressed individuals. An interesting observation is that the number of generations required to adapt in LT stress conditions is lower than in the case of HT-stressed conditions (Fig.6and Supplementary Fig. S2). This suggests that the LT-stressed mosquitoes exhibit a higher adaptability rate, and the NT-stressed mosquitoes exhibit a larger number of generations required to adapt, indicating the lowest adaptability rate.

Correlation analysis demonstrated a notable positive correlation under LT stress, suggesting a high adaptability potential. Equating models from specific stress conditions with their respective controls illuminated the generations required for optimal adaptation, providing insights into mosquito resilience to environmental stressors.

Climate is a significant factor which influences density, distribution, and dispersal of mosquito populations [40]. Climatological variables include rise or fall of temperature, humidity, rainfall, wind flow and direction, duration of photoperiods, which may modify the complex sets of demographics and environmental scenarios that influence the dynamics of transmission of mosquito-borne diseases.

The present laboratory-based transgenerational study specifically emphasizes the impact of temperature and nutrition on the life-history traits, vectorial competence, chromosomal inversion and prediction model ofAn. stephensi. Life-history traits are efficient tools for analysing and understanding the effects on the growth rate, reproduction, and survival of a mosquito population.

In the present study, transgenerational data shows a distinct progressive trend towards adaptation from 1st or 2nd generation to 7th or 8th generations in LT, HT and NT-stressed lines. This indicates that the mosquito population can adapt quickly to various temperature fluctuations and nutritional deficiencies, which is quite normal in natural (wild) conditions. It was observed that the average percent egg hatchability rates of LT, HT and NT lines were decreased by 13%, 19% and 29% compared to their corresponding control lines. A study showed that food restriction caused a 50% reduction in clutch size and a 25% reduction in fecundity in Lepidoptera, specifically in butterflies [41] and transgenerational effects due to food deprivation in the Glanville fritillary butterfly,Bicyclus anynana[42].

In this study, the developmental time of egg-to-adult emergence in the LT line showed longer, and the duration was prolonged (~ 25 days), compared to the HT and the NT lines, which were faster, and shorter (~ 7.5 days and ~ 11 days, respectively). The mean adult longevity was 30, 25 and 5 days for LT, HT and NT lines, respectively. The highest larval and pupal mortality in the LT line were 32% and 44% in the 1st generation, 72% and 46% in the 1st and 8th generations of HT line and 25% and 28% in the 6th generation of NT line, respectively. Similar results were observed inAe. aegypti[43,44].

The egg–wing measurements and pupal mass are the significant indicators of mosquito fitness and therefore, an important methodological consideration. It has been observed that the EL, EW and EFL of eggs in LT lines were larger. By contrast, the same parameters in HT and NT lines were shorter compared to their control lines. For the first time, this study reveals the effect of temperature and nutrition on the size of mosquito eggs.

Wing shape and size ofDrosophila melanogasterwere used for seasonal variation studies on the effect of temperature-related factors and food availability [45]. In this study, the wing sizes varied significantly in LT, HT and NT lines ofAn. stephensidue to stress. The wing length of LT males and females was larger, whereas the same were smaller in HT and NT lines. Based on the present findings, the morphometric analyses indicate that the variation in egg and wing sizes due to temperature variations and food deficiency is an outcome of rapid adaptation in response to environmental changes. This study supports the earlier reports where the similar results were observed. Yeap et al. tested the wing shape, size and wing–thorax ratio to ascertain field fitness ofWolbachia-infectedAe. aegypti[46].

The pupal stage provides a reliable estimate of body mass due to its non-feeding nature. The environment of the larval stages has a significant effect on pupal mass due to diverse larval rearing conditions like high or low temperatures, larval density, their interactions and availability of nutrients. In the present study, the average pupal masses in females were significantly lower in LT (8%), HT (16%), and NT (19%) lines, respectively, compared to their corresponding control lines due to high-stress conditions. Armbruster and Hutchinson estimated the pupal mass and wing length as significant estimators to accurately predict the fecundity inAedes albopictusandAedes geniculatus[33].

Climate change influences malaria transmission, correlated mainly with temperature and malaria parasite development inside the mosquito host [47]. The sensitivities ofAnophelesmosquitoes to temperature vary among different species and even among the same species, with various responses [48]. A high temperature and a low food supply during the larval and adult stages considerably shorten the survivability and longevity of larval and adult mosquitoes leading to enhance transmission potential. The present study also supports the high infection rate in the stressed lines than the control. Various extrinsic factors, including temperature and nutritional status, regulate vectorial competence. Earlier studies showed that food stress during larval development may cause variations in adult mosquito immunity that can increase their susceptibility to pathogens, such asAnopheles gambiaeandAnopheles melas[49];Anopheles quadrimaculatusandAnopheles albimanustoP. falciparum[50],Ae. aegyptito Sindbis virus [51] and Zika virus [52]. The food-stressed larvae might utilize their stored energy mostly in development and survival instead of immunity and defence [53]; thus, the adults become more susceptible to infections [54,55], modulate microbiota and permissiveness to parasites and immune traits [56]. In the present study, the HT line showed a significant difference (P< 0.001) in the oocyst rate compared to control.

To understand the interactions between mosquito life-history traits and environmental variables and interrelate them with disease risk with accuracy is made difficult by trait-, species-, and even population-specific effects [57]. Polytene chromosome inversion is an indication of process of adaptation. Two paracentric inversions found on the 3L arm in the NT line ofAn. stephensiis an important finding that can be used as a good reference for future studies.

Recent studies increasingly focus on laboratory-derived temperature dependencies of various life stages of vectors to develop mathematical models that predict how climatic and environmental factors influence the dynamics of vector-borne diseases. These models assess the impact on the global abundance, distribution, and invasion of vector populations [58,59]. In this 8-generation transgenerational study, the linear model provides a suitable framework for analysing the impact of stress on mosquito adaptation. The experiments were conducted at different time points for temperature and nutrition stress on two mosquito lines. The analysis of the slopes for high and low temperatures was very different from each other. Opting for other models would have masked these fine observations. For all these reasons, the linear model was chosen for the analysis. Additionally, it provides straightforward interpretability of key parameters like the intercept and slope, aiding in comparisons between stress and control groups.

Pathogen-induced effects in host phenotypic life-history traits appear to be under epigenetic control. The bases of these changes and their heritable transgenerational consequences probably have an epigenetic component. Epigenetic epidemiology has recently been focused on infectious diseases and has emerged as a promising area for future research. Moreover, the incorporation of epigenetic plasticity and epigenetic inheritance mechanisms to evolutionary models and empirical studies of host–pathogen interactions would provide new insights into the evolution and coevolution of these associations [60].

This comprehensive laboratory study would help understand the relationship between environmental stressors and mosquito biology, which would improve understanding the epidemiology of vector-borne diseases. Vector-borne diseases including malaria are climate-sensitive tropical diseases because of global climate change and local land use practices [61]. Global health community is concerned in finding out more connections between climate change and diseases risk and trying to reach out appropriate interventions. Prediction of the effect of temperature on both the biology and distribution of ectotherms requires a deep understanding of the relation between temperature and performance traits [62,63].

There are some limitations in laboratory-rearing mosquito populations as they are poor representations for natural habitats, because of the differences in mating success, mosquito survival, developmental time, blood-feeding behaviour, and overall reproduction output could differ significantly in natural settings. It will be more challenging for mosquitoes to sustain and survive in nature than in laboratory standard conditions. However, still there has limited knowledge of these responses, mainly when multiple stress factors exist simultaneously, as it is often found in nature. The present experiments were aimed to determine the relative effects of temperature and diet on the developmental processes and evaluate their vectorial competence under laboratory conditions. Considering the effect of high and low temperature and low nutrition on vectorial competence, oocyst infection rates in the HT, LT and NT stressed lines were higher than the control. In this study, life-history traits were used for developing the linear predictive model. Data of vectorial competence was not considered because laboratory-driven conditions have limited applications in developing predictive modelling that would stimulate the varied natural conditions.

The present transgenerational laboratory study on two main environmental stressors such as temperature and nutrition onAn. stephensihas clearly pointed out the changes in life-history parameters like fecundity, egg hatchability, duration of life-cycle stages, sex ratio, adult longevity, egg and wing morphometrics, vector competence and chromosomal inversions. Considering ongoing climate scenario of rising temperature, humidity, draughts, excess rainfall and flooding happening in nature, many regions currently free from or already existing vector-borne diseases will face serious challenges and consequences due to extended transmission seasons, geographic invasion, changes in the development of vectors and pathogens, mosquito habitats and behaviour. This preludes a pre-emptive action plan for vector control strategies especially mosquito-borne diseases in view of current ongoing climate-change scenario.

The selection events resulting from long-term colonization and rearing at generally constant insectary conditions, indicate that the use of mosquito colonies to measure the effects of environmental stressors like temperature and nutrition on life-history traits may at times provide inexact representations of natural populations. However, this near-real study under laboratory conditions provides a picture of the possible effects of climate change on nature and it could be an ideal reference study for future research.

Supplementary Material 1: Table S1.Life-cycle data of the control line for the corresponding low-temperature stress line ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S2.Life-cycle data of the control line for the corresponding high-temperature stress line ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S3.Life-cycle data of the control line for the corresponding nutritional stress line ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S4.Comparative differences among the life-cycle stages of low-temperature, high-temperature, and nutritional stress lines with the control lines ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S5.Significant differences in the life-cycle stages of low-temperature versus high-temperature lines for 8 generations.Table S6.Number of male and female adults of the nutritional stress line and their survivability for 8 generations.Table S7.Measurements of egg length, egg width, egg-float length, and egg-float width of low-temperature and control lines ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S8.Measurements of egg length, egg width, egg-float length, and egg-float width of high-temperature and control lines ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S9.Measurements of egg length, egg width, egg-float length, and egg-float width of nutritional stress and control lines ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S10.Comparative statistics of measurements of egg length, egg width, egg-float length, and egg-float width among low-temperature, high-temperature, and nutritional stress lines ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S11.Wing measurement of male and female adults of low-temperature and control lines ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S12.Wing measurement of male and female adults of high-temperature and control lines ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S13.Wing measurement of male and female adults of nutritional stress and control lines ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S14.Pupal massof low-temperature, high-temperature, and nutritional stress and control lines ofAnopheles stephensi.Table S15.Chromosomal inversions in low-temperature, high-temperature, and nutritional stress lines ofAnopheles stephensi.

Supplementary Material 2: Fig. S1.Photomap of the polytene chromosome fromAnopheles stephensiovarian nurse cells. Chromosomal inversions show breakpoints at two locations, i.e., 39 A–39 C and 42 A–44 C, on the 3L arm of nutritional stress line.

Supplementary Material 3:Fig. S2.Plots show the transgenerational changes in the larval and pupal stages ofAnopheles stephensiunder stress and control conditions.A,DChanges in number of eggs and adults of LT line.B,EChanges in number of eggs and adults of high-temperature line.C,FChanges in number of eggs and adults of nutritional stress line for 8 consecutive generations.

Sincere gratitude to Dr. Rakesh Mishra, Director, Tata Institute for Genetics and Society (TIGS), Bangalore, India and Dr. Suresh Subramani, UCSD, San Diego for their support, insightful inputs and quick review of the manuscript. Their guidance from time to time have been instrumental in the completion of this research work. The authors are thankful to Dr. Susanta Kumar Ghosh, Former ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Bangalore, India for his guidance in the establishment of TIGS insectary. We are thankful to Mr. Joydeep Roy from TIGS-insectary for his technical support.