The applicant Janssen Pharmaceutica N.V. submitted a request to the competent national authority in the Netherlands to evaluate the confirmatory data that were identified for imazalil in the framework of the maximum residue levels (MRLs) review under Article 12 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005. In addition, a request for raising the MRL for citrus fruits was made. To address the data gaps additional information on the toxicity of the metabolites R014821, FK‐722 and FK‐284 and storage stability for imazalil and FK‐772 in ruminant matrices were submitted. The data gaps implemented in the MRL legislation were considered satisfactorily addressed with the information submitted in this application and in a previous MRL application on courgettes. The available residue data support the intended post‐harvest uses in citrus fruits and allow deriving an MRL proposal. The implementation of the Codex MRL for bananas and the maintenance of the existing tentative MRL for melons are proposed for risk management consideration. Based on the risk assessment results, noting that data on unit‐to‐unit variability of residues to refine the acute consumer risk assessment for citrus were provided, EFSA concluded that the short term and long‐term intake of residues resulting from the uses of imazalil according to the intended agricultural practices is unlikely to present a risk to consumer health.

In 2017, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) reviewed the existing maximum residue levels (MRLs) for imazalil according to Article 12 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005. The MRL review was further updated in 2018, following new information related to the toxicological profiles of metabolites R014821, FK‐722 and FK‐284. In these outputs, EFSA identified some information as unavailable (data gaps) and derived tentative MRLs for those uses which were not fully supported by data but for which no risk to consumers was identified.

information on the storage conditions of the samples of the feeding studies performed with ruminants.

In accordance with the agreed procedure set out in the working document SANTE/10235/2016, Janssen Pharmaceutica N.V. submitted an application to the competent national authority in the Netherlands (rapporteur Member State, RMS) to evaluate the confirmatory data identified during the MRL review. It was clarified by the RMS that the original application combined a request of the applicant to modify the existing MRLs for imazalil in citrus fruits in accordance with Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005. In addition, this application also considered the proposal to implement the Codex maximum residue limit (CXL) on bananas, for which the EU has put a reservation pending the ongoing re‐evaluation of imazalil in the EU and because the toxicity of metabolite R014821 (formed after post‐harvest treatment) was not sufficiently addressed.

The application, alongside the dossier containing the supporting data in IUCLID format, was submitted through the EFSA Central Submission System on 14 September 2021. The appointed RMS the Netherlands assessed the dossier and declared its admissibility on 30 January 2023. Subsequently, following the implementation of the EFSA's confidentiality decision, the non‐confidential version of the dossier was published by EFSA and a public consultation launched on the dossier. The consultation aimed to consult stakeholders and the public on the scientific data, studies and other information part of, or supporting, the submitted application, to identify whether other relevant scientific data or studies are available. The consultation run from 21 June 2023 to 12 July 2023. No additional data nor comments were submitted in the framework of the consultation.

At the end of the commenting period, the RMS proceeded drafting the evaluation report, in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 merging the assessment of Art.12 confirmatory data and the proposal for MRL modification in citrus. The evaluation report was submitted to the European Commission and EFSA on 30 July 2024.

In view of the above, on 29 August 2024 the European Commission sent a mandate to EFSA to assess the Art 12 confirmatory data as well as the modification of the existing MRLs in citrus. EFSA identified points which required further discussion, and which were tackled in the dedicated peer review expert meetings on Mammalian toxicology (25 November 2024, TC 153) and on Residues (4 December 2024, TC 156). Following the expert meeting on Mammalian toxicology, EFSA identified data gaps which needed further clarifications and requested the RMS to address them. On 11 February 2025, the applicant provided the requested information in an updated IUCLID dossier. The additional information was duly considered by the RMS who submitted a revised evaluation report to EFSA on 10 April 2025, which replaced the previously submitted evaluation report.

Following the assessment of the confirmatory data, EFSA concluded that the data gap concerning the toxicological profile of metabolites R014821, FK‐772 and FK‐284 was addressed. Based on experimental data available, it was concluded that metabolite R014821 and FK‐772 are unlikely to be genotoxic. EFSA concurred with the decision of the RMS that the same conclusion could be drawn for metabolite FK‐284. It was also concluded that the toxicological reference values of imazalil are applicable to metabolite R014821 and to metabolites FK‐772 and FK‐284, as a worst‐case approach.

EFSA also assessed the new MRLs requested for the proposed post‐harvest uses of imazalil on citrus fruits. The residue trials on oranges and mandarins are sufficient to derive an MRL proposals of 7 mg/kg for the whole group of citrus fruits (grapefruits, oranges, lemons, limes, mandarins and other citrus fruits) based on the more critical post‐harvest dipping/drenching use and gaps on toxicity of metabolites R014821, FK‐772 and FK‐ 284 are now addressed. An expert meeting was organised to discuss the residue definitions in plants. Following this meeting, the formerly tentative residue definition for risk assessment proposed by EFSA in the MRL review for post‐harvest use in fruits was confirmed as: ‘sum of imazalil (any ratio of constituent isomers) and metabolite R014821, expressed as imazalil’. Sufficient residue trials, evaluated in line with this residue definition, enable the calculation of the input values for risk assessment. New data on unit‐to‐unit variability submitted in the application allow for the derivation of an empirical variability factor to replace the default value in the acute consumer risk assessment and to demonstrate the safety of the MRL proposal for citrus. For bananas, upon the request of the applicant and the RMS, the input values (imazalil residues in the pulp) corresponding to the CXL of 3 mg/kg for bananas were included in the consumer risk assessment.

The by‐product of citrus, dried pomace can be fed to livestock. The calculated dietary burden indicated that the newly intended uses on citrus fruits would not impact the level of livestock exposure on which the existing MRLs for products of animal origin are based, and therefore no modification of these values is required. The MRLs set for commodities of animal origin corresponds to the CXLs implemented in the EU legislation by Regulation (EU) 2020/856 which were calculated based on higher dietary burdens.

The consumer risk assessment was performed with revision 3.1 of the EFSA Pesticide Residues Intake Model (PRIMo). EFSA updated the previous risk assessment, taking into account the new data submitted, including the newly calculated variability factor for citrus fruits. To allow an informed risk management decision, the input values derived by Codex Alimentarius for bananas and melons (post‐harvest use) were included in the calculation. Since residues in bananas and melons were not analysed for the metabolite R014821, the contribution of this metabolite to the overall acute and chronic exposure could not be estimated, leading to non‐standard uncertainty. EFSA concluded that according to the calculations performed following the internationally agreed methodology, the uses under consideration in the MRL application will not result in a consumer intake exceeding the acute reference dose (ARfD). The highest value accounted for a maximum of 66.6% of the ARfD (UK infant diet) was for oranges. No long‐term consumer intake concerns were identified for any of the European diets incorporated in EFSA PRIMo. The estimated long‐term dietary intake accounted for 67% of the acceptable daily intake (ADI) (NL toddler diet). The contribution of residues expected in citrus fruits and bananas to the overall long‐term exposure was low and accounted for a maximum of 3.22% (DE child diet, oranges) and of 1.07% (NL toddler diet, bananas) of the ADI, for citrus fruits and bananas, respectively.

The summary table below provides an overview of the assessment of confirmatory data and the recommended MRL modifications to Regulation (EU) No 396/2005.

The data gap identified by EFSA concerning the toxicity of metabolite R014821 has been addressed. The formerly tentative MRL is confirmed.

In addition, the applicant has resubmitted previously assessed data which support, by extrapolation from residue trials on oranges and mandarins, a higher MRL proposal for the post‐harvest uses on citrus fruits. New data on unit‐to unit variability of residues in oranges allow refining the acute consumer risk assessment.

The implementation of the Codex MRL for bananas is for risk management decision. The risk for consumers is consider unlikely.

The contribution of residues of the metabolite R014821 to the consumer exposure could not be estimated for the CXL, leading to non‐standard uncertainty.

The data gap identified by EFSA concerning the toxicity of metabolite R014821 has been addressed.

However, EFSA noted that the EU critical GAP on melons submitted in the MRL review is not sufficiently supported by data and the alternative Codex MRL of 2 mg/kg (post‐harvest use) has been withdrawn in 2019.

A risk management decision is required on whether to maintain the current MRL.

The data gap identified by EFSA concerning the toxicity of the metabolites FK‐772 and FK‐284 is considered addressed. Information on storage stability was addressed.

The higher proposed MRL for citrus is not having an inpat on the previous livestock dietary burden calculations.

Abbreviations: GAP, Good Agricultural Practice; MRL, maximum residue level; NEU, northern Europe; SEU, southern Europe.

Indicates that the MRL is set at the limit of analytical quantification (LOQ).

Commodity code number according to Annex I of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005.

Existing EU MRL and corresponding footnote on confirmatory data.

Modification of the existing maximum residue levels for imazalil in courgettes, cucumbers and gherkins (EFSA,2023).

ft 1 The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

ft 2 The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on residue trials as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

ft 3 The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

ft 4 The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites and storage stability as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

The review of existing MRLs for imazalil according to Article 12 of Regulation (EC) No 396/20051(MRL review) has been performed in 2017 (EFSA,2017) and updated in 2018 (EFSA,2018c) following new toxicological information. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) identified some information as unavailable (data gaps) and derived tentative MRLs for those uses not fully supported by data but for which no risk to consumers was identified.

In accordance with the specific provisions set out in the working document of the European Commission SANTE/10235/2016 (European Commission,2020) the applicant, Janssen Pharmaceutica N.V., on 14 September 2021 submitted an application to the competent national authority in the Netherlands (designated rapporteur Member State, RMS) to evaluate the confirmatory data identified during the MRL review. Alongside, the applicant also made a request to modify the existing MRLs for imazalil in citrus fruits in accordance with Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005. To address the data gaps identified by EFSA, the applicant provided several toxicity studies on the genotoxic potential and general toxicity of the metabolite R014821 and toxicological studies to assess the hazard characterisation for the two metabolites identified in livestock metabolism studies (i.e. FK‐772 and FK‐284). Furthermore, the applicant provided two studies on storage stability for imazalil and FK‐772 (R061000) in ruminant matrices. In addition, the applicant also provided the results of residue trials to support a higher MRL proposal in citrus fruits and unit‐to‐unit variability data to refine the consumer risk assessment on citrus. The applicant also proposed to implement in the MRL regulation the Codex MRL(CXL) for bananas. The EU introduced a reservation to this implementation pending the ongoing re‐evaluation of imazalil in the EU. The renewal of the approval has not yet started, however the main reason for concerns was the toxicity of the metabolite R014821 (released after post‐harvest treatment) (EFSA,2019b). This concern has been fully addressed in the Art.12 confirmatory data application.

The application, alongside the dossier containing the supporting data in IUCLID format, was submitted through the EFSA Central Submission System on 14 September 2021. The appointed RMS the Netherlands assessed the dossier and declared its admissibility on 30 January 2023. Subsequently, following the implementation of the EFSA's confidentiality decision, the non‐confidential version of the dossier was published by EFSA and a public consultation launched on the dossier. The consultation aimed to consult stakeholders and the public on the scientific data, studies and other information part of, or supporting, the submitted applications, to identify whether other relevant scientific data or studies are available. The consultation run from 21 June 2023 to 12 July 2023. No additional data nor comments were submitted in the framework of the consultation.

At the end of the commenting period, the RMS proceeded drafting the evaluation report, in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005, which was submitted to the European Commission and EFSA on 30 July 2024.

In view of the above, on 29 August 2024 the European Commission sent a mandate to EFSA to assess the Article 12 confirmatory data as well as the modification of the existing MRLs in citrus fruits. EFSA identified points which required further discussion and tackled them in the dedicated peer review experts' meetings on: Mammalian toxicology (25 November 2024, TC 153; EFSA,2025a) and Residues (4 December 2024, TC 156; EFSA,2025b). Following the expert meeting on Mammalian toxicology, EFSA identified data gaps and requested the RMS to address them. On 11 February 2025, the applicant provided the requested information in an updated IUCLID dossier. The additional information was duly considered by the RMS who submitted a revised evaluation report to EFSA on 10 April 2025, which replaced the previously submitted evaluation report (Netherlands,2024).

EFSA based its assessment on the evaluation report submitted by the RMS (Netherlands,2024), the reasoned opinion on the MRL review according to Article 12 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 (EFSA,2017), the revised MRL review (EFSA,2018c), EU pesticides peer review and its confirmatory data (EFSA,2010,2014) and additional assessments of imazalil performed after the MRL review (EFSA,2018b,2023).

An updated list of end points, including the end points of the relevant studies assessed previously and the confirmatory data evaluated in this application, is presented in AppendixB.

To address data gap number 1 for the toxicity of metabolite R014821 of the MRL review (footnote 16of the MRL legislation) and number 4 for the toxicity of metabolites FK‐772 and FK‐284 of the MRL review (footnote 47of the MRL legislation), new data were submitted in the context of the current assessment (Netherlands,2024).

The data were discussed during the Pesticides Peer Review Teleconferences (TC 153, November 2024; EFSA,2025a) on mammalian toxicology.

Based on experimental data, metaboliteR014821andFK‐772are unlikely to begenotoxic. The available in‐vivo MN test onFK‐284showed limitations (i.e. contamination occurred in control samples); taking into consideration the positive results obtained in the in‐vitro MN test, all experts agreed that the genotoxicity of metabolite FK‐284 is inconclusive with regards to its clastogenic and aneugenic potential. After the experts' meeting, the RMS further addressed the reliability of the in‐vivo MN test and considered that contamination was found in a limited number of animals (4 out of 37) and the percentage contributed for only 0.01% compared to exposed animals. Therefore, the RMS concluded that would not have any impact on the results. EFSA concurred with this conclusion, however this point has not been discussed with Member States in a peer review experts' meeting to reach a broader consensus.

As regardsgeneral toxicity, based on commonalities of the effects observed in toxicological studies betweenR014821and imazalil, the toxicological reference values of imazalil are applicable to the metabolite R014821. Based on a comparative 90‐day, rat study, the toxicological reference values of imazalil can apply to the metaboliteFK‐772as a worst‐case approach (since there are indications that it is of lower toxicity than parent). Since the genotoxicity of the metaboliteFK‐284was considered inconclusive during the experts' meeting, no reference values could be set for the metabolite. Based on further considerations by the RMS after the experts' meeting (i.e. unlikely to be genotoxic), the RMS concluded that the toxicological reference values of imazalil can apply to the metabolite FK‐284 based on a comparative 90‐day rat study. EFSA concurred with this conclusion, however this point has not been discussed with Member States in a peer review experts' meeting to reach a broader consensus.

EFSA concluded that the data gaps number 1 and number 4 identified in the framework of the MRL review were satisfactorily addressed and the toxicological reference values of imazalil (i.e. ADI of 0.025 mg/kg body weight (bw) per day and an ARfD of 0.05 mg/kg bw; EFSA,2010) are applicable to the metabolites R014821, FK‐772 and FK‐284.

Not relevant as no data gaps were identified in the framework of Article 12 MRL review.

The intended uses on citrus under assessment in the MRL application are post‐harvest uses. The metabolism of imazalil was investigated in different crop groups in the framework of the EU pesticides peer review (EFSA,2010), the MRL review (EFSA,2017) and the updated MRL review (EFSA,2018c). The studies were conducted after foliar applications on fruit crops (tomato), post‐harvest use on fruit and root crops (oranges, apples and potatoes) and seed treatment on root crops and cereals/grasses (potatoes and wheat).

Imazalil was the major component of total radioactive residues (TRR) following foliar and post‐harvest uses (69%–99% TRR) and after seed treatment in cereal forage and straw (17%–24% TRR). Following post‐harvest application, the compound R014821 was observed in significant amount (11% TRR in apples and 9% TRR in potatoes) after long withholding storage period of 6–7 months. The residues of R014821 were shown to increase with the length of the storage. These studies indicate that imazalil is likely to degrade into metabolite R014821 during the storage of post‐harvest treated commodities (fruit and root crops). R014821 was also observed in metabolism studies following foliar treatment but below the trigger value of 10% of the TRR. While metabolite R014821 is not expected to occur in significant levels with foliar and seed treatments, it is recommended to still analyse it in any new studies investigating the magnitude of residues in plant commodities.

Chiral analyses performed on potato tubers after post‐harvest application indicated that the S/R ratio of imazalil isomers remained unchanged during the storage period (EFSA,2018c).

For the intended use in citrus fruits, the metabolic behaviour in primary crops is sufficiently addressed. Details of the metabolism studies are presented in Appendix B.

Not relevant as no data gaps were identified in the framework of the MRL review (EFSA,2017) for the tentative MRLs which are based on post‐harvest (citrus, melons) and foliar spray use in glasshouse grown on artificial soil (courgettes).

As the proposed uses of imazalil in citrus is for post‐harvest application, and, anyway, on a permanent crop, investigation on the nature of residues in rotational crops is not required.

Not relevant as no data gaps were identified in the framework of the MRL review.

The effect of processing on the nature of residues was investigated in the framework of the EU pesticides peer review confirmatory data process (EFSA,2014,2017,2018c). The study was conducted with imazalil, simulating representative hydrolytic conditions for pasteurisation (20 min at 90°C, pH 4), boiling/brewing/baking (60 min at 100°C, pH 5) and sterilisation (20 min at 120°C, pH 6). Although this study was not conducted with radiolabelled material, the test compound was found at an amount of 94%–99% after any kind of hydrolysis. Therefore, it was concluded that processing by pasteurisation, baking/brewing/boiling and sterilisation is not expected to have a significant impact on the composition of residues of imazalil in matrices of plant origin.

Not relevant as no data gaps were identified in the framework of the MRL review.

Analytical methods for the determination of imazalil residues were assessed during the EU pesticides peer review and the MRL review (EFSA,2010,2017,2018c). The methods, based on high performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC–MS/MS) are sufficiently validated for the quantification of residues of imazalil in high‐water, high‐acid, high‐oil content and dry commodities with a limit of quantification (LOQ) of 0.01 mg/kg. Independent laboratory validation (ILV) data for these methods are available for high‐water, high‐acid content and dry commodities.

A published Quick, Easy, Cheap, Effective, Rugged, and Safe (QuEChERS) method based on liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) is also available to control residues of imazalil in plant matrices and allows quantification of residues at or above the LOQs of 0.005 mg/kg in high‐water and high‐acid content commodities, 0.01 mg/kg in high‐oil content commodities and green tea, 0.02 mg/kg in dry commodities (EFSA,2017).

In addition, a cross‐validation study has been submitted in the context of the current application to assess the extraction efficiency of the method for the determination of the content of imazalil and R014821 (for pre‐registration purpose since the compound is included in the residue definition for risk assessment for post‐harvest use of imazalil) in mandarin pulp and peel samples (Netherlands,2024). The extraction was demonstrated comparing the amounts of residues extracted from samples with incurred residues using the solvent system of the monitoring analytical method, which was already concluded as acceptable (EFSA,2018), with an LOQ of 0.01 mg/kg (QuEChERS solvent) and the solvent system of the metabolism study in oranges (3 extractions with n‐heptane/isoamyl alcohol (95:5), 3 extractions with chloroform, adjustment to final volume with acetonitrile). Residues by applying the different extraction methodology differed by less than 30% for imazalil in mandarin pulp and for imazalil and R014821 in mandarin peel samples.

EFSA concluded that the extraction efficiency of the analytical method for enforcement of imazalil in high acid content commodities (QuEChERS‐LC–MS/MS) with an LOQ of 0.01 mg/kg is sufficiently demonstrated in accordance with the requirements of the Guidance (European Commission,2023c).

Not relevant as no data gaps were identified in the framework of Article 12 MRL review.

The storage stability of imazalil and its metabolite R014821 in plant commodities stored under frozen conditions was investigated in the framework of the EU pesticides peer review and MRL review (EFSA,2010,2017,2018c).

In addition, the results of a storage stability study in orange (raw and processed) were submitted in the current application (Netherland,2024). However, it was noted that this storage stability study was already submitted in the context of a different application and considered valid (EFSA,2018) and considered in the revised MRL review (EFSA,2018c).

It was demonstrated that in the commodities assessed in the framework of this application, belonging to the high acid content matrix group, residues of both compounds are stable for at least 8 months at −18°C. No further data are required for the present assessment.

Based on the available metabolism studies performed on three different crop categories and with different modes of application, the results of hydrolysis studies, the isomerisation of imazalil and the capabilities of enforcement analytical methods, a residue definition for enforcement was proposed as ‘imazalil (any ratio of constituent isomers)’ to all plant commodities and processed products (EFSA,2010,2017). This residue definition applies to the commodities under the following assessment.

The residue definition for enforcement set in Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 is identical with the above‐mentioned residue definition.

In the revised MRL review (EFSA,2018c), different residue definitions for risk assessment (RD‐RA) were proposed based on the type of application.

For foliar applications and seed treatments, the residue definition for risk assessment was limited to the parent compound only(‘imazalil, any ratio of constituent isomers’). This conclusion was supported by metabolism studies and residue trials showing that R014821 is either not formed (in seed treatments) or is present only at insignificant levels in crops treated with a foliar application according to the authorised GAPs.

For post‐harvest treatments, a tentative residue definition was proposed as ‘sum of imazalil and R014821, expressed as imazalil’, acknowledging the metabolite's relevance under these conditions and pending a full toxicological evaluation of the metabolite R014821.

In the current application the toxicity of metabolite R014821 has been fully addressed, concluding that it is unlikely to be genotoxic and its toxicity is covered by the parent (see Section1).

It is noted that the applicant proposed to disregard the metabolite R014821 from the RD‐RA under the argument that R014821 is usually found at low levels in the citrus residue trials, and the toxicological evidence shows that it's less toxic (Netherlands,2024). The RMS suggested to tackle this proposal with an Expert consultation. This proposal was discussed during the peer review experts meeting on residues (TC 156, December 2024; EFSA,2025b).

Residue trials on apples, pears, citrus and bananas following post‐harvest treatment were submitted during the MRL review (EFSA,2018c) and showed that metabolite R014821 typically accounts for less than 10% of the total residue (imazalil + R014821). However, higher levels – up to 35% – were observed in the orange pulp after a 2‐month withholding period (WHP). Although the individual dietary exposure from R014821 is low, its relative proportion may increase with time and long post‐harvest storage periods, beyond 2 months cannot be ruled out. For citrus fruits, a refined chronic exposure calculation performed by the applicant showed that including R014821 only slightly increased the total exposure. Based on this argument, disregarding the metabolite R014821 from RD‐RA could be an option. However, since the duration of storage after post‐harvest treatment is often uncertain and R014821 may continue to form over time, its relative contribution could increase with longer WHPs. In addition, this argument does not consider potential future authorisations and MRL applications for post‐harvest treatment on other fruits than citrus (e.g. apples/pears, bananas). Thus, considering the metabolite R014821 is still contemplated a safer option for future consumer risk assessments.

Regarding the residue definition for processed products, EFSA is proposing to apply the residue definition for enforcement and risk assessment set for post‐harvest use until a final decision is taken within the broader context of the EU pesticides peer review for the renewal of the active substance imazalil.

The data gap number 1 of the MRL review (footnote 110of the MRL legislation) oncitrus fruitsregarding the toxicity profile of the metabolite R014821 was addressed (see Section1). In principle, the tentative MRLs for citrus fruits are confirmed. However, the applicant is proposing to increase the MRL for the whole group (see ‘Art 10 MRL application’).

To address data gap number 3 for the indoor GAP oncourgettesof the MRL review (footnote 211of the MRL legislation) additional residue trials were previously submitted and assessed by EFSA (EFSA,2023). An MRL of 0.08 mg/kg was proposed by extrapolation for the whole group of cucurbits with edible peel (cucumbers, courgettes and gherkins), addressing the data gap identified in the framework of the MRL review for courgettes (EFSA,2017,2018c).

The data gap number 1 of the MRL review (footnote 39of the MRL legislation) onmelonsregarding the toxicity profile of the metabolite R014821 was addressed (see Section1). It is noted that the data gap number 3 identified in the MRL review for the post‐harvest EU drench critical GAP on melons was not reflected in a footnote in the MRL legislation. Additional residue trials on melons analysed for parent and R014821 were not submitted within the current assessment. Therefore, the authorised EU cGAP assessed in the MRL review is not sufficiently supported by data.

At time of the MRL review, the existing CXL on melons (post‐harvest use) was covered by the EU use since set as the same MRL value of 2 mg/kg (EFSA,2017). Considering that the data gap identified in the footnote of the MRL legislation is addressed, the CXL could be an alternative MRL value. However, Codex Committee on Pesticide Residues (CCPR) has revoked this CXL of 2 mg/kg because supervised residue trials were not provided for melons and no longer supported by applicant (EFSA,2019b; FAO and WHO,2019). The CXL of 2 mg/kg is included in the inventory of revoked CXLs compiled by EFSA (EFSA,2025d).

Risk management consideration is required for melons on whether to confirm the tentative MRL or to lower it to the LOQ, considering that CXL has been withdrawn and none of the residue trials available on melons is in sufficient number and is analysed for the metabolite R014821, included in the residue definition for risk assessment for post‐harvest use.

The applicant provided the results of residue trials on oranges and mandarins according to the GAP that were already assessed in a previous EFSA opinion (EFSA,2018c). Additional post‐harvest residue trials compliant with the GAP on citrus fruits conducted with the different application methods are also available (EFSA,2010,2018c,2017). All these trials were also considered in the following evaluation report. Extrapolation of results from oranges and mandarins to the whole citrus fruit group was proposed (Netherlands,2024).

Among the residue trials performed in oranges and mandarins compliant with the intended GAP included in the evaluation report (Netherlands,2024) and already assessed by EFSA (EFSA,2010,2018b), 10 (five on oranges and five on mandarins) were previously identified as independent and valid trials. Samples from eight trials of these trials were analysed for imazalil and R014821 separately either in the whole fruit or the pulp. Migration of residues occurred over the time. From the decline trials, it was observed that residues of the metabolite increased over the time of storage of the treated fruit. The number of 10 trials is sufficient to derive an MRL proposal. Nevertheless, to derive a more robust MRL proposal, the results of additional 10 GAP‐compliant trials on oranges and mandarins analysed for the parent compound only which were assessed as representative use in the EU pesticides peer review (EFSA,2010) and additional 16 GAP‐compliant residue trials on oranges and mandarins assessed in the MRL review (EFSA,2017; Spain,2016) were combined. The latter trials were also analysed for the parent compound, either in the whole fruit or in the pulp. The MRL review selected the residue levels corresponding to WHP 0 for this dataset (EFSA,2017,2018c). However, in the current MRL application, the RMS proposed to select from decline studies, residue levels at longer WHPs if they were higher than at WHP 0 (Netherlands,2024). EFSA agreed with this more conservative approach proposed by the RMS, even though it does not result in a significant impact on residues compared to what was previously selected (EFSA,2017,2018c). With the addition of this dataset, a total of 36 trials were considered for the GAP on dipping/drenching, among which eight of them analysed according to the residue definition for risk assessment.

The combined dataset allowed to derive an MRL proposal of 7 mg/kg and risk assessment input values.

Residues of R014821 ranged from < 0.01 to 0.03 mg/kg in whole fruit and from < 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg in the pulp. The trials selected for MRL derivation on the whole fruit did not always match the trials used for derivation of the risk assessment input values in the edible portion (pulp), especially when they resulted in higher residues. The RMS criteria to select the most critical parameter for residues is acceptable.

Residue trials compliant with this intended GAP were previously assessed by EFSA as representative use in the framework of the EU pesticides peer review and in a previous MRL application (EFSA,2010,2018b).

Only in six residue trial (three in oranges and three in mandarins) samples of fruit and pulp were analysed separately for imazalil and R014821. Residues of R014821 were always < LOQ of 0.01 mg/kg in both whole fruit and the pulp, however none of these trials was designed as decline trial.

To derive a more robust MRL proposal, the results of the trials analysed for the parent compound only (EFSA,2010) were combined with the results of the trials analysed also for the metabolite included in the residue definition for risk assessment (EFSA,2018). The number of residue trials is sufficient to derive a MRL proposal of 2 mg/kg for the intended post‐harvest use. Risk assessment input values were derived from six trials.

Noteworthy, a more critical GAP for waxing in citrus fruits was assessed in the framework of the MRL review (EFSA,2017) and the data submitted in the MRL request under assessment do not lead to a different MRL.

Among the 24 residue trials performed in oranges and mandarins compliant with the intended GAP included in the evaluation report (Netherlands,2024) and already assessed (EFSA,2010,2018b), eight (four in oranges and four in mandarins) were previously identified as independent among replicate trials. Whole fruit and pulp were analysed separately for imazalil and R014821. Residues of R014821 ranged from < 0.01 to 0.03 mg/kg in whole fruit and always < LOQ of 0.01 mg/kg in the pulp, except for one value (0.02 mg/kg), however none of these trials was designed as decline trial. The trials selected for MRL derivation on the whole fruit did not always match the trials used for derivation of the risk assessment input values in the edible portion (pulp), because the most critical parameter for residues was applied (Netherlands,2024).

The number of residue trails is sufficient to derive a MRL proposal of 4 mg/kg and risk assessment input values for the intended post‐harvest use.

Overall, the information provided is sufficient to derive MRL proposals for the intended post‐harvest drenching/dipping, low volume spraying and waxing for the group of citrus fruits by extrapolation from residue trials on oranges and mandarins. From the independent residue trials analysed according to the residue definition for risk assessment, EFSA derived median conversion factors (CF) for risk assessment which are presented in Table B.2.2.1 of the LoEP. These CFs refer exclusively to the trials used to derive input values for risk assessment presented in Table B 2.2.1. They provide the opportunity to verify the calculations in complete transparency. The combined dataset of residue trials after drenching/dipping allowed deriving an MRL proposal of 7 mg/kg, making this the most critical proposal among the different post‐harvest application methods under assessment. The trials have been summarised in the AppendixB.2.2.

In addition, and since the ratio of residues between enforcement and risk assessment might be time‐dependant and a few decline trials are available, EFSA calculated median CF at different times which are reported in Table B.2.2.2. The CF at time zero for the post‐harvest dipping/drenching use was calculated based on a broader dataset which included all results available from residue trials, regardless their independency (i.e. results from all side‐by‐side residue trials were considered). It also included the CF calculated from the 122 samples of the Unit‐to‐Unit variability study. Since the dataset is broader, slightly different individual mean values were reported. Overall, a median CF risk value of 1.02 is derived for citrus post‐harvest uses under assessment, which can be useful for the consumer risk assessment on pesticide residues collected in food during the controls carried out by EU member states. In several samples, residues were analysed in the peel and the pulp. Migration of residues for both parent and metabolite R014821 into the pulp was observed over the time of storage (EFSA,2018).

All methods of analysis used in the residue trials were concluded to be valid, and the samples were also valid as per storage stability (EFSA,2010,2017,2018b; Netherlands,2024).

In the framework of the present application, the applicant submitted a new study to replace the default variability factors (VF) used for citrus fruits in the acute risk assessment risk (i.e. VF of 5 for grapefruit and 7 for other citrus fruit).

In this study, oranges collected from a field in Spain were treated with imazalil post‐harvest with one application at the rate of 50 g/hL via drencher, which is representative for one of the intended GAPs. Samples of oranges of the variety Navelina were collected at 0 days after application once the application deposit was dry. In total 122 individually treated samples were analysed for residue content of Imazalil and its metabolite R014821. Data sets with a sample size of 119 or more individual units allow to calculate a variability factor with a certainty (EFSA,2025c; Hamilton et al.,2004; OECD,2021).

Residues were measured in whole fruit and ranged from 1.04 to 3.81 mg/kg for imazalil and 0.02 to 0.05 mg/kg for R014821. The median CF for risk assessment of these 122 samples was 1.02. The variability factor representing the unit‐to‐unit variability of residue concentrations was calculated for imazalil, R014821 and for the ‘sum of imazalil (any ratio of constituent isomers) and metabolite R014821, expressed as imazalil’ according to the definition as ratio between the residue level in the 97.5th percentile unit divided by the mean residue level for the lot.

Based on the above studies on oranges, RMS in the Netherlands concluded that the use of a variability factor of 1.6 for citrus (whole group, RD‐RA) is proposed (Netherlands,2024).

Data generated from more than one field trial would normally be preferable to capture a wider variation than the one expected from analysing units from one single trial. Nevertheless, in the case of post‐harvest treatment, particularly drenching/dipping, it is expected that the unit‐to‐unit variability is lower. Empirical data in other citrus fruits treated according to post‐harvest spraying and particularly waxing was not provided. Furthermore, investigation on the variability of residues in the edible portion (peeled fruit) was not carried out. The applicant and the RMS propose to extrapolate the VF derived from the study in oranges treated post‐harvest by drenching to the whole group of citrus fruits. Considering that no guideline is available on how to conduct the unit‐to‐unit variabilities studies, on rounding of results, on the possible extrapolations of the VF among different crops and its applicability to residues in the pulp, EFSA indicatively accepted the proposal in this case. EFSA renew the recommendation to develop a guidance document on the subject (EFSA,2025c).

As the proposed uses of imazalil in citrus is after post‐harvest use and citrus which are even permanent crops, investigations of magnitude of residues in rotational crops are not required.

Data on processing studies on oranges were previously assessed by EFSA in the framework of the MRL review (EFSA,2017,2018c). The processing studies in oranges showed that transfer of imazalil is low when processed into juice and marmalade and increases in pomace (wet and dry). It is noted that due to the limited number of studies analysing according to the residue definition for risk assessment, a CF from enforcement (imazalil) to risk assessment (imazalil plus metabolite R014821, expressed as imazalil) could not be derived. Anyway, EFSA recommends reconsidering the need for a conversion factor and to reach a conclusion on the residue definition for risk assessment for processed products within the broader framework of the renewal of the approval of imazalil.

Based on the available data, a robust peeling factor of 0.07 was derived for imazalil for citrus whole fruits and it is sufficiently supported by data (EFSA,2017). EFSA considered only the sampling performed after a withholding period (WHP) of 0 day (compliant with the critical GAP assessed in this review). All the processing factors and peeling factor are summarised in AppendixB.2.2.3.

The data gap number 412of the MRL review (footnote 413of the MRL legislation) regarding the toxicity profile of the metabolites FK‐772 and FK‐284 was addressed in Section1where it was concluded that their toxicity of both metabolites is covered by the parent.

Therefore, the residue definition for enforcement in animal commodities (except honey and other apiculture products) is confirmed as the ‘sum of imazalil and its metabolite FK‐772 (any ratio of constituent isomers), expressed as imazalil’. The residue definition for enforcement set in Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 is identical with the above‐mentioned residue definition. A fully validated multi‐residue analytical method is available for the determination of imazalil and FK‐772 at the LOQ of 0.01 mg/kg per each analyte (combined LOQ 0.02 mg/kg) (EFSA,2017).

For risk assessment, the residue definition was tentatively set as ‘sum of imazalil and all identified/characterised metabolites’, pending full assessment of toxicological properties of the metabolites FK‐772 and FK‐284. Despite the information on these two metabolites is now provided, EFSA proposes to maintain the residue definition as tentative and still use the conversion factors for risk assessment derived in the MRL review from the metabolism studies (EFSA,2017). This is because the residue definition includes unspecified metabolites that are difficult to analyse unless selected and listed individually. Furthermore, it does not consider the lack of information on the impact of livestock metabolism on the isomer ratio of imazalil.

In addition, footnote number 412of the MRL legislation also includes a gap regarding the storage stability of imazalil and its metabolite FK‐772 in animal matrices. In the framework of the MRL review, information on the storage conditions of the samples of the feeding studies in ruminants was not available (see data gap number 514and 615). However, in previous EFSA outputs it was confirmed that the samples from the ruminant and poultry feeding studies were stored under frozen conditions and analysed within 30 days (tissues) or at −4°C and analysed within 3 days (milk, eggs) after collection (EFSA,2018b,2018c). Consequently, investigations on storage stability are not required. Nevertheless, two studies on storage stability for imazalil and FK‐772 have been submitted. Based on these studies it is concluded that imazalil residues is stable for at least 3 months at or below −18°C in matrices fat and kidney and for at least 1 month for matrix liver. Imazalil metabolite FK 772 is stable for at least 6 months storage at or below −18°C in matrices muscle, fat, kidney, liver and milk (Netherlands,2024).

EFSA concluded that the data gaps identified in the framework of the MRL review have been addressed.

By‐products of citrus fruits (dried pulp) might be fed to livestock. Therefore, the possible transfer of residues in commodities of animal origin should be assessed. EFSA updated the dietary burden calculations for livestock performed in the framework of the MRL review (EFSA,2017) with the median residues of 2.08 mg/kg derived according to the residue definition for enforcement for citrus whole fruits, multiplied by the conversion factor (CF) for risk assessment of 1.01 calculated in the current assessment and by the processing factor of 4.22 for citrus dry pomace derived in the MRL review (EFSA,2017). The input values for the exposure calculations for livestock are presented in AppendixD.1and the results of the dietary burden calculation are presented in AppendixB.3.

Although exposure for cattle (all diets and dairy only) and swine (all diets) exceeded the trigger values of 0.01 mg/kg DM set under Regulation (EU) No 544/2011, the calculated dietary burden indicated that the newly intended uses on citrus fruits would not impact the level of livestock exposure on which the existing MRLs for products of animal origin are based. The MRLs set for commodities of animal origin corresponds mostly to the CXLs implemented in the EU legislation by Regulation (EU) 2020/85616which were calculated based on higher dietary burdens. Hence, EFSA is not proposing a modification of the existing EU MRLs in products of animal origin, following the intended post‐harvest use in citrus under assessment.

The consumer risk assessment was performed with revision 3.1 of the EFSA PRIMo in line with the working document SANTE/10235/2016 for the MRL confirmatory data (European Commission,2020). This exposure assessment model contains the relevant European food consumption data for different subgroups of the EU population and allows the acute and chronic exposure assessment to be performed in accordance with the internationally agreed methodology for pesticide residues (EFSA,2018a,2019a; FAO and WHO,2016).

The toxicological reference values for imazalil used in the risk assessment (i.e. ADI and ARfD values) were derived in the framework of the EU pesticides peer review (European Commission,2011). Based on new toxicological studies submitted in as part on the Art. 12 confirmatory data, the toxicity of the metaboliteR01482(crop product specific after post‐harvest use) and metabolites FK‐772 and FK‐284 (animal product specific) was concluded to be covered by the toxicological endpoints for the parent (see Section1).

Upon the request of the applicant and the RMS, the input values (imazalil residues in the pulp) corresponding to the CXL of 3 mg/kg for bananas (post‐harvest dip application with 0 days WHP) was included in the consumer risk assessment. To allow an informed risk management decision, the existing MRL (input values derived by Codex Alimentarius are not available and the EU use is not supported by data) and the peeling factor derived by EFSA (EFSA,2017) for melons (post‐harvest use) were also included in the calculation. Since residues in bananas and melons (CXLs) were not analysed for the metabolite R014821, the contribution of this metabolite to the overall acute and chronic exposure could not be estimated, leading to non‐standard uncertainty.

To be noted that, in addition to the CXL on melons, other CXLs (i.e. strawberries) have been revoked by Codex Alimentarius (EFSA,2019b; FAO and WHO,2019). The full list is included in the EFSA output on inventory of revoked CXLs (EFSA,2025d). Since still implemented in the MRL legislation, the risk assessment was conducted considering these berry fruits as well.

The short‐term exposure assessment was performed for crops belonging to the citrus group, using the highest residue value in the pulp according to the residue definition for risk assessment for the post‐harvest uses for citrus fruits derived from the intended GAP for low spraying. The empirical variability factor of 1.6 (see Section2.2.1) for whole fruits was used to refine the calculation for citrus fruits. In addition, EFSA included the highest residue of 0.1 mg/kg for imazalil in banana pulp (FAO and WHO,2019) and the existing MRL for melons, the peeling factor was used to take into account residues in the pulp. These values are expressed according to the residue definition for enforcement and no conversion factor for risk assessment is available.

The estimated short‐term exposure did not exceed the ARfD for any of the crops under assessment. The maximum acute exposure accounted for 66.6% of the ARfD in oranges (UK infant diet), 19.4% in bananas (NL toddler diet) and 72.8% in melons (BE toddler diet) (see AppendixB.4).

EFSA updated the previous risk assessment derived in the context of the MRL review, considering the EU MRLs implemented in the Regulation (EU) 2019/1582 and their associated input values based on the EFSA opinions on the MRL review and the updated MRL review (EFSA,2017,2018c). It is noted that for pome fruits, bananas and persimmon, the uses assessed in the MRL review were found to lead to exceedance of the ARfD and, consequently, for these commodities, MRLs were lowered to LOQs in Regulation (EU) 2019/1582. Therefore, the inputs from these commodities were not included in the calculation, assuming that former critical uses have been withdrawn. Furthermore, the CXLs and associated median residue values for muscle and fat (swine, bovine, sheep, goat, equine and other farmed animals), all tissues (poultry), milk and wild terrestrial vertebrate animals (FAO and WHO,2019), implemented in the EU legislation by Regulation (EU) No 2020/856 were further considered. Finally, the risk assessment was also updated considering the STMR value proposed for cucurbits with edible peel (EFSA,2023) and assuming that the MRLs as proposed by EFSA would be implemented in the MRL regulations.

For livestock commodities derived from CXLs the associated values were retrieved from the JMPR report (FAO and WHO,2019). It is noted that these were derived according to the residue definition for risk assessment in animal commodities set by JMPR as ‘sum of imazalil and the metabolite R06100017expressed as imazalil equivalents’, which corresponds to the residue definition for monitoring in animal commodities in the EU (see Section3) (i.e. ‘sum of imazalil and metabolite FK‐722 (any ratio of constituent isomers), expressed as imazalil’). However, the residue definition for risk assessment tentatively proposed by EFSA (2017) was the ‘sum of imazalil and all identified/characterised metabolites’. Therefore, to assess the consumer exposure to animal commodities in line with the previous EFSA assessments, the tentative CFs derived by EFSA (2017) were applied to the input values; this is expected to provide a conservative risk assessment.

For citrus fruits, the supervised trials median residue (STMR) pulp based on the most critical post‐harvest use assessed in this application according to the residue definition for risk assessment was included. EFSA included, the STMR pulp for bananas (FAO and WHO,2019) and the Codex MRL (EFSA,2017) for melons.

The estimated long‐term dietary intake accounted for a maximum of 67% of the ADI (NL toddler diet). The contribution of residues expected from citrus fruits to the overall long‐term exposure is presented in more detail in AppendixB.4. The complete list of input values can be found in AppendixD.2.

Furthermore, in the framework of the EU pesticides peer review, it was highlighted that metabolism studies did not investigate the possible impact of plant and animal metabolism on the isomer ratio of imazalil (EFSA,2010). Information on potato tubers after post‐harvest application indicated that the S/R ratio of imazalil isomers remained unchanged during the storage period (EFSA,2018c). No more information is currently available to address this point. Further investigation on this matter would in principle be required. It is noted that the EFSA guidance on the risk assessment of compounds that may have stereoisomers has been issued (EFSA,2019c). EFSA would therefore recommend reconsidering this point in the framework of the EU pesticides peer review for the renewal of approval of the imazalil.

EFSA concluded that the long‐term intake of residues resulting from the use of imazalil based on post‐harvest uses in citrus is unlikely to present a risk to consumer health. The contribution of the crops under consideration was 3.22% of the ADI with oranges being the highest contributor.

For further details on the exposure calculations, a screenshot of the Report sheet of the PRIMo is presented in AppendixC.

To address data gaps identified in the framework of the MRL review (EFSA,2017), new toxicological and storage stability data were submitted and assessed in the present opinion. The confirmatory data gap on the toxicity of metabolites R014821, FK‐772 and FK‐ 284 was addressed. The toxicity of those metabolites is concluded to be covered by the parent. In addition, storage stability for imazalil and FK‐772 in ruminant matrices were submitted. The tentative MRL for citrus and animal commodities are therefore confirmed. A recent EFSA opinion on courgettes, cucumbers and gherkins, not yet considered for implementation in the MRL regulation, already addressed the confirmatory data gap on courgettes. New residue data assessed in that application allow deriving a lower MRL proposal for the GAP assessed in the MRL review. For melons, the confirmatory data gap identified in the MRL legislation is addressed. Since the EU critical use assessed in the MRL review is not sufficiently supported by residue data, the CXL could be an alternative MRL value. However, Codex Committee on Pesticide Residues (CCPR) has revoked this CXL of 2 mg/kg. The maintenance of the existing tentative MRL for melons is proposed for risk management consideration.

The available residue data support the intended post‐harvest uses in citrus fruits and allow deriving a higher MRL proposal. New data on unit‐to unit variability of residues in oranges enable refining the consumer risk assessment and concluding that the proposed MRL of 7 mg/kg derived from the most critical post‐harvest drenching/dipping use is unlikely to pose a risk for consumer safety. A change of the existing MRLs set for products of animal origin is not necessary.

In addition, EFSA included the CXL on bananas in the consumer risk assessment within the current assessment, upon request of the applicant and the RMS. Considering that the toxicological properties of metabolite R014821 are now sufficiently addressed, and no consumer concern is identified, risk managers may consider repealing the reservation on the CXL for imazalil on bananas.

EFSA concluded that according to the calculations performed following the internationally agreed methodology, the uses under consideration are acceptable with regards to consumer exposure. Since residues in bananas and melons (CXLs) were not analysed for the metabolite R014821, the contribution of this metabolite to the overall acute and chronic exposure could not be estimated, leading to non‐standard uncertainty. EFSA also emphasises that the above risk assessment was performed disregarding the possible impact of plant and animal metabolism on the isomer ratio of imazalil and further investigation on this matter would in principle be required. EFSA would therefore recommend reconsidering this point in the framework of the EU pesticides peer review for the renewal of approval of the imazalil. EFSA also recommends reconsidering the need for a conversion factor, and to reach a conclusion on the residue definition for risk assessment for processed products in the broader framework of the renewal.

The overview of the assessment of confirmatory data and the recommended MRL modifications are summarised in AppendixB.5.

EFSA may include images or other content for which it does not hold copyright. In such cases, EFSA indicates the copyright holder and users should seek permission to reproduce the content from the original source.

Drenching/dipping. Critical waiting period: 0 day.

Sufficient number of trials is in principle available to support this GAP. However, further trials including simultaneous analysis of imazalil and metabolite R014821 should be generated.

Annual rate max 300 g/ha. Restricted to use in artificial soil.

Applied on ripe citrus fruits. Critical waiting period: 0 days.

Applied on ripe citrus fruits. Critical waiting period: 0 days.

Applied on ripe citrus fruits. Critical waiting period: 0 days.

Abbreviations: NEU, northern European Union; SEU, southern European Union; MS, Member State.

Outdoor or field use (F), greenhouse application (G) or indoor application (I).

CropLife International Technical Monograph no 2, 6th Edition. Revised May 2008. Catalogue of pesticide formulation types and international coding system.

Growth stage range from first to last treatment (BBCH Monograph, Growth Stages of Plants, 1997, Blackwell, ISBN 3‐8263‐3152‐4), including, where relevant, information on season at time of application.

Combined dataset of residue trials on oranges and mandarins compliant with GAP already assessed (EFSA,2010,2017,2018b,2018c). Samples from trials assessed in the EU pesticides peer review, in the MRL review (EFSA,2010,2017) and from 2 trials assessed in the previous EFSA opinion, were analysed for imazalil only (italicised values). Further trials, which were not considered in the MRL review, were herewith considered for the MRL calculations (Netherlands,2024; Spain,2016).

Two trials on oranges and two trials on mandarins analysed according to the residue definition for risk assessment were designed as decline trials.

Higher residue, underlined, observed at a longer storage period.

Extrapolation to the whole group of citrus fruits possible.

Combined dataset of residue trials on oranges and mandarins compliant with GAP already assessed (EFSA,2010,2018b). Samples from trials assessed in the EU pesticides peer review (EFSA,2010) were analysed for imazalil only.

None of the studies was designed as a decline study.

Combined dataset of residue trials on oranges and mandarins compliant with the GAP already assessed (2018b). None of the trials was designed as a decline study.

Extrapolation to the whole group of citrus fruits possible.

Abbreviations: GAP, Good Agricultural Practice; Mo, monitoring; MRL, maximum residue level; RA, risk assessment.

NEU: Outdoor trials conducted in northern Europe, SEU: Outdoor trials conducted in southern Europe, Indoor: indoor EU trials or Country code: if non‐EU trials.

Highest residue. The highest residue for risk assessment refers to the whole commodity and to the edible portion (pulp). Prior to be summed up for risk assessment purpose, the individual residue values of R014821 above the LOQ of 0.01 mg/kg were recalculated to express them as imazalil equivalents using a conversion factor of 1.16 based on molecular weights; Individual residues of R014821 below or equal 0.01 mg/kg were summed as such, without conversion.

Supervised trials median residue. The median residue for risk assessment refers to the whole commodity and to the edible portion (pulp). Prior to be summed up for risk assessment purpose, the individual residue values of R014821 above the LOQ of 0.01 mg/kg were recalculated to express them as imazalil using a conversion factor of 1.16 based on molecular weights; Individual residues of R014821 below or equal 0.01 mg/kg were summed as such, without conversion.

Median conversion factor to recalculate residues according to the residue definition for monitoring to the residue definition for risk assessment, for the whole product. These CFs are derived from the results of the trials selected to derive an MRL proposal. In Table B.2.2.2 all residue trials analysed according to the residue definition for risk assessment where included, regardless to their independency.

CFs calculated at the supported WHP are underlined.

Studies with residues in the RAC at or close to the LOQ were disregarded (unless concentration may occur).

Underlined, samples analysed also for R014821. Residues were: 2 × 0.02 mg/kg in the RAC (WP 31 days), 2 × < 0.01 mg/kg in juice, 0.18 and 0.28 mg/kg in dry pomace, 0.05 and 0.08 mg/kg in wet pomace, < 0.01 and 0.01 mg/kg in marmalade (EFSA,2018b).

Conversion factor for risk assessment in the processed commodity; median of the individual conversion factors for each processing residues trial. n.c. Limited information does not allow to derive CFs for risk assessment for processed products.

Based on residue trials compliant with the critical GAP (drenching 50 g/hL; WHP 0 days, including replicates) performed on oranges (n= 15 ranging from 0.01 to 0.28) and mandarins (n= 16 ranging from 0.01 to 0.25) and considering the processing factors derived during the peer review on oranges (0.08), lemons (0.04; 0.04; 0.05) and grapefruits (0.13) (EFSA,2010,2017).

Based on residue trials performed with a higher application rate compared to GAP (EFSA,2017).

Dietary burden calculation according to OECD (2013).

When one group of livestock includes several subgroups (e.g. poultry ‘all’ including broiler, layer and turkey), the result of the most critical subgroup is identified from the maximum dietary burdens expressed as ‘mg/kg bw per day’.

The most critical commodity is the major contributor identified from the maximum dietary burden expressed as ‘mg/kg bw per day’.

The data gap identified by EFSA concerning the toxicity of metabolite R014821 has been addressed. The formerly tentative MRL is confirmed.

In addition, the applicant has resubmitted previously assessed data which support, by extrapolation from residue trials on oranges and mandarins, a higher MRL proposal for the post‐harvest uses on citrus fruits. New data on unit‐to unit variability of residues in oranges allow refining the acute consumer risk assessment.

The implementation of the Codex MRL for bananas is for risk management decision. The risk for consumers is consider unlikely.

The contribution of residues of the metabolite R014821 to the consumer exposure could not be estimated for the CXL, leading to non‐standard uncertainty.

The data gap identified by EFSA concerning the toxicity of metabolite R014821 has been addressed.

However, EFSA noted that the EU critical GAP on melons submitted in the MRL review is not sufficiently supported by data and the alternative Codex MRL of 2 mg/kg (post‐harvest use) has been withdrawn in 2019.

A risk management decision is required on whether to maintain the current MRL.

The data gap identified by EFSA concerning the toxicity of the metabolites FK‐772 and FK‐284 is considered addressed. Information on storage stability was addressed.

The higher proposed MRL for citrus is not having an inpat on the previous livestock dietary burden calculations.

Abbreviations: GAP, Good Agricultural Practice; MRL, maximum residue level; NEU, northern Europe; SEU, southern Europe.

Commodity code number according to Annex I of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005.

Existing EU MRL and corresponding footnote on confirmatory data.

Modification of the existing maximum residue levels for imazalil in courgettes, cucumbers and gherkins (EFSA,2023).

ft 1 The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

ft 2 The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on residue trials as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

ft 3 The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

ft 4 The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites and storage stability as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

Abbreviations: HR, highest residue; PF, processing factor; STMR, supervised trials median residue.

Figures in the table are rounded to two digits, but the calculations are normally performed with the actually calculated values (which may contain more digits). To reproduce dietary burden calculations, the unrounded values need to be used.

For processed commodities of potatoes and cereals (brewer's and distiller's grain, gluten and milled by‐products), no default processing factor was applied because imazalil is applied as a seed treatment and residues are expected to be below the LOQ. Concentration of residues in these commodities is therefore not expected.

Abbreviations: HR‐RAC, highest residue in raw agricultural commodity; PeF, Peeling factor; STMR‐RAC, supervised trials median residue in raw agricultural commodity.

Figures in the table are rounded to 2 digits, but the calculations are normally performed with the calculated values (which may contain more digits). To reproduce dietary burden calculations, the unrounded values need to be used.

Input values for the commodities which are not under consideration for the acute risk assessment are reported in grey.

For cucumbers and gherkins, the current MRLs of 0.5 mg/kg are set based on CXLs. These CXLs have been proposed to be withdrawn by JMPR (EFSA,2019b,2023).

In the absence of risk assessment values available for this CXL, the CXL value is directly used for an indicative calculation (EFSA,2018c).

For blackberries and raspberries, as the median value is not available, the highest value (instead of the median) is used for an indicative chronic calculation (EFSA,2018c). JMPR has withdrawn also these CXLs (FAO and WHO,2019, EFSA,2019b).

The EU previously made a reservation on the implementation of the CXL for bananas pending the ongoing re‐evaluation of imazalil in the EU because of the lack of toxicological data on the metabolite R014821. The toxicity of this metabolite is sufficiently addressed in the current application. For melons, the confirmatory data gap identified in the MRL legislation is addressed. Since the EU MRL is not sufficiently supported by data, the CXL could be an alternative, but this CXL has been revoked (FAO and WHO,2019, EFSA,2019b). Further risk managers' considerations are required.

In the absence of supporting data, the existing EU MRL (and by the Peeling Factor derived in the framework of the MRL review) is used for indicative exposure calculations.

MRL implemented by Regulation (EC) 2020/856, based on CXL (FAO and WHO,2019) derived using the JMPR residue definition for monitoring for animal commodities (i.e. ‘imazalil’ only).

Risk assessment value derived by JMPR (FAO and WHO,2019) using the JMPR residue definition for risk assessment for animal commodities, corresponding to the EFSA residue definition for monitoring in animal commodities (i.e. ‘imazalil and FK‐772 (R061000) ((RS)‐3‐[2‐(2,4‐dichlorophenyl)‐2‐(2,3‐dihydroxypropoxy)ethyl]imidazolidine‐2,4‐dione(+)‐1‐[2‐(2,4‐dichlorophenyl)‐2‐[(2,3‐dihydroxypropyl)oxy]ethyl]‐2,5‐imidazolidinedione), expressed as parent equivalents’) (EFSA,2017; FAO and WHO,2019); therefore, conversion factors derived in the MRL review from metabolism studies were applied to ensure consistency with previous EFSA assessments considering the residue definition for risk assessment previously tentatively derived by EFSA (2017).

Abbreviations: InChiKey, International Chemical Identifier Key; IUPAC, International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry; SMILES, simplified molecular‐input line‐entry system.

The metabolite name in bold is the name used in the conclusion.

ACD/Name 2024.2.3 ACD/Labs 2024.2.3 (File Version N25E41, Build 142837, 21 January 2025).

ACD/ChemSketch 2024.2.3 ACD/Labs 2024.2.3 (File Version C45H41, Build 142855, 23 January 2025).

Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 of the Parliament and of the Council of 23 February 2005 on maximum residue levels of pesticides in or on food and feed of plant and animal origin and amending Council Directive 91/414/EEC. OJ L 70, 16.3.2005, p. 1–16.

Commission Regulation (EU) 2019/1582 of 25 September 2019 amending Annexes II and III to Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards maximum residue levels for imazalil in or on certain products. OJ L 246, 26.9.2019, p. 1–14.

Commission Regulation (EU) No 544/2011 of 10 June 2011 implementing Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the data requirements for active substances. OJ L 155, 11.6.2011, p. 1–66.

Commission Regulation (EU) No 546/2011 of 10 June 2011 implementing Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards uniform principles for evaluation and authorisation of plant protection products. OJ L 155, 11.6.2011, p. 127–175.

Background documents to this reasoned opinion are published on OpenEFSA portal and are available at the following links:https://open.efsa.europa.eu/study‐inventory/EFSA‐Q‐2023‐00068;https://open.efsa.europa.eu/study‐inventory/EFSA‐Q‐2024‐00529.

The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites and storage stability as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

See experts' consultation point 3.1 in the Report of the Pesticides Peer Review Experts' Teleconference 156 in December 2024 (EFSA,2025b).

See experts' consultation point 3.2 in the Report of the Pesticides Peer Review Experts' Teleconference 156 in December 2024 (EFSA,2025b).

The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on residue trials as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

Full toxicological assessment of metabolites FK‐772 and FK‐284.

The European Food Safety Authority identified some information on the toxicity of metabolites and storage stability as unavailable. When re‐viewing the MRL, the Commission will take into account the information referred to in the first sentence, if it is submitted by 26 September 2021, or, if that information is not submitted by that date, the lack of it.

A study demonstrating the storage stability of imazalil and its metabolite FK‐772 in commodities of animal origin.

Information on the storage conditions of the samples of the feeding studies performed with ruminants.

Commission Regulation (EU) 2020/856 of 9 June 2020 amending Annexes II and III to Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards maximum residue levels for cyantraniliprole, cyazofamid, cyprodinil, fenpyroximate, fludioxonil, fluxapyroxad, imazalil, isofetamid, kresoxim‐methyl, lufenuron, mandipropamid, propamocarb, pyraclostrobin, pyriofenone, pyriproxyfen and spinetoram in or on certain products. C/2020/3608. OJ L 195, 19.6.2020, p. 9–51.

((RS)‐3‐[2‐(2,4‐dichlorophenyl)‐2‐(2,3‐ dihydroxypropoxy)ethyl]imidazolidine‐ 2,4‐dione (+)‐1‐[2‐(2,4‐dichlorophenyl)‐2‐[(2,3‐dihydroxypropyl)oxy]ethyl]‐2,5‐imidazolidinedione), also reported as FK‐772.