In the United States, ∼30,000 units of red blood
cells (RBCs)
are transfused daily to patient recipients. These RBCs are stored
in one of multiple variations of media known as additive solutions,
all of which contain glucose at concentrations well above physiological
levels. Recently, strategies for storage of the RBCs in normoglycemic
versions of the additive solutions whose glucose levels are maintained
with periodic boluses of glucose were developed, resulting in benefits
to the stored RBCs. Here, we describe a system capable of semiautonomous,
Wi-Fi-enabled control of glucose delivery using a microperistaltic
pump for maintenance of physiological concentrations of glucose in
a closed RBC storage system. The RBCs stored in these normoglycemic
conditions demonstrated reduced lysis and reduced hemoglobin glycation
in comparison to those of the currently used hyperglycemic additive
solutions. Furthermore, a novel single cell technique using pressure-induced
conductivity mapping showed an improved Young’s modulus for
those RBCs stored in normoglycemic solutions. These quantitative measurements
of the RBCs’ chemical and physical properties coincide with
improvements in cell functionality. Specifically, determinations of
RBC-derived ATP using a 3D-printed microfluidic device show an increased
release of ATP for RBCs stored in normoglycemic solutions in comparison
to hyperglycemic storage, even for cells that were 2 weeks past a
storage expiration of 42 days.

The first successful human-to-human blood
transfusion was administered
by James Blundell in 1825, marking an important milestone in the beginning
of a critical field of modern medicine. Now, nearly 200 years later, the most recent available National
Blood Collection and Utilization Survey (from 2021) estimated that
more than 10.5 million units of red blood cells (RBCs) are transfused
every year in the United States alone. From the management of anemias to trauma stabilization, the availability
of high quality blood products is key to proper patient care.

We recently reported on
advancing those normoglycemic storage strategies
with a semiautomated, valve-controlled delivery system for maintenance
of glucose concentrations in the stored cells using a reservoir of feeding solution connected to a solenoid valve
and suspended above the red blood cell (RBC) storage bags. This first-generation
feeding system worked well throughout multiple RBC storage periods.
However, several drawbacks exist that may have impacted system performance
and translational potential. First, the feeding solution was gravity-fed,
and therefore, flow was dependent on the relative elevation of the
feeding solution reservoir. Another drawback of our previously reported
feeding system was that the valves necessitated direct contact with
the feeding solution. While care was taken to clean these valves,
they could not be autoclaved or easily disassembled for sterilization.
While it is worth noting that blood agar swabs following initial storage
trials showed no signs of bacterial contamination, future clinical
approvals using this system could prove to be challenging. Finally,
the previous system did not individually manage each storage bag.
A general feeding schedule was established with delivery volumes scaled
based on the initial bag volume and values of known glucose consumption
by the stored RBCs as a function of time. This strategy accounts for
increases in volume due to feeding but not reductions due to sampling
for experimentation. It also does not allow for glucose feedback,
preventing the system from compensating in the case of hypoglycemia
or hyperglycemia. Since certain values were not accounted for during
the storage duration, separate systems were required for each set
of blood bags in storage.

Here, we report on a next-generation
system that enables wireless
control of remote administration of glucose maintenance in a parallel
format. Use of peristaltic pumps (instead of gravity-based feeding
through valves) coupled with an improved dosing algorithm has led
to improvements in experimental control, rigor, and flexibility as
well as system usability and translational potential. Importantly,
we use several analytical measurements to confirm these improvements
to the overall stored RBC health. This includes a novel, SICM-based
single cell pressure mapping of individual cells, as well as bulk
measurements of the RBC’s ability to release ATP using 3D-printed
microfluidic technologies.

All blood
was collected via forearm venipuncture from informed and consented
donors following procedures approved by the Biomedical and Health
Institutional Review Board at Michigan State University. Approximately
7 mL of whole blood were collected into untreated (no commercially
added anticoagulant) 10 mL glass Vacutainer tubes (BD; Franklin Lakes,
NJ) containing 1 mL of in-house made CPD (a citrate, phosphate, dextrose
solution currently used in blood storage strategies) or CPD-N (a solution
that is the same as the CPD but with normoglycemic concentrations
of glucose) anticoagulants sterilized via autoclave at 121 °C
and 21 bar for 30 min.Tabledescribes the contents of the collection and subsequent additive
solutions (AS-1 and AS-1N) used in these studies. Six tubes (each
containing the aforementioned ∼7 mL of whole blood) of each
condition were collected from all donors and allowed to sit at room
temperature for 30 min with inversion of the tubes every 5 min. Blood
components were then separated by centrifugation at 2000gfor 10 min, followed by aspiration of the plasma, buffy coat, and
top 2 mm of packed RBCs (pRBCs). For each donor, the remaining pRBCs
were pooled by condition in a 50 mL conical tube and added in a 2:1
ratio to either AS-1 or AS-1N additive solutions, likewise sterilized
by autoclave. These RBCs were then transferred into sterile 100 mL
veterinary blood storage bags (ABRI catalog no. BG-DD 100 BAG). All
steps following centrifugation took place in a biosafety cabinet to
maintain sterility.

A partial description for glucose maintenance of the RBCs in storage
is shown inFigure. An open-source single-board computer (SBC) (Orange Pi Zero2; Shenzhen
Xunlong Software Co., Ltd.; Shenzhen, China) was used as the control
server for the feeding system (FigureA). In addition to enabling operation of the feeding
software, the SBC also acts as a Wi-Fi host to which client devices
can connect. Client devices are redirected to the web interface of
the software upon opening a web browser and navigating to any Web
site via domain name system redirection. The feeding software, written
entirely in the Python programming language, is described in detail
in theSupporting Information. The microcontroller
board drives up to four stepper motors with peristaltic pump heads.
These allow for closed-system pumping without direct contact with
the working fluid. Thus, a reservoir of glucose feeding solution can
be pumped into RBC-containing storage bags while maintaining sterility.
The stepper motors used to drive the peristaltic pump heads can be
controlled with high precision, enabling rotation in 0.225° increments
and volumes as low as 160 nL, although the precision of the delivered
volume increases as the bolus volume increases. Early on in glucose
storage, when glucose consumption was at a higher rate that later
in storage, a typical bolus was between 800 and 1,000 nL every 10–15
min. Near the end of storage, the frequency of such a bolus was several
hours. The RBCs were mixed daily by gently massaging the storage bag
containing the cells.

Assembled pumping system with a control server and stepper
motors
controlling peristaltic pumping is shown in (A). The two connection
ports on each of the 4 pumps on the front of the assembled system
are used to connect to the RBC storage bags for glucose delivery.
A graphical overview of the Wi-Fi-enabled semiautomated RBC feeding
system is shown in (B). The directional arrows represent the pumps
controlled by stepper motors. The feeding software, written in-house,
is described in theSupporting Information.

RBCs undergoing normoglycemic storage were then
connected to the
glucose maintenance system, as shown inFigureB. All tubing used in the system to maintain
glucose concentrations was UV sterilized and/or chemically disinfected
using a 10% bleach solution followed by a thorough flush using 18.2
MΩ·cm water. Sterilized 1.5 in., 18-gauge blunt tip needles
were connected to the tubing, and the entire system was primed with
feeding solution. This solution contained 300 mM glucose in 18.2 MΩ·cm
water and was sterile filtered using a 0.22 μm pore Stericup
(MilliporeSigma; Burlington, MA). The needle was used to pierce the
spike port and inserted fully into the bag, forming a tight seal between
the port collar and the needle base. All RBC units were kept in cold
storage at 2 – 6 °C for 6 to 8 weeks. The design algorithm
for maintenance of glucose concentrations within the storage bags
is shown in the Supporting Information asFigure S1, along with a detailed description algorithm.

Stored RBCs were
sampled periodically to monitor glucose concentrations in the bags
and to perform various experiments to determine the RBC chemical and
physical properties. A 1 mL syringe was used to remove aliquots of
RBCs from each bag in storage via a sampling port. The graduations
on the syringe were used to estimate the volume of each aliquot and
were entered into the feeding system shown inFigureA to maintain an accurate bag volume for
feeding solution dosing. Determination of glucose concentrations in
the storage bag generally required only a few microliters to be removed,
while weekly experiments to determine other RBC properties (described
below) required approximately 300 – 400 μL.

A 3D-printed device was
used in this study for detecting ATP from RBCs and was based on a
previous design, optimized for nitric
oxide (NO) and ATP detection from flowing RBCs. The NO portion of
the device was not used in this work. The device was designed in Autodesk
Inventor Professional and printed on a Stratasys J750 PolyJet printer
with Vero UltraClear model material. The device was manually cleaned
of support material and rinsed with isopropanol and water, with any
small ridges forming a carpet layer on the bottom of the device (from
the support material) removed by wet polishing until the device was
smooth and transparent. All channels were designed with a 500 ×
500 μm cross-section, and fluidic connections were made with
printed threads designed to accommodate commercial fittings (Idex
P-202 IDEX Health & Science, Oak Harbor, WA) and tubing (508 μm
I.D. Tygon tubing, 06419-01, Cole-Parmer. The previously described
device had ports for introduction of
electrodes (for NO detection) that were not used in this study. These
ports were blocked by threading into the device various prefabricated
and commercially available electrodes to make the device complete
and possibly prevent it from leaking prior to ATP detection. The chemiluminescence
detection part of the device is the significant component for this
study. It consists of two inlets for introducing the luciferin/luciferase
solution, followed by a straight reaction channel. The optimized design
resulted in reagent streams that converge with the sample channel
to form a double-mixing T, and the light-producing reaction occurs
as the solutions mix via diffusion in the ATP detection channel.

In this study, phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was used as the carrier
buffer and pumped through the device at 15 μL/min from a syringe
pump. Injections were made using a 4-port injector fitted with a 1
μL volume rotor (Valco Instruments, Houston, TX). The ATP/luciferin/luciferase
reaction channel was placed over a photomultiplier tube (Hamamatsu
Photonics) in a light-excluding black box. The luciferin/luciferase
solution contained 10 mg/mL crude firefly lantern extract (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO), and 1 mg/mL luciferin (Gold Biotechnology, St. Louis,
MO) in PBS. The solution was sterile filtered, loaded into two syringes,
and continuously pumped into the device at 2.5 μL/min.

For long-term RBC storage studies, all solutions were prepared
fresh on the day of the experiment. An ATP stock solution of 25 μM
was prepared in PBS. The freshly isolated RBCs that were suspended
in a storage solution (at ∼60% hematocrit) were diluted with
PBS to a final volume of 1.25 mL and a final hematocrit of 7%. Standard
addition curves were created using 1 mL of RBCs and 0–250 μL
of ATP stock solution. Both RBC samples were spiked with standard
ATP solutions immediately before 1 μL plugs of the standard
addition samples were injected into the device via a 4-port injector
(with a 150 μm i.d. fused silica capillary connecting the 4-port
to the device). The injected RBC samples resulted in signals represented
by chemiluminescent peaks. The peak heights from ATP-spiked samples,
injected in triplicate, were used to determine ATP concentrations
from RBCs stored in the various storage solutions (AS-1 vs AS-1N).
The method of standard addition was used to quantitate the ATP for
all of the RBC studies to account for any matrix effects. All data
was smoothed in PeakFit (San Jose, CA) with a Savitzky-Golay filter
(0.5% window) to filter noise for analysis and presentation purposes.

For pressure mapping studies,
the RBC samples were diluted to a hematocrit of ∼0.7% and centrifuged.
The supernatant was removed and replaced with either fresh additive
solution or a physiological salt solution (PSS). After mixing by vortex, the RBC sample was transferred
onto a poly-l-lysine coated glass slide (Poly-Prep Slides,
Sigma-Aldrich) for cell attachment for 30 min prior to scanning ion
conductance microscopy (SICM) imaging. The SICM was set up over an
inverted optical microscope (Eclipse TE2000-U with DMK 37BUR0234 CMOS
sensor, The Imaging Source), to facilitate the positioning of the
nanopipette and obtain bright-field images of the RBCs. The pipet
of ∼200 nm I.D. tip size on average was fabricated using a
heat-filament puller (P-1000, Sutter Instruments) with a borosilicate
single-barrel capillary (1.0 mm O.D., 0.58 mm I.D., 10 cm in length,
Sutter Instruments) using the following parameter: HEAT = 505, PULL
= 65, VEL = 78, DELAY = 167, PRESSURE = 500, with the RAMP = 505 using
Delay Mode. The optical microscope was placed over an antivibrational
stage (AVI-200S/LP, Herzan). Pipette movement was achieved with aZ-axis stepper motor (M-112.1DG1, Physik Instrumente), aZ-axis piezoelectric actuator (P-753.21C, Physik Instrumente)
and anXY-axis piezoelectric actuator (P-621.2CL,
Physik Instrumente). Nanopipettes were pressurized through the high-pressure
gas line controlled through a pressure valve (TM-200, Narishige) with
a custom-designed pipet holder. The SICM potentiostat (Axopatch 200B,
Axon Instrument) was connected to the pipet to apply voltage and measure
ion current. A multichannel oscilloscope (Axon Digidata 1550B, Axon
Instrument) was connected to a computer for monitoring all of the
signal channels. An FPGA board (NI-7845R OEM, National Instruments)
was programmed to communicate with a home-built LabVIEW (2024, National
Instruments) and Python (version 3.9.5) hybrid-designed software on
the computer. The pipet was back-pressurized with 2 kPa and brought
∼12.5 μm away from the sample surface first, which is
within the reach of theZ-axis piezo actuator. Before
scanning, the probe hopped at the same XY position 200 times to obtain
200 ion current approach curves as the substrate reference. Then,
the probe raster scanned the RBC region of interest with a pipet approach
rate of 7 μm/s and retract rate of 35 μm/s with 5 μm
hopping height and 2.1% ion current threshold. During the pipet approach
at each XY pixel, ion current and piezo movement traces between 1%
and 2% threshold were recorded and saved as data files.

During
the AS-1 and AS-1N experiments, samples were imaged with the original
buffer first (AS-1/AS-1N) and then the buffer was replaced with PSS,
and the same region was imaged again. Approach curves were extracted
and analyzed by using custom-built Python scripts. RBC topography
was obtained by extracting the piezo final location when the ion current
reached a 2.1% threshold at each XY pixel. Linear regression was performed
on 200 substrate-referential approach curves and on RBC scanning approach
curves. Substrate referential I-Z curve slope,s∞, was chosen by picking the median
value of all the slopes of substrate-referential approach curves.
The Young’s modulus at each pixel was obtained using the equation
reported by Rheinlaender et al. For statistical
analysis, only the pixels over the cells were extracted by applying
the Watershed imaging segmentation method (using the scikit-image
Python library) to the topography to isolate the location of red
blood cells. Young’s moduli pixelwise histograms were obtained
by summarizing all pixels from categories: fresh cells (in PSS), AS-1
cells (in AS-1), AS-1 cells (in PSS), AS-1N cells (in AS-1N), and
AS-1N cells (in PSS). These cells were measured during week 6 of storage.

Improvements
in blood storage have come about primarily through the development
of improved additive solutions. These
solutions help to preserve RBCs throughout storage by providing them
with nutrients and enable easier transfusion by reducing the viscosity
of stored RBCs. However, current FDA-approved
additive solutions contain extreme amounts of glucose (up to 111 mM),
which have been implicated in the development the storage lesion.−
,Red blood cell storage using
experimental normoglycemic additive solutions shows promise in mitigating
components of this storage lesion by improving RBC deformability and
ATP release and reducing oxidative stress and osmotic fragility.−

,Here, a semiautonomous, remotely
controlled feeding system for normoglycemic RBC storage was developed.
This iteration improves upon previously published work to enable better experimental control, allowing
for more rigorous study of low-glucose blood storage.

While
a previous feeding system enabled acceptable
glucose control throughout the 42-day storage period, the system reported
here enables semiautomated glucose correction and higher volumetric
precision compared to previous systems. This current system (Figure) was used to deliver
varying volumes of 300 nM glucose to storage bags containing RBCs
from n = 4 donors. Using a target glucose concentration of 5 ±
1 mM in the AS-1N storage bag, the system was able to maintain that
range of glucose in 48 of 64 measurements performed over a 56 day
storage period (FigureA). No glucose was added to the AS-1 stored cells due to the concentration
in those bags ranging from slightly below 50 mM on day 1 and never
decreasing below 35 mM for any of the donor samples.

Concentrations of glucose
forn= 4 donors across
56 days of storage in AS-1N is shown in (A). Of the 68 measurements
shown, 48/64 (75%) are within the range of 5 ± 1 mM. The glucose
levels were maintained by measuring the glucose concentration of an
aliquot removed from the storage bag, followed by the addition of
an appropriate volume of a sterile glucose stock solution using the
system described inFigure. The percentage of lysed RBCs within the storage bag is shown
in (B). Importantly, the lysis rate for the AS1-N stored RBCs remained
under 1% (required by the American Association of Blood Bankers, AABB)
up through 6 weeks of storage; however, both storage methods resulted
in lysis rates above 1% beyond 6 weeks of storage. For both measurements,n= 4 donors, and error bars represent SEM.

RBC lysis was also measured for cells stored in
a traditional hyperglycemic
AS-1 additive solution and compared to AS-1N storage with periodic
feeding. As shown inFigureB, there was no significant difference in cell lysis between
the two storage solution strategies and both AS-1 and AS-1N were below
the 1% lysis threshold set forth by the FDA through 4 weeks of storage.
However, there was a significant difference in RBC lysis that was
dependent on storage solution after 5 and 6 weeks of storage duration.
Specifically, while the AS-1 storage strategy was not statistically
different than the 1% threshold, the RBCs stored in AS-1N were statistically
less than 1% (t= 0.05 for both tests). Furthermore,
at 7 weeks of storage (which is 1 week past normal storage duration
allowed in the United States) the AS-1N lysis percentage was not statistically
different than 1% (t= 0.05). While AS-1N may not
improve RBC lysis enough to extend storage durations, decreases in
hemolysis relative to traditional hyperglycemic storage near current
storage end points may be clinically relevant. Coupled with our previous
reports of reduced osmotic fragility of RBCs stored in AS-1N solutions
with periodic feeding, overall improvements
in post-transfusion RBC circulation may be attainable with normoglycemic
storage.

Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels in stored RBCs likely
increase throughout storage due to the hyperglycemic conditions present
in current additive solutions, and such measurements have been reported.−While glycation may play a role in the increased fragility and impaired
post-transfusion function of these RBCs, these prior studies were
in agreement that the small increases in HbA1c were most likely not
clinically significant. However, these reports investigated only 
RBCs stored in hyperglycemic environments. The data inFigureprovide evidence that normoglycemic
storage of the RBCs in AS-1N was beneficial in controlling the increase
in HbA1c versus RBCs stored in AS-1. While the conventional, hyperglycemic
AS-1 additive solutions did not result in a significant positive increase
in HbA1c until week 6 of storage, there was a significant difference
in the HbA1c between AS-1 and its normoglycemic counterpart, AS-1N
even at 28 days in storage. Thus, normoglycemic storage may prevent
glycation of RBC proteins (in addition to hemoglobin) and formation
of early or advanced glycation end-products. This may help alleviate
post-transfusion complications, including endothelial damage, inflammation,
and lung injury.

Changes in HbA1c for normoglycemic storage in AS-1N (gray
bars)
and AS-1 (white bars). Changes in HbA1c were measured as the difference
between the HbA1c value on day 1 of storage and days 14, 28, 42, and
56 for each of the samples. There is a significant difference in the
HbA1c values between AS-1N and AS-1 for each day past 14 days of storage
(t= 0.05). The error bars represent the SEM of eithern= 8 (days 14, 28, and 42) orn= 4 (day
56) donor samples.

However, hyperglycemic storage of RBCs has previously been
shown to significantly reduce flow-induced ATP release.−
,However, to date, measurements
of RBC-derived ATP in stored cells have never been measured beyond
6 weeks of storage.

(A) CAD rendering of the 3D-printed microfluidic
device used in
this study. The device contains threaded ports for fluidic fittings
and electrodes. (B) The assembled device with threaded electrodes
for amperometric detections was not employed in this study. ATP mixing
channel is aligned directly on top of a PMT window for chemiluminescence
detection. (C) RBC-derived ATP was measured under flow conditions
for RBCs stored in AS-1N (gray bars) and AS-1 (white bars). The RBCs
stored in the AS-1N released significantly higher amounts of ATP than
the cells stored in AS-1 (t= 0.05). Importantly,
the ATP release from the RBCs stored in AS-1N continued to release
ATP at levels similar to those measured on day 1 of storage past typical
expiration dates of 6 weeks. The data are averages of 4 donor samples,
and error bars are SEM.

The improvements in flow-induced ATP release from
RBCs stored under
normoglycemic conditions could have important implicationsin vivo. Previously, we reported an increase in nitric oxide
production from bovine pulmonary endothelial cells using a microfluidic
chip consisting of stored RBCs flowing under inserts containing the
cultured endothelium. The ability of
RBCs to regulate vasodilation through this mechanism could be impaired
by hyperglycemic storage but maintained using a normoglycemic anticoagulant
and additive solutions.

The ability
of RBCs to deform as they pass through the microvasculature and splenic
pulp is critical. Deformable cells are
less prone to sublethal membrane damage and sequestration within the
spleen, improving circulation time, and contribute to healthy hemorheology
and tissue oxygenation. This shear-induced
deformation also results in the release of intracellular stores of
ATP into the bloodstream, helping regulate vasodilation, as described
above. Improvements in bulk deformability of stored RBCs in AS-1N
solutions compared to AS-1 have been demonstrated in previous work,
but similar measurements on individual RBCs in hyper- and normoglycemic
storage solutions are unprecedented.

where the reference response
generated from the substrate slopes, s∞, was derived from the
median value of the set of slopes of the ion current approach curves.
The response of the RBC sample at each XY pixel was determined using
linear regression of the 1% to 2% region of approach curves to generate
a sample slope map, s. A (ineq) is the geometry dependent empirical parameter derived from
COMSOL simulation (COMSOL Multiphysics v6.1). In this experiment,
A = 0.1617, details of which have been previously reported.

Pressurized-SICM instrumental principle and 3D topographic
image
and Young’s Modulus image of RBCs using Pressurized-SICM. (a)
Local RBC compliance induced by nanofluidic flow from a pressurized
nanopipette. The difference in compliance leads to variations in slope
of ion current approach curves (shown in (a)). (b) SICM topography
of AS-1 stored RBCs in the AS-1 buffer. The corresponding Young’s
Modulus images were taken (c) before and (d) after the AS-1 solution
was switched to PSS. Similarly, the (e) SICM topography was taken
RBCs stored in AS-1N buffer. Young’s Modulus images were scanned
at the same region (f) before and (g) after the buffer was switched
to PSS. Glass substrate pixels are colored as shallow cyan and are
excluded from further statistical analysis.

Interestingly, the data inFiguresand  suggest that
the overall
cell rigidity of single cells, reported as the Young’s modulus
of each cell, is quite similar for each cell stored in its respective
storage solutions, with the AS-1 stored cells exhibiting slightly
lower values of Young’s moduli. However, when moved to a plasma-like
physiological salt solution, which mimics the actions of an actual
transfusion, the AS-1N stored RBCs have measurements of Young’s
moduli across the cell surface that indicate an ability to recover
cell deformability more readily than the cells stored in the AS-1.
For example, inFiguresc and f (RBCs measured while in their AS-1
and AS-1N storage media, respectively) the center moduli are both
at ∼300 Pa, which differ from cell edge <100 Pa. When moved
to a plasma-like physiological salt solution (PSS), which mimics the
actions of an actual transfusion, the moduli of the AS-1 stored RBCs
did not change significantly, especially the center moduli. However,
the AS-1N stored RBC has measurements of Young’s moduli across
the cell surface below 100 Pa (Figureg). In summary, these data indicate that while the
moduli for the cells in their respective storage solutions were somewhat
similar, the moduli of the AS-1N stored cells were able to respond
to the media (PSS) change better than the AS-1 stored cells. Interestingly,
an examination of AS-1N stored cells after dilution in the PSS suggests
that Young’s moduli increased for some of the RBCs (Figure, yellow trace) in
comparison to the AS-1N cells mapped in AS-1N without buffer exchange
in PSS (Figure, black
trace). It is not confirmed whether this particular “range”
of Young’s moduli is favored for increased release of ATP from
the RBC upon being subjected to flow.

Normalized pixelwise Young’s Modulus
distribution of fresh
RBC, AS-1 stored RBC in AS-1 imaging medium, AS-1 stored RBC in PSS
imaging medium, AS-1N stored RBC in AS-1N imaging medium, and AS-1N
stored RBC in PSS imaging medium.

The differences in the release of ATP from the
stored RBCs shown
inFigure, which
are often related to cell deformability, coupled with the mapping
data suggest that there may be either a specific region of Young’s
moduli that are favorable to ATP release or perhaps the AS-1N and
AS-1 stored cells have similar moduli but the AS-1 cells have increased
glycation damage (as suggested by the glycated hemoglobin data inFigure). The Young’s
moduli data inFigureare represented as a distribution of the pressure mapping across
the RBCs in AS-1, AS-1N, PSS or in AS-1 and AS-1N with buffer exchange.

Transfusion-transmitted infections, immune-mediated
reactions,
sepsis, and transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO) are
all relevant complications that must be considered during a transfusion
to a patient recipient.,The leading cause of
transfusion-related death in the United States, TACO, is caused by
rapid transfusion of large volumes leading to hypervolemia or too
much fluid in the body. On average, each transfusion recipient will
receive two to five units, or 700 to 1750 mL, of RBCs.

Here, we report that normoglycemic
storage of RBCs using an experimental
additive solution can mitigate the development of some of these storage-associated
detriments. A novel semiautomated RBC feeding system was developed
to maintain normoglycemia throughout storage. Hemolysis, hemoglobin
glycation, and flow-induced ATP release were quantified in RBCs stored
for up to 8 weeks, and single-cell stiffness was measured after storage
for 3 weeks of storage. The performance of the feeding system was
validated by frequent blood glucose monitoring, and normoglycemia
was well-maintained throughout 8 weeks of storage. Under these conditions,
HbA1c and hemolysis were improved near the end of the storage period
compared with standard hyperglycemic storage. Significant improvements
were seen in flow-induced ATP release from AS-1N stored RBCs throughout
storage, indicating superior function relative to their AS-1 stored
counterparts. Finally, single-cell measurement of Young’s moduli
at the midpoint of storage indicates improved cellular deformability,
perhaps contributing to the observed enhanced ATP release. Collectively,
these improvements to stored RBCs show that normoglycemic anticoagulant
and additive solutions may be beneficial for increasing the efficacy
of RBC transfusions. This may have important clinical implications,
such as reducing transfusion volumes, which could prevent the onset
of serious complications. In addition, this work shows that new analytical
tools make it possible to gain insights into the RBC function. Limitations
to the current study are primarily focused on the lack of a noninvasive
method to monitor the glucose concentrations in the bags throughout
storage. Overcoming this limitation, without having to invade the
bag or sample from the bag, would enable the glucose concentrations
to be controlled within a set range by having on-demand feeding within
minutes of checking the glucose levels.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.5c00032.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.