Die by suicide is a significant public health issue globally, especially among individuals with mental health diagnoses. An efficient and reliable tool for suicidal intervention is urgently needed to identify those who are in danger. A widely recognized tool for assessing the risk of death by suicide around the world is the Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS). This study conducted an assessment of the C-SSRS's psychometric qualities among participants with mental health diagnoses in China.

Of the 614 individuals diagnosed with mental health diagnoses who participated in the study, 161 had previously attempted to take their own life. Reliability was assessed using Cronbach's alpha and McDonald's omega. The construct validity was tested using ULSMV (unweighted least squares with mean- and variance-adjusted standard errors). Discriminant and convergent validity were evaluated using the third item of the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD-17) and the Schizophrenia Quality of Life Scale (SQLS). Participants’ history of suicide attempts was used to calculate predictive validity.

The analysis demonstrated that the C-SSRS exhibited satisfactory internal consistency. The Cronbach alpha was 0.869, and McDonald's omega was 0.871. The C-SSRS's three-factor structure and the two-component structure of the suicidal ideation intensity subscale were both validated by confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). Data analysis revealed that the active-passive model has a relatively better overall scale fit (χ²/df = 3.862, RMSEA = 0.068, SRMR = 0.0605, CFI = 0.917, IFI = 0.918, AGFI = 0.884). A high composite reliability value supports convergent validity. Both discriminant and divergent validity are satisfactory. Predictive validity indicates that the four subscales of the C-SSRS can effectively predict suicide attempts.

This study is the first to examine the scale factor model and the active-passive model of the C-SSRS among individuals with mental health diagnoses in China. The results demonstrated that the C-SSRS has sufficient validity and reliability, making it suitable for assessing suicidal attempts and thoughts in individuals with mental health diagnoses and for distinguishing between active and passive suicidal ideation. These findings require confirmation in other populations through future research.

The issue of suicidal deaths is a pressing global concern that requires immediate attention. Around 800,000 people die each year because of suicidal behavior, according to a report by the World Health Organization [1], and according to 2025 reports, death by suicide is now the third leading cause of death for people aged 15 to 29 [2]. A rising trend in rates of death by suicide was observed in Chinese society in 2014, particularly among the 15–34 age group [3]. The rate of death by suicide in China remains at 5.3% despite a decrease in the total number of suicidal behaviors. Between 2010 and 2021, the suicide death rate for children aged 5 to 14 rose, and between 2017 and 2021, the rate for youth aged 15 to 24 rose as well. Compared to metropolitan areas, the suicide death rate was substantially higher in rural areas [4]. Because the feeling of not being humanized may be more prone to mental health issues, this may involve the difference in a humanized environment [5]. At the same time, repeated suicidal crises have not been paid enough attention, and the widespread use of pesticides in rural areas may lead to this phenomenon [6]. The seriousness of suicidal behavior makes it imperative to identify critical risk indicators, such as suicide ideation. Effective measures of suicidal ideation among people with mental health diagnoses may improve detection and ongoing evaluation of risk. The practice of suicide prevention and intervention identifies the need for standardized assessment measures of suicide ideation and behavior to recognize people at risk in clinical settings.

An intentional act of injuring oneself and terminating one’s life is referred to as suicide attempts [7]. However, many suicide attempts have not been taken seriously because of social stigma and a misidentification of suicidal behavior. Died by suicide, then, is better understood as a person’s choice to end their own life in a particular circumstance after experiencing excruciating suffering and intolerable mental anguish [8]. The risks of suicidal behavior among people who have experienced psychosis are higher than in the general population, according to research [9]. These people take their own life because of delusions experience, ongoing mental disorders, and suicide attempt history [10,11]. Additionally, a large body of evidence suggests that past suicidal thoughts and actions are reliable indicators of future suicide attempts [12–14]. Several reliable and valid self-rating or other suicide-related scales have been established and confirmed to detect suicidal risk. As an example, the Scale for Suicide Ideation (SSI) is a 19-item clinical tool commonly used to assess adolescents’ and adults’ suicide thoughts [15]. Mental health diagnosis person with symptoms of psychosis can be assessed for suicidal thoughts using the InterSePT Scale for Suicidal Thinking (ISST) [16]. To date, despite the utility of those suicide attempt measurement instruments, significant challenges remain in classifying the phenomenon of death by suicide in daily practices.

Active suicidal thoughts and behavior, as well as passive thoughts, are the usual manifestations of suicide ideation, and suicide behaviors are traditionally considered to be a unidimensional construct without clear distinction [17,18]. Distinguishing between suicide behavior and thoughts is especially crucial since different evaluation results require different response strategies. Clinical interviews are the most effective method of evaluating suicidal behavior in the context of the transition from a “risk-focused” to a “safety-focused” culture, and they will not injure those who are contemplating suicidal behavior [8,19]. Posner and his colleagues developed the Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS). The C-SSRS aims to delineate the different facets of suicidal ideation and behavior while also evaluating their impact on the overall risk of ending one’s life [20]. The scale was primarily a semistructured interview conducted by experienced professionals. Suicidal thoughts, interruption of suicidal behavior, discontinuation of suicidal behavior, suicidal behaviors, and non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI) could all be properly distinguished, and it could assist intervention workers in suicide prevention [21]. The scale differentiates between five types of suicidal thoughts and actions, enhancing its ability to assess the risk of taking one’s own life accurately. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has adopted these criteria for evaluating suicidal behavior [22]. Additionally, the C-SSRS is the only scale associated with the Columbia Classification Algorithm for Suicide Assessment, a system for reporting adverse events [23]. In 2012, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) endorsed the use of the C-SSRS for prospective evaluations [24].

Numerous validated versions of the C-SSRS are available. Mundt developed eC-SSRS and tested its reliability and feasibility, indicating that the eC-SSRS could provide valuable guidance for prospective screening and monitoring of suicidal risk in medical trial studies and clinical settings [25]. The results of research on the Spanish version of the C-SSRS (Sp-C-SSRS) demonstrated that numerous psychometric indicators, such as internal consistency, confirmed the efficacy of the Spanish version of the C-SSRS (Sp-C-SSRS) in evaluating suicidal ideation and behavior [26]. C-SSRS has been validated for incremental predictive validity in short-term suicidal risk analysis for high-risk adolescents in Denmark [27]. According to these psychometric results, the C-SSRS can be successfully modified into several variants and used to identify people who may be considering or have already lived suicidal thoughts and behaviors. The C-SSRS, which has been translated into more than 100 country-specific languages and is accessible online, is an ideal suicidal attempts and behaviors assessment tool for estimating who is most at risk in various settings (e.g., communities, healthcare and schools), and these versions are available online. Just like suicide behaviors performed in the real world, the C-SSRS has powerful predictive capabilities, which can be effectively used to save lives in clinical practice [28]. The Chinese version of the C-SSRS was validated by researchers in China, identifying a three-factor model with good reliability, validity, and predictive validity [29].

Researchers have also examined the association between suicidal thoughts and quality of life, which is one of the many other scales that include suicide attempts. As stated by a prior study, people with a low score of suicide ideation had a high living quality [30]. Victims of attempted suicide have a much worse quality of life than the average population [31]. In China, the increased symptoms and decreased quality of life of person with symptoms of psychosis, such as schizophrenia, may lead to lifelong suicide attempts [32]. Therefore, the relationship between scores on the Chinese-C-SSRS and the Schizophrenia Quality of Life Scale (SQLS) was evaluated as a test of divergent validity.

Nevertheless, the Chinese C-SSRS model in Ji’s study [29] did not align with the findings of an Argentine investigation [33] and lacked further research on the suicidal ideation intensity subscale among Chinese individuals with mental health diagnoses [26]. The items on the suicidal ideation severity subscale and the suicidal ideation intensity subscale were not divided into active and passive categories in Ji’s study [29]. The current study aims to analyze the psychometric properties of the Chinese-C-SSRS and evaluate its fitted model in a sample of Chinese people with mental health diagnoses in order to validate the active-passive model of the suicidal ideation severity subscale and intensity subscale. We categorized the items in these two subscales, verified the validity of the active-passive models in these two subscales independently, and then verified the C-SSRS model as a whole, which incorporated the active-passive model. To determine the optimal C-SSRS model, we contrasted it with the overall model that excludes the active-passive classification.

The statistics came from two psychiatric hospitals (Nanchang and Ganzhou) in Jiangxi province, located in Southeast China. This study included 614 subjects, comprising 423 participants from Ganzhou Third People’s Hospital and 191 participants from the Nanchang Mental Health Center. All diagnoses were made according to the ICD-10 criteria by experienced doctors. Persons’ daily observations who receiving mental health care, comprehension of medical histories, and C-SSRS data collection process were used to gather information on the participants living with suicidal thinking and attempting suicide. HAMD-17 was utilized as one of the suicidal behavior assessment instruments concurrently. This study was approved by The Institute of Third People’s Hospital of Ganzhou Ethics Committee (reference No. LHCH-20201101; ethical approval No. 2021062). All patients participated in the study with informed consent.

The study’s subjects were inpatients from two mental health facilities located in Ganzhou and Nanchang. The information is derived from a mental health survey used to assess the mental health of individuals admitted to the hospital and the effectiveness of hospital administration. Two hundred thirty-one people were living with schizophrenia, 157 people experiencing bipolar disorder, 108 people living with depression, 44 people living with sleep deprivation, 21 people living with anxiety, and 53 people experiencing obsessive compulsive disorder in the overall sample. Among the participants with a history of taking their own life 65 people living with schizophrenia, 39 people living with bipolar disorder, 22 people living with depression, 11 people living with sleep deprivation, 14 people living with anxiety and 10 people living with obsessive compulsive disorder.

The criteria for participant recruitment were: (1) age range from 18 to 65 years, Chinese Han nationality; (2) diagnosed by a psychiatrist or a medical professional with schizophrenia, bipolar illness, severe depression, severe anxiety disorder, severe insomnia and obsessive compulsive disorder, according to The International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 10th Revision (ICD-10); (3) do not experience any severe physical diseases or organic brain diseases; (4) no prior history of substance addiction; (5) have the ability to communicate with doctors and capable of comprehending the information.

The Columbia Lighthouse Project provided the scale of risk assessment version [34]. The Chinese version was acquired by comparing it with the Hong Kong screener version and verifying it with well-English-speaking researchers. This version was then distributed to all relevant researchers for review of the scale’s wording. Before the survey, ten people living with experience of psychosis were interviewed using the translated version to test its understandability. Based on these participants’ feedback, any ambiguous wording in our translation version was corrected. For instance, the English term “things” might mean multiple things, and for the scale, it means “causes” in Chinese.

Since the research was incorporated into the hospital’s mental health survey work, which aimed to evaluate the mental health status of hospitalized patients and inform hospital management, we also included a description of the investigation and parental or guardian informed consent. Trained professionals in mental health administrated the entire process.

An 18-item, semistructured C-SSRS is used to assess suicidal ideation and behavior [35]. In this study, we used the risk assessment version [34]. The Chinese-C-SSRS has been evaluated by professional psychological researchers and experienced doctors and was considered to be described accurately. The suicidal ideation subscale and the suicidal behavior subscale were the two dimensions in which it was dispersed. Suicidal ideation subscales consist of ideation severity subscales and ideation intensity subscales, each with five items and a five-point score. Frequency, duration, controllability, blockage, and the cause of suicidal thoughts are all included in the intensity subscale. Individuals can score between 0 and 25 on this subscale. Those who do not endorse any severity subscale items can leave the second subscale blank, indicating a score of 0 on the intensity subscale [36]. The suicidal behavior subscale is divided into two subscales: (1) the behavior subscale is a nominal scale, including six items. This subscale is mainly used to measure five types of suicidal behaviors, which are non-suicidal self-harm behaviors, preparation behaviors, actual attempts, interrupted attempts and aborted attempts. Participants receive 0–5 points on the subscale, which determines whether they answer or not. (2) lethality subscale, including two items, that is used to assess the actual degree of damage of an individual’s suicidal behavior. If lethality exists, 5 points will be scored; if there is no actual lethality, it will be considered potential lethality, and a 3-point score will be assigned [20].

The SQLS was developed to measure the quality of a patient’s life, including 30 items, and implemented through self-evaluation. Each item is scored 0–4 (ranging from 0 = never to 4 = always). The scale comprises three subscales, corresponding to three components of life quality: symptom and side effects, energy and motivation, and psychosocial facets [37].

Previous studies have shown that the SQLS has been adapted to Chinese [38]. The Chinese version demonstrated satisfactory reliability, with adequate retest reliability and internal consistency ranging from 0.70 to 0.92. Additionally, the validity of the revised version has been confirmed among Chinese people living with schizophrenia in previous studies.

The HAMD developed by Beck is a clinician-rated tool for determining depression severity. The current study uses the 17-item version of the HAMD, and its total score ranges from 0 (no depressive symptom) to 4 (extremely severe depression) [39]. The Chinese version has been confirmed [40]. Adequate rater reliability of the Chinese version was demonstrated, with a correlation coefficient ranging from 0.88 to 0.99. The Chinese-HAMD also showed appropriate validity, as reported in prior studies. Among all items, item 3 specifically assesses suicidal ideation and behavior.

Given that all participants in this study were with mental health diagnoses according to ICD-10, so only item 3 of HAMD-17 was used in this study to measure the participants’ suicidal attempts. This approach has been employed in certain research studies to quantify suicide attempts [41–44].

Data analysis software SPSS 26.0, AMOS 22.0, and Mplus 28.0 were used for analysis in this study. The internal consistency reliability of the subscales would be tested by calculating the Cronbach alpha coefficient and McDonald’s omega coefficient. Reliability values above the standard value of 0.70 are deemed acceptable, and reliability values over 0.80 are deemed excellent; average interitem correlation values between 0.15 and 0.50 are regarded as good [45]. In the study,P<0.05 was deemed significant.

To analyze the construct of the Chinese-C-SSRS, we employed confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) using the unweighted least squares with mean- and variance-adjusted standard errors (ULSMV) method in Mplus 8.0. Data indicators, including the Chi-Square value, degree of freedom (DF), comparative fit index (CFI), Tucker–Lewis Index (TLI), incremental fit index (IFI), root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), root mean square residual (RMR) and standardized root mean square residual (SRMR), were recorded to assess the model’s fit. χ2/DF < 5 indicates a good model fit, and an extremely excellent model fit is indicated by χ2/DF < 3. The average variance extracted (AVE) > 0.05, composite reliability (CR) > 0.70, RMSEA < 0.08, CFI > 0.90, IFI > 0.90, TLI > 0.85, RMR < 0.05 and SRMR < 0.08 were the evaluation criteria. An adjusted goodness-of-fit index (AGFI) value greater than 0.85 indicated satisfied model fitting, and a value greater than 0.90 indicated excellent model fitting. The model was deemed acceptable when these requirements were satisfied.

Correlation coefficients between HAMD item 3 and subscale scores were used to assess convergent validity. Scale convergence validity is adequate if the correlation coefficient falls between 0.40 and 0.70 and excellent if it exceeds 0.70. Additionally, we determined the subscale’s CR, AVE value, and the factor load of each item. AVE > 0.05 and CR > 0.70 were satisfied.

For discriminant validity, we first employed the T-test to ascertain whether the scale can differentiate between groups with varying scores. Next, we listed the correlation between the subscales, the AVE value, and the square root of the AVE value. Prior to computation, each participant was split into two groups based on whether suicidal behavior was present: the suicidal attempt (SA) subgroup and the no suicidal attempt (NSA) subgroup. The correlation between the subscales, the AVE value, and the square root of the AVE of the two subgroups were also computed. When the AVE value of the subscales and the correlation coefficient between them were smaller than the corresponding AVE square root value, the discriminant validity was deemed to be good.

Finally, predictive validity was assessed using binary logistic regression analysis and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. Area under curve (AUC) values greater than 0.7 was considered to have good predictive validity. AUC values between 0.5 and 0.7 were considered to have a predictive effect, although the effect was poor.

The participants’ demographic data is shown in Table1. Only those with varied diagnoses of mental illnesses showed disparities in suicidal behavior; there were no differences in suicidal behavior by gender, age, education level, or marital status.

To assess reliability multidimensionally, we included the McDonald’s omega coefficient measurement in place of the single-dimensional alpha coefficient measurement [46].

The Chinese-C-SSRS had a Cronbach alpha of 0.869. The Cronbach’s α coefficients for the suicidal severity subscale, intensity subscale, and suicidal behavior subscale were 0.857, 0.819, and 0.754, respectively, indicating that the Chinese-C-SSRS has good internal consistency.

The McDonald’s omega of the Chinese-C-SSRS was 0.871. The McDonald’s ω coefficients for the suicidal severity subscale, intensity subscale, and suicidal behavior subscale were 0.823, 0.859, and 0.759, respectively, indicating that the Chinese-C-SSRS has good internal consistency.

Furthermore, we determined the overall scale’s average interitem correlation (AIC) value, which is 0.266, as the behavior subscale’s reliability coefficient is less than 0.80 [45]. The optimal AIC range, as recommended by Clark LA et al. [45], was between 0.15 and 0.50.

We conducted a CFA using the ULSMV in Mplus and compared the results of several factor models (Table2). The results demonstrated that the 4-factor model was relatively better. However, there were common influencing factors or multicollinearity between suicidal severity subscale and the lethality subscale.

Therefore, an alternative model analysis approach was used. According to the results of previous research [33], we divided the items of severity subscale as well as intensity subscale into two factors: (1) active suicide ideation and (2) passive suicide ideation. In suicidal severity subscale, item 1, item 2 and item 3 were considered passive ideations, and the other were active ideations. In the intensity subscale, items 6, 7, and 8 were active ideations. When we conducted analysis, a subscale specified two factors, and the other constructed the model as a whole. The results (Table2) indicated that the suicidal ideation severity subscale and intensity subscale were explained well by the passive and active ideation factors. The Chinese-C-SSRS had better indicators when both severity and intensity subscales were specified.

We adjusted the whole model (as shown in Table2, whole model). Based on the modification index from AMOS, the whole model (both severity and intensity subscales were specified) was adjusted by establishing covariances between item 13 and item 14 and between item 11 and item 16. Following the debate, we considered these changes to be meaningful. For instance, both item 13 and item 14 presented whether participants were stopped from taking their own life, which was similar questions. The adjusted model’s fitting index, including the CFI, IFI, and AGFI values, exceeded the threshold. At the same time, the adjusted model’s error was minimal, with the RMSEA and SRMR values falling within the acceptable range at less than 0.08. The fitted indicators of the model were relatively satisfactory (χ2/DF = 3.862, RMSEA = 0.068, SRMR = 0.0605, RMR = 0.037, CFI = 0.917, TLI = 0.897, IFI = 0.918, AGFI = 0.884).

The total score of SQLS was significantly correlated with the ideation severity subscale (r= 0.310,P< 0.001) and the ideation intensity subscale (r= 0.614,P< 0.001) of the C-SSRS. The significant association demonstrated the validity of the suicidal ideation subscale in measuring suicidal ideation. The third item of HAMD-17 was significantly correlated with suicidal behavior subscale (r=0.142,P<0.001) and lethality subscale (r=0.549,P<0.001), indicating that suicidal behavior subscale and lethality subscale measuring suicidal behavior well.

The convergent validity was obtained from the factor loading, CR and AVE values obtained through confirmatory factor analysis (Table3). The AVE value larger than 0.5 (greater than 0.36 is also acceptable), and the CR standard value greater than 0.70 were acceptable. Since only Group the SA group completed the lethality subscale, the total data cannot be used to calculate the latent variables of this subscale. Consequently, the standard factor load, CR value, and AVE were not provided for the lethality subscale.

Participants with and without a history of attempted suicide had different t values for the four subscales: −10.554 (P<.001), −6.832 (P<.001), −13.847 (P<.001), and 4.573 (P<.001), respectively. There was also a significant difference in the total score between the SA group and the NSA group (t = −2.946,P=.003). The results showed that the four C-SSRS subscale scores could discriminate between the two groups of Chinese participants who exhibited distinct behaviors. Moreover, two subgroups were found to have significant differences in the Chinese version of the C-SSRS severity, intensity, behavior, and lethality subscale scores.

Although Ji’s study combined the behavioral and lethality subscales into a single subscale for assessment, we found that this approach compromises the discriminative validity of the other subscales. The discriminant validity of the first three subscales was computed (Table4). We did not determine the discriminant validity for the lethality subscale due to its poor validity and two-item structure.

Binary logistic regression showed suicidal ideation severity subscales (B=0.436, OR=1.547, 95% CI [1.395-1.715],p<.001), ideation intensity (B=0.091, OR=1.095, 95% CI [1.059-1.132],p<.001), suicidal behavior (B=0.928, OR=2.529, 95% CI [2.144-2.984],p<.001), lethality subscale (B=0.176, OR=1.192, 95% CI [1.065-1.334],p=0.002), and C-SSRS total score (B=0.105, OR=1.110, 95% CI [1.082-1.0139],p<.001) were significant associated with suicide attempts. The ROC curve was used to predict suicide attempts (Fig.1).

The total score predicted suicidal thoughts and behavior well, with an AUC of 0.730 (95% CI =0.683-0.778,p<.001). The cut-off value was 17.5, with a sensitivity of 58.4% and a specificity of 0.208. Youden index was 0.376. There was a 70.2% positive predictive value (PPV) and a 77.4% negative predictive value (NPV).

Suicidal ideation severity predicted suicide attempts well. The AUC was 0.729 (95% CI, 0.683-0.774;p<.001), and the cut-off value was 1.5. Youden index was 0.385. The results showed 75.8% sensitivity and 62.7% specificity. There was a 54.8% PPV and a 78.3% NPV.

Suicidal ideation intensity had an AUC of 0.639 (95% CI = 0.590-0.688,p<.001), a cut-off value of 8.5 and a Youden index of 0.222. The sensitivity was 65.2%, and the specificity was 57.0%. PPV was 66.7% and NPV was 74.0%.

Suicidal behavior was also a strong predictor of suicide attempts; the AUC was 0.851 with a cut-off value of 0.5 (95% CI = 0.816-0.887,p<.001). Youden index was 0.634. The sensitivity was 88.8%, and the specificity was 74.6%. PPV was 66.7% and NPV was 80.5%.

Lethality had an AUC of 0.586 (95% CI, 0.537-0.635;p<.001), and a cut-off value of 0.5 was identified. Youden index was 0,190. The sensitivity was 76.4%, and the specificity was 42.6%. NPV was 73.8%.

As far as we know, this study is the initial one to validate the active-passive model of the suicidal ideation intensity subscale in the C-SSRS, which is internationally widely used in several languages. The current study examined its psychometric properties among a sample of people living experience of psychosis in China. In this study, we validated a practical scale to assess suicidal behavior and thoughts of participants with mental health diagnoses. The results indicated that the Chinese-C-SSRS is an excellent instrument with satisfactory psychometric qualities. Several studies have pointed out that as a well-structured attempted suicide risk screening tool, C-SSRS can be effectively employed in clinical settings [24–26]. Our study reiterates the fact that the Chinese-C-SSRS has sufficient predictive validity, convergent and discriminant validity, and internal reliability. This study also confirms the differentiation between active and passive suicidal ideation on the Suicidal Ideation Severity Scale and the Suicidal Ideation Intensity Scale.

As stated by the original author, sufficient reliability for the intensity subscale was found, with internal consistency ranging from 0.73 to 0.93 [20]. From our data analysis, it can be seen that in a sample of Chinese people with mental health diagnoses, the internal consistency coefficients of the subscales and whole scale were greater than 0.75, which indicates that the C-SSRS all used to measure the same trait about suicidal attempts. The consistency between items is satisfactory (> 0.70), which is acceptable within the expected value range. A study conducted among teenagers who lived with depression diagnosis in Turkey reported similar results, which showed that the intensity subscale has an excellent internal consistency coefficient of 0.95 [47]. However, in a study of emergency persons with a high risk of taking their own life, Brown found that C-SSRS had a poor performance with a reliability of 0.42 [48]. One possible explanation for this difference may be the homogeneity issue of the research participants. The participants in our study and the Turkish version were all clinically people having experience of psychosis with a high degree of homogeneity. When the participants were selected, their suicidal attempt risk levels were not explicitly measured. The participants in Brown’s study were recruited in the emergency department, and all had a high risk of ending their own life. This difference in suicidal risk level may lead to score discrepancy. But it is still up to debate whether reliability discrepancy would be caused by suicide attempt risk level.

However, in our study, the reliability of the lethality scale was poor, with a value below the threshold of 0.70, and the PPV value was 0. This result might be because the lethality scale only looks at those who have suicidal thoughts or behaviors. Therefore, it may not be applicable to all survey respondents. According to the overview of earlier study findings, scales associated with the risk of suicide attempts, the Suicide Behaviors Questionnaire-Revised (SBQ-R) and the Suicide Intent Scale (SIS) in particular, have a poor PPV value [49–51], which was consisted with the results of the current study. It could be a result of the effects on suicide prevention or the decrease in suicidal thoughts following professional care or treatment. As a retrospective measurement, the C-SSRS scale’s first three subscales are capable of accurately predicting previous suicidal thoughts and behaviors; regardless, the lethality subscale forecasts actual and potential lethality, which also can be used as a predictor of future suicidal behaviors. The lethality subscale in our study had a poor PPV because individuals did not take their own life during the treatment, and we were unable to collect follow-up data on them. The lethality subscale, however, has a certain validity (AUC > 0.50) in predicting suicidal behavior, lower than other scales, which can aid clinical medical decision-making for those people with suicidal attempts. This subscale also requires attention due to its relatively great sensitivity. According to McHugh’s meta-analysis [52], the percentage of individuals with suicidal attempts has an inverse correlation with specificity and a positive correlation with sensitivity. It suggests that, to a certain extent, even if the scale earns a low score, it can nevertheless assess the risks that participants may face in the future, as well as their current unexpressed suicidal intents, even though they do not exhibit any overt damage from their suicidal attempts at this time. However, when applied in clinical practice, stressors, other lifestyle factors and so on must be integrated to take the participants’ risk of ending their own life into account more thoroughly [51]. Furthermore, clinical workers should not consider the high score of lethality subscale to be a tool for forecasting long-term life potential risks for individuals. Rather, they must implement more proactive suicide prevention strategies and motivate individuals to get assistance as possible, such as contacting local mental health hotlines.

According to the results of the CFA, the construct validity of the severity, intensity, and behavior subscales was acceptable. The internal consistency and CFA results indicated that the five items of both the first and second subscales were designed to assess the severity and intensity of suicidal ideation, and both subscales were well-structured. The result was consistent with similar previous studies [25,33]. The Spanish and Argentinian versions indicated that two components may exist in the intensity subscale. The first three items (frequency, duration, controllability) were one component; items four and five (deterrent and reason for ideation) were the other components presented by cognitive aspects. The two-component model was validated in this study, defined as active and passive ideation according to the Argentine version. Compared to the general factor model [29], this study found that the active-passive model had relatively better fit indicators when both the suicidal ideation severity subscale and the suicidal ideation intensity subscale were specified.

The C-SSRS intensity subscale and other subscales had shown a moderate correlation. The intensity and lethality subscale of C-SSRS showed high correlations with the HAMD item 3, further corroborating its convergent validity. As for the discriminant validity, the data indicated that the four subscales can effectively discriminate between participants who lived experience of psychosis with and without suicidal attempts. The AVE value indicates that the discriminant validity was satisfactory. The results were also consistent with the prior studies [25]. The Chinese version and the SQLS scores show a moderate correlation, as well as previous studies that suicidal ideation has a moderate correlation with the quality of life [30]. This finding suggested that the Chinese-C-SSRS has acceptable concurrent validity. The convergent validity of the behavioral subscale in our study does have some limitations, however. Although its AVE score was low (< 0.50), its CR value was high (> 0.70). It was also inconsistent with previous research [29], which could suggest that the behavioral subscale contains latent characteristics that are unable to account for suicidal behavior. After modifying the model, we found that the factor loading of CS14 was poor and exhibited covariance with other items. A relatively better fit was obtained on several parameters (CLI > 0.90, IFI > 0.90, AGFI > 0.80, RMR < 0.05, SRMR < 0.08) by establishing covariance between CS14 and CS13, thereby modifying the model.

Predictive validity showed that all four subscales effectively predicted the occurrence of suicide attempts. Our findings, nevertheless, differ from those of certain earlier investigations. According to studies by Nal Chalabi and other researchers [53], the C-SSRS has high specificity but poor predictive validity. Higher sensitivity was found on both subscales and overall scales in our study, which was in line with our anticipated objective of lowering misdiagnosis and paying more attention to self-harming behavior that is distinct from suicidal behavior. This discrepancy might be the result of sample differences since not every individual in our sample was on the spectrum of schizophrenia. From a different angle, this further illustrates the wide range of applications of the C-SSRS in the diagnosis of mental illnesses. Furthermore, our study demonstrated that the PPV and NPV of C-SSSRS scale were both poor. It might be a result of the lower suicide attempt rate in our group, which also implied that other populations were needed to confirm the efficacy of the scale.

Overall, active-passive models in suicidal ideation severity subscale and intensity subscale can help suicide prevention professionals identify suicidal thoughts in participants. We need a more thorough knowledge of the reasons behind the die by suicide decisions of those who are actively contemplating taking their own life. It might be necessary for us to take more direct action to prevent suicidal behaviors or ideations and assist them in lowering suicidal ideation. Prevention workers can utilize cognitive-behavioral therapy to help modify misconceptions about people who have suicidal ideation; for those who have suicidal attempts, it may be more useful to help them build their internal coping mechanisms and improve their social support [54]. For individuals with passive suicidal ideation, we may need to adopt more comprehensive intervention measures. Psychological therapy based on family or surrounding environment may be more effective, especially for adolescents with accompanying suicide attempts [55].

Some limitations need to be mentioned. Above all, the selection of participants in this study is based on the principle of convenience. Most of the participants have symptoms of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, and only a few participants have other mental disorders. This phenomenon may suggest that we must be cautious when promoting the scale to other people with symptoms of mental illness diagnoses. Second, due to the particular characteristics of the population, this study lacks follow-up observations of participants, so the incremental predictive validity of the scale cannot be examined. Future studies should include prospective detection of death by suicide risk in large and more various populations with mental health diagnosis. In addition, follow-up research on participants in the future is essential for obtaining more detailed psychometric data. Third, although the validity of the lethality scale in our study did not meet the requirement, we were unable to improve it. This point needs to be strengthened in future studies. Lastly, our research participants comprised people living with bipolar disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, insomnia, etc., and the results may contain some errors because we only chose SQLS as a validation instrument for suicidal thoughts.

The current study is the first to validate the Chinese-C-SSRS active-passive model using a sample of Chinese people with mental health diagnoses. According to our results, the Chinese-C-SSRS is a valuable instrument for assessing and screening persons with mental health diagnoses for suicidal thoughts and behavior. Using the active-passive model rather than the single-factor subscale approach is advised. More research is required to validate the results in other populations.

Thanks to all the participants and volunteers who provided support for this study.

Sanrong Xiao: Methodology, Visualization, Validation, Writing-Original draft, Writing-Reviewing and Editing. Qing Ge: Investigation, Data curation, Conceptualized the models, Writing–original draft. Ting Wang: Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis. Minxuan Zhang: Data curation, Statistical analysis, Writing-editing. Anquan Hu: Conceptualization, Data curation, Resources, Supervision. Xiangyang Zhang: Writing– review & editing, Formal analysis, Resources, Supervision. All authors have seen, wrote, approved the manuscript, and revised the manuscript.

This study was supported by the Key Laboratory of Psychology of TCM and Brain Science, Jiangxi Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jiangxi Provincial Planning of Educational Science General Project of China (22YB151), and the Research and Planning of Humanities and Social Sciences in colleges and universities of Jiangxi Province, China (XL21102).