Multi‐environment trials are routinely conducted in plant breeding to capture the genotype‐by‐environment interaction (G × E) effects. Significant G × E could alter the response pattern of genotypes (the change in rankings of genotypes), subsequently complicating the selection process. Four genomic prediction (GP) models were assessed in three groundnut yield‐related traits: pod yield (PY), seed weight (SW), and 100 seed weight (SW100), across four environments. The models, M1 (environment + line), M2 (environment + line + genomic), M3 (environment + line + genomic + genomic × environment interaction), and M4 (environment + line + genomic + genomic × environment interaction + significant markers), were tested using four cross‐validation (CV) schemes (CV2, CV1, CV0, and CV00), each simulating different practical breeding scenarios. The results revealed that models incorporating marker data (M2, M3, and M4) consistently improved predictive ability in comparison to the phenotypic model (M1). Incorporating G × E (M3 and M4) further improved predictive ability and reduced residual and environmental variances. The inclusion of significant markers and G × E was more advantageous in CV1 and CV00 scenarios, demonstrating that this strategy is especially useful when phenotypic data for the target genotypes is limited or unavailable. Across the CV schemes, predictive ability was higher in CV2, suggesting that including additional information on the performance of genotypes in known environments can increase the accuracy of selecting superior genotypes in breeding programs. Integrating significant markers and modeling G × E in GP models could be an effective approach in groundnut breeding programs to accelerate genetic gains.

Including marker data in genomic prediction (GP) models significantly increased the predictive ability.

Incorporating genotype‐by‐environment interaction (G × E) in GP models improved the predictive ability and reduced residual variances.

Integrating significant markers and modeling G × E in GP models enhanced the predictive ability.

Genotype‐by‐environment interaction (G × E) is an important consideration in plant breeding, particularly for crops like groundnut, where environmental variability can significantly influence the yield. Effectively modeling G × E can enhance the ability to predict how different genotypes perform across diverse environments, which is essential for identifying promising genotypes that are high‐yielding and stable. Using molecular marker data in genomic prediction models improves the accuracy of selecting the best genotypes. Including significant markers as fixed effects in these models can further increase predictive ability by making use of known genetic information. This approach allows for the direct utilization of known genetic information, thereby refining the selection of superior genotypes in breeding programs. Our findings showed that this approach enhanced the predictive ability and can be implemented in groundnut breeding programs to select superior high‐yielding genotypes.

Groundnut (Arachis hypogaea L.) is a vital crop primarily cultivated by smallholder farmers in tropical and subtropical countries for food security and income. It plays a significant role in sub‐Saharan Africa (SSA), where it is a major source of dietary protein (Toomer,2018), healthy fats (Mora‐Escobedo et al.,2015), essential vitamins (Arya et al.,2016), and micronutrients (Kurapati et al.,2021). Despite its significance in SSA, groundnut yields remain remarkably low, averaging ∼1017 kg/ha compared to 4505 kg/ha recorded in the United States (FAO,2022; USDA‐NASS,2021). Groundnut yield losses in SSA have been further worsened by climate change effects (Yeleliere et al.,2023) that include prolonged dry periods, heavy rainfall, hail damage, increased temperatures, and the emergence of pests and diseases (Batley & Edwards,2016). Developing climate‐resilient groundnut varieties is therefore an important breeding objective for improving yields in SSA (Asibuo et al.,2018; Tabe‐O et al.,2023).

Evaluating advanced breeding lines in multi‐environment trials (METs) is a crucial step in the varietal development process (Janila et al.,2013). The METs enable the assessment of genotype stability through studying genotype‐by‐environment interaction (G × E) (Burgueño et al.,2012). Significant G × E occurs when genotypes respond differently to changes in the environment, potentially complicating the selection of high‐yielding groundnut genotypes (Asibuo et al.,2018). Similarly, significant G × E can alter the relative performance rankings of genotypes across environments.

Genomic selection (GS) involves the application of genomic prediction (GP) models to estimate breeding values of genotypes based on genome‐wide markers (Bernardo,1994; Meuwissen et al.,2001). The accurate capture of G × E enables the identification of superior and stable genotypes across different environments (Crossa et al.,2006; Crossa et al.,2014). Single‐environment GP models ignore G × E, and are therefore unreliable (Crossa et al.,2017) as they fail to capture the heterogeneity of genetic variance across environments, or the imperfect genetic correlation among environments (Lopez‐Cruz et al.,2015). Modeling covariance matrices by incorporating G × E allows for the utilization of information from correlated environments, thereby enhancing the accuracy of predicting genotypes (Burgueño et al.,2012).

The accuracy of GP models is evaluated using random cross‐validation (CV) methods that partition the dataset into training and testing sets (Pérez‐Cabal et al.,2012). The CV2 method, in which known genotypes are evaluated in known environments with unknown combinations of genotype and environments, is particularly well‐suited for scenarios involving incomplete field trials (sparse testing) (Burgueño et al.,2012). The primary objective of CV2 is to predict the performance of genotypes in environments where they have not yet been tested. An alternative method, CV1, predicts the performance of untested genotypes in known environments (Burgueño et al.,2012). In the CV1 scenario, the accuracy of prediction is influenced by the genetic relatedness between the training and testing sets. A third alternative is CV0, which is used to predict the performance of tested genotypes in new environments where they have not been evaluated (Jarquín et al.,2017). Another method, CV00, predicts untested genotypes in unknown environments, and is therefore, the most challenging strategy (Jarquín et al.,2017).

The first statistical framework for analyzing G × E was the Finlay–Wilkinson model, also known as the joint regression analysis that was first introduced by Yates and Cochran (1938) and later published by Finlay and Wilkinson (1963). In this method, the performance of each genotype in individual environments is regressed against an environmental index, which represents the overall effect of each environment within the trial. This index is typically defined as the mean performance of all genotypes in a given environment. Burgueño et al. (2012) were the first to use the genomic best linear unbiased prediction (GBLUP) model in a multi‐environment context where G × E was modeled with different variance and covariances among environments (factor analytic). However, the model does not incorporate environmental covariables (EC), which limits its ability to predict performance in new environments. Jarquín et al. (2014) introduced the Bayesian reaction‐norm model incorporating G × E as functions of markers and ECs. In the Bayesian reaction‐norm model, the main effects of markers and EC, as well as their interactions (marker × EC), are introduced using covariance structures that are functions of markers and EC. This model extends the standard GBLUP by fitting all markers, ECs, and marker × EC interaction effects as random effects, modeled jointly through a multiplicative covariance structure. Specifically, the interaction term follows a multivariate normal distribution with covariance defined as the Hadamard (element‐wise) product of the genomic and environmental relationship matrices. Including EC in this model allows predicting genotypes in new environments.

Lopez‐Cruz et al. (2015) proposed a marker × environment interaction (M × E) model, in which marker effects and genomic values are partitioned into components that are stable across environments (main effects) and others that are environment‐specific (interactions). The M × E model estimates the phenotypic correlation between any two environments as the ratio of variance component estimates. The covariance (and thus the correlation) between environments is derived from the variance components associated with the genetic effects across environments. Since variance components are constrained to be nonnegative, this formulation inherently restricts the covariance (and thus correlation) between environments to be positive. Cuevas et al. (2016) extended the M × E model by using a nonlinear (Gaussian) kernel to model G × E. Similarly, Crossa, los Campos, et al. (2016) extended the M × E model using priors that produce shrinkage and variable selection, that is, Bayesian ridge regression and BayesB.

Including marker data in genomic prediction (GP) models significantly increased the predictive ability.

Incorporating genotype‐by‐environment interaction (G × E) in GP models improved the predictive ability and reduced residual variances.

Integrating significant markers and modeling G × E in GP models enhanced the predictive ability.

In this study, we implemented the reaction‐norm model (Jarquín et al.,2014) by incorporating the interaction between markers and EC. Previous studies have demonstrated that GP models that include significant markers associated with traits of interest as fixed effects, in combination with genome‐wide markers, achieve higher accuracy than standard GP models such as multiple linear regression, G‐BLUP, Bayesian Lasso, and Bayes Cπ (Rutkoski et al.,2014). Spindel et al. (2016) presented a method where genome‐wide association study (GWAS) was conducted on a training set, and markers passing a threshold were modeled as fixed effects in the RR‐BLUP model. This approach, which they termed GS + de novo GWAS, improved the prediction accuracy by 10% compared to six other GP and marker‐assisted selection (MAS) approaches in rice (Oryza sativaL.) andCapsicum annuum. Kim et al. (2022) also reported an improved prediction accuracy of 5.3% for capsaicinoid contents inCapsicum annuum. These instances provide evidence that including significant markers as fixed effects in GP models has the potential to improve the prediction accuracy. The current study incorporated significant markers from previous GWAS analyses (Okaron et al.,2024) with the following objectives: (1) study the effects of modeling G × E in GP models for groundnut yield and (2) determine whether incorporating significant markers from GWAS as fixed effects in GP models could enhance predictive ability.

A total of 192 advanced breeding lines sourced from the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi‐Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) ‐ Malawi were used in this study (TableS1). ICRISAT utilises extensive germplasm collections to generate high‐yielding and climate‐resilient varieties in Asia and SSA. The field trial evaluations were conducted in four locations: Serere (1.4994° N, 33.5490° E) and Nakabango (0°19′36″ N, 33°53′36″ E) in Uganda, and Chitala (13°40′59″ S, 34°16′0″ E) and Chitedze (13.9815° S, 33.6372° E) in Malawi. The trials were planted in a 14 × 25 Alpha Lattice design with two replicates. Each plot was 1 × 0.9 m, comprising 3 m‐long rows with 45 cm inter‐row spacing, 60 cm between plots, and 2 m between replicated blocks. Phenotyping was conducted at Chitedze and Chitala (Malawi) during the 2020/21 cropping season (December–April), and at Serere and Nakabango (Uganda) during the long rainy season of 2021. These sites represent major groundnut‐producing agroecological zones in Eastern and Southern Africa.

All genotypes were harvested at the end of the growing season and evaluated for PY and other yield‐associated traits, including SW and SW100 in the four environments. Details of the plant material, experimental design, phenotyping and genotyping procedure are described in our recent study by Okaron et al. (2024). In brief, pods from each plot were harvested and sun‐dried to a moisture content below 13%, then weighed using a weighing scale, and recorded in grams as PY. For SW, seeds from each plot were shelled and weighed in grams. Additionally, 100 kernels were randomly selected from each plot, weighed, and the data recorded in grams as SW100.

SNP filtering involved removing all markers with >20% missing values and a minor allele frequency below 5%. SNPs with a call rate lower than 80% and heterozygosity larger than 95% were also excluded. The final retained genotypes contained 38,853 SNPs. Filtered SNPs were converted to numeric allele classes (0, 1, and 2) for homozygous minor, heterozygous and homozygous major alleles, respectively using Plink 1.9 (Purcell et al.,2007).

The phenotypic analyses were performed in two stages. The first stage involved calculating the best linear unbiased estimates (BLUEs) for each genotype within each environment using Equation (1). The BLUEs for each trait in each environment were extracted using ASReml‐R Version 4.2 (Butler et al.,2023).

Here,yiklrepresents theith genotype observed in the thelth incomplete block nested withinkth replicate. μis the overall mean (intercept),Liis the fixed effect of theith genotype,Rkis the random effect of thekth replicate, assumingRk∼iidN(0,σR2),σR2is the variance of the replicate.N(.,.) denotes a normal density, iid stands for independent and identically distributed observations,Bklis the random effect of thelth block nested within thekth replicate such thatBkl∼iidN(0,σB2),σB2is the variance of the block effect nested within replication,eiklis the random error term witheikl∼iidN(0,σe2),σe2as the error variance.

whereσL2is genotypic variance,σe2is error variance, andris the number of replicates within each environment.

whereσL2is genotypic variance,σLE2is the G × E variance,σe2is error variance, andris the number of replicates within each environment and n is the number of environments.

The second stage of the analysis involved using the BLUEs obtained in the first stage (Equation1) to fit four different prediction models described below in Equations ((6),(7),(8),(9)).

whereLiis the random effect of theith line assumingLi∼iidN(0,σL2), whereσL2is the variance component of the genotype effect,Ejis the random effect of thejth environment such thatEj∼iidN(0,σE2)whereσE2is the variance component of the environment effect, andeijis the random error term, such thateij∼iidN(0,σe2), whereσe2is the error variance.

whereximis the genomic information (marker matrix) of theith genotype at themth marker, andbmis the corresponding marker effect. Marker effects are considered as iid draws from normal distributions of the formbm∼iidN(0,σb2), withσb2as the corresponding variance component, which is homogenous to all markers. The vector of genomic effectsg={gi}follows a multivariate normal density with zero mean and variance‐covariance matrixcov(g)=Gσg2such thatg∼N(0,Gσg2).

where the genotype effects of the vector of genomic random effectsgare correlated such that Model 2 allows the borrowing of information across genotypes. A disadvantage of this model is that the genomic estimated breeding values for a genotype tested in different environments are the same regardless of the environment. To allow a specific genomic effect in each environment, G × E was included as shown in the Model M3.

whereZgandZEare the incidence matrices that connect genotypes and environments with phenotypes, respectively.σgE2is the variance component associated withgEand “°” represents the Hadamard product (element‐by‐element product) of the two covariance structures representing the genetic information and the the environmental effects.

GWAS was previously conducted by Okaron et al. (2024) using the same set of SNPs that were employed in the GP models. The significant SNPs (p< 0.005) that were associated with PY, SW, and SW100 from the BLINK model were selected to improve GP. Wang and Zhang (2021) demonstrated that the BLINK model offers higher statistical power compared to other GWAS models. Based on this criterion, the number of selected markers as fixed effects for each trait was 111 (PY), 187 (SW), and 96 (SW100).

whereSiis the fixed genomic effect associated with theith genotype.

wherexiuis the genotype at theuth (u= 1, 2,..,t) selected marker of theith individual,tis the number of associated markers selected for inclusion as fixed‐effect covariates andbuis the fixed additive effect of theuth significant marker.

To assess the performance of the four GP models, four prediction strategies commonly used by breeders were considered. These prediction scenarios mimic different realistic problems that breeders face at different stages of the breeding pipeline. In all the CVs, predictive ability was calculated as the correlation between observed and predicted values within the same environment. A random five‐fold partitioning of the entire population was used for CV1 and CV2, and predictive ability was calculated as the average correlation between predicted and observed values of genotypes within the same environment. In CV0 and CV00, the “leave one environment out” approach was used to predict future (unknown) environments.

In CV2, a fivefold CV was implemented, where 20% of the phenotypic values were randomly assigned to each fold, one fold was used as a testing set, and the remaining four folds (80%) were used as the training set for model calibration. This process was repeated 10 times for all the five folds, and the correlations between the predicted and observed values within the same environment computed for all environments.

Under CV1, a five‐fold CV approach was also used, where the dataset was randomly divided into five equal subsets, each containing 20% of the genotypes. One fold was used as the validation set, while the remaining four folds (comprising 80% of the genotypes) were used as the training set. Predictions were generated separately for each fold. Predictive ability was assessed as the correlation between predicted and observed values within the same environment. This process was repeated across 10 random fivefold partitions.

CV0 was done by masking the phenotypic information of all genotypes at each environment (one at a time), then using the remaining environments as the training set. In CV00 scheme, both the phenotypic information of the testing environment and the phenotypic information of the genotype to be predicted were deleted from all environments (one at a time).

All the prediction models were analyzed using the BGLR package (Pérez & de los Campos,2014).

Mean phenotypic values and broad‐sense heritability (H2) for PY, SW, and SW100 across the four environments that had been reported in Okaron et al. (2024) are also summarized in Table1. The mean phenotypic values for PY, SW, and SW100 ranged from 46.97 to 328.85 g, 22.73 to 218.19 g, and 28.08 to 43.01 g, respectively (Figure1).

Mean phenotypic values and heritability of pod yield (PY), seed weight (SW), and 100 seed weight (SW100) in the four environments.

Trait phenotypic variance component estimation and proportion of the total variance explained for the three traits (pod yield [PY], seed weight [SW], and 100 seed weight [SW100]). G × E, genotype‐by‐environment.

The estimatedH2across environments indicated influences of genetic and environmental impacts and their interactions across environments. SW showed the highest proportion of variance explained by G × E at 16%, while SW100 had the highest proportion of variance explained by the residual at 52% (Figure1). The corresponding narrow sense h2estimates were 0.38, 0.31, and 0.58 for PY, SW, and SW100, respectively.

The relative percentage of variability explained by the different model terms is shown in Figure2. Adding G × E effects and significant markers as fixed effects reduced the variability captured by the environment and residual terms (Figure2). As expected, the main effects of the environment consistently explained most of the total variance for all traits. The most complex model, M4, had the lowest variance explained by the environment effect, while M1 had the highest in all the traits. This suggests that M4 may more effectively capture G × E than the other models. Relative to model M1, the inclusion of G × E reduced residual variance by 2.9% for PY, 4.0% for SW, and 4.9% for SW100. A comparable reduction was observed in environmental variance, with decreases of 4.8%, 5.4%, and 4.3% for the respective traits (Figure2).

Percentage of explained variance components accounted for pod yield (PY), seed weight (SW), and 100 seed weight (SW100) for the four models (M1, M2, M3, and M4). G × E, genotype‐by‐environment.

The mean predictive abilities of all models across the evaluated traits are presented in Figures3,4,5,6. In general, the predictive ability was higher in CV2 compared to CV1, CV0, and CV00, implying that including more information on observed genotypes and known environments in the training set can enhance model performance. Incorporating the G × E interaction in model M3 increased predictive ability compared to the main effect models, that is, M1 and M2, for all traits under CV1 and CV2 schemes (Figures3&4). The inclusion of significant markers as fixed effects, along with G × E, improved the predictive ability in both CV1 and CV00 scenarios (Figures3&5). This finding suggests that accounting for known associated loci can improve the predictive ability by capturing a greater proportion of the underlying genetic variance.

Predictive abilities under CV1 (where CV is cross‐validation) scheme of the four models for pod yield (PY), seed weight (SW), and 100 seed weight (SW100) at Chitala, Chitedze, Nakabango, and Serere.

Predictive abilities under CV2 (where CV is cross‐validation) scheme for pod yield (PY), seed weight (SW), and 100 seed weight (SW100) at Chitala, Chitedze, Nakabango, and Serere.

Predictive abilities under CV00 (where CV is cross‐validation) scheme for pod yield (PY), seed weight (SW), and 100 seed weight (SW100) at Chitala, Chitedze, Nakabango, and Serere.

Predictive abilities under CV0 (where CV is cross‐validation) scheme for pod yield (PY), seed weight (SW), and 100 seed weight (SW100) at Chitala, Chitedze, Nakabango, and Serere.

All models incorporating marker information exhibited higher predictive ability compared to the phenotype model (M1). Overall, models that incorporated G × E exhibited higher predictive ability than the main‐effect models M1 and M2 (Figure3; TableS2). Additionally, incorporating significant markers as fixed effects in the GP model that accounted for G × E further enhanced predictive ability across all traits and environments (Figure3). Model M4 consistently demonstrated the highest predictive ability, whereas M1 showed the lowest across all traits. The range in predictive ability was −0.15 to 0.73, −0.15 to 0.67, and −0.11 to 0.77 for PY, SW, and SW100, respectively (Figure3; TableS2).

All traits exhibited moderate to high predictive abilities. Models that incorporated marker information consistently outperformed the phenotypic Model (M1), for all traits except SW100. Overall, the interaction models M3 and M4 did not offer a significant improvement in predictive ability compared to the main‐effect models M1 and M2 (Figure4). The predictive ability ranged from 0.40 to 0.78, 0.35 to 0.71, and 0.69 to 0.90 for PY, SW, and SW100, respectively (Figure4; TableS2).

Models that utilized significant markers as fixed effects consistently outperformed the phenotype model (M1), highlighting the value of including known genomic information (Figure5). As observed in CV1, models that accounted for G × E and included significant markers as fixed effects outperformed the main‐effect models M1 and M2 across all traits, except SW100. The predictive ability ranged from −0.04 to 0.37, −0.05 to 0.35, and −0.05 to 0.45 for PY, SW, and SW100, respectively (Figure5; TableS2).

Among the models evaluated, the main‐effect model M2 consistently demonstrated superior predictive performance compared to M1, M3, and M4 (Figure6; TableS2). Similar to CV2, the interaction models M3 and M4 did not provide additional predictive benefit compared to the main‐effect models M1 and M2 (Figure6; TableS2). Predictive ability ranged from 0.22 to 0.43 for PY, 0.13 to 0.37 for SW, and 0.10 to 0.84 for SW100 (Figure6).

The current study exploited existing phenotypic and genotypic datasets for advanced breeding lines evaluated across four different locations to enhance GP for yield‐related traits in groundnut. The results demonstrated the power of modeling G × E to improve GP in groundnut breeding programs. GP models based on METs are inherently complex due to the heterogeneity of genetic variance and imperfect genetic correlations across environments, non‐genetic noise, and high‐dimensional marker data (Jarquín et al.,2014). Modeling and exploitation of G × E remains one of the major challenges in the analysis of METs in plant breeding and variety testing (Crossa, los Campos, et al.,2016). The use of EC to model the environment component explicitly has been previously shown to increase prediction accuracies in multiple environments (Jarquín et al.,2014), and this also applies to our work. The reaction norm model used in the current study allowed modeling the main and interaction effects of markers and EC using covariance structures (Jarquín et al.,2014). The M3 model was in all cases superior to or not different from the main effect models (M1 and M2). These results are consistent with other studies that incorporated G × E, resulting in higher predictive accuracy compared to univariate models (Burgueño et al.,2012; Crossa, Burgueño, et al.,2006; Cuevas et al.,2016). The improved predictive ability could be due to the decreased amount of variance captured by both the environment and residual terms in all the traits as compared to the traditional GP model (M2) and the phenotypic‐based model M1. In other studies, incorporating G × E was reported to reduce the proportion of variability attributed to the environment and residual terms in soybean (Canella Vieira et al.,2022). Mageto et al. (2020) observed that including G × E led to approximately 30% reduction in the residual variance component in maize. Lubanga et al. (2025) demonstrated that models incorporating G × E effects exhibited the lowest mean square error across various sparse testing designs when compared to models that included only main effects in cassava.

The benefit of using molecular marker information was reflected in the current study, where models M2, M3, and M4 revealed a higher predictive ability than M1 (without marker information). Lubanga et al. (2023) reported higher prediction accuracies for models incorporating markers compared to pedigree and phenotypic‐based models. In GBLUP, molecular markers are used to estimate relatedness between individuals and represent realized genomic relationships rather than the expected relationships (Bernardo,1994; Bernardo & Yu,2007). This makes it possible to capture distant relationships and variation in sibling relationships due to Mendelian sampling, leading to more accurate estimates of additive genetic variance and breeding values (Goddard et al.,2011).

CV schemes are useful for assessing the predictive ability of GP models in a multi‐environment context (Burgueño et al.,2012; Jarquín et al.,2017). The four CV schemes used in this study simulated different realistic problems that breeders face, that is, CV2, CV1, CV0, and CV00 (Jarquín et al.,2017; Persa et al.,2021). Across all models, predictive ability was consistently higher under CV2 compared to CV1, CV0, and CV00, due to the additional benefit of incorporating observed genotypes in known environments, even though the combinations of genotype and environments are unknown. However, CV2 adds time to the generation interval due to the additional field testing requirement for all the selection candidates (Burgueño et al.,2012). Although CV1 enables the selection of lines without field testing, it allows for a reduction in the generation interval, and this generally leads to lower predictive ability compared to CV2. Breeding programs therefore need to prioritize accordingly to avoid compromising the annual rate of genetic progress (Burgueño et al.,2012; Jarquín et al.,2017).

Predicting new environments is a more difficult task (Jarquín et al.,2017). This study used CV0 and CV00 schemes for predicting in untested environments. These scenarios are common for most breeding programs that have trials in multiple locations with the need to predict the performance of superior genotypes in future environments. Predictive performance was consistently low under the CV00 scheme, which represents the most challenging CV scenario.

Among the traits, modeling G × E in SW100 did not improve the results of modeling the main genotype and EC matrices alone. It is possible that the EC used explained only a limited proportion of the across environment interaction for this trait, and for this reason the model incorporating G × E, when fitting covariance matrices for the environment and marker by environment interaction, did not improve predictive ability in comparison to the main effect models.

The findings of the current study align with earlier reports indicating that high heritability of the target trait results in improved predictive ability (Lubanga et al.,2021; Zhang et al.,2017). These findings imply that enhancing heritability of the target trait is a significant component in training populations to improve prediction accuracies in the GS pipeline design. Groundnut breeders will need to consider expanding the number of locations and replications, and testing in multiple years to increase heritability. The current strengthening of breeding networks such as the Groundnut Improvement Network for Africa (http://gnut4africa.org) and the Africa Dryland Crops Improvement Network in Africa can be further leveraged to increase testing locations and make GS practical.

The current results further validate earlier studies that reported improved predictive ability using significant markers from trait association studies as fixed effects in prediction models (Spindel et al.,2016). The implemented model (M4) accounted for G × E by modeling interactions between markers and ECs using covariance functions, and incorporating trait‐associated markers from a previous study as fixed effects. The results revealed that including significant markers as fixed effects, along with modeling G × E, improved predictive ability across all traits in CV1 and CV00. However, no clear benefit was observed in CV2 and CV0, perhaps due to the availability of abundant training data leading to the high predictive ability. These results suggest that the advantage of incorporating significant markers and modeling G × E would be more pronounced when predicting unknown genotypes in new environments. The higher influence of the significant markers incorporated as fixed effects in the model could be due to a lower proportion of the total variance associated with the trait explained by the random portion of the model. We, therefore, strongly recommend the addition of trait‐associated markers where available to improve GP in groundnut breeding programs. These findings are consistent with those of Li et al. (2019) in maize and Kim et al. (2022) inCapsicum annuum, both of which reported improved predictive ability when significant markers were included as fixed effects. Similarly, Rice and Lipka (2019) simulated 216 traits with varying genetic architectures and identified 60 cases in which the inclusion of fixed‐effect markers led to improved prediction accuracy. They recommended that the performance of models incorporating significant markers as fixed effects be evaluated on a trait‐by‐trait basis prior to implementation in breeding programs.

The findings of the present study will require future validation based on some of the limitations. First, the phenotypic data for the three traits were collected over a single season across the four experimental sites located in Uganda and Malawi. Consequently, genotype‐by‐year (G × Y) interaction effects were not assessed, which may have limited the robustness of the dataset. Consideration of G × E in the context of G × Y remains an important challenge for breeders, especially those from small breeding programs (Monteverde et al.,2019). Second, the current study used the reaction norm model proposed by Jarquín et al. (2014) to analyze data and predict genomic performance of PY, SW, and SW100. The assumption of the model is that the relationships between molecular markers and EC are linear, which is a major limitation since interactions between genes and environmental conditions may take many different forms. The reaction norm model uses the Gaussian prior that does not induce variable selection, and the shrinkage induced by Gaussian prior density may not be particularly appropriate when markers or ECs have large effects. For instance, a study by Monteverde et al. (2019) on G × Y in grain yield and quality of rice that integrated molecular markers and EC demonstrated that partial least squares model (Wold et al.,2001) gave better prediction accuracies than reaction norm model (Jarquín et al.,2014).

Finally, this study did not evaluate varying levels of significance thresholds for molecular marker selection. Future work should focus on fitting models with greater biological realism that can accommodate non‐linear and more complex genotype responses across a wide range of environments. Promising directions include (i) the reaction norm model with penalized factorial regression (Avagyan et al.,2025), (ii) integrating crop growth models (CGM) with whole genome prediction (WGP) (CGM–WGP) (Technow et al.,2015), (iii) using models that apply priors that produce variable selection (which cannot be directly implemented under the reaction norm model) (Crossa, los Campos, et al.,2016), and (iv) integrating random regressions on known and latent EC (Tolhurst et al.,2022). Future research should also investigate the effects of different marker threshold levels to determine the optimal balance between model complexity and predictive ability, and to provide guidance on the most effective threshold for marker inclusion.

This study demonstrates the importance of incorporating G × E and significant markers in GP. G × E remains one of the most critical challenges in accurately estimating breeding values for agronomic traits, as it can obscure the true genetic potential of genotypes across diverse environmental conditions. The higher predictive ability observed in CV2 compared to the other scenarios suggests that incorporating more information from known genotypes and environments could enhance the prediction accuracy. The inclusion of significant markers as fixed effects and G × E was more advantageous in CV1 and CV00, demonstrating that this strategy is especially useful when phenotypic data for the target genotypes is limited or unavailable. Collectively, these results are promising, especially when predicting newly developed genotypes in unknown environments.