Both anemia and polycythemia have previously been shown to influence outcomes in patients with COPD admitted to hospital with acute exacerbations (AECOPD). The aims of this study are to elucidate the prevalence of anemia and polycythemia and their prognostic value on readmission and mortality in patients admitted with AECOPD.

This retrospective cohort study included patients admitted with AECOPD to hospitals in the North Denmark Region in 2018. Age, gender, body mass index, lung function, smoking history, number of comorbidities, hemoglobin levels, information regarding readmission and mortality were included. Patients were stratified according to hemoglobin levels: Anemia (<12 g/dL in women, <13 g/dL in men), normal hemoglobin (12–15 g/dL in women, 13–17 g/dL in men), and polycythemia (>15 g/dL in women, >17 g/dL in men). Differences in group characteristics, one-year readmission, and mortality risk were investigated.

In total 1525 subjects with COPD were included at first AECOPD admission in 2018, and divided in anemic, normemic, and polycythemia groups. Prevalence of polycythemia and anemia was 6.8% and 35.2%, respectively. One-year readmission and -mortality risk increased in anemic patients but did not increase in patients with polycythemia.

Anemia was predictive of increased risk of one-year readmission and -mortality on patients admitted with AECOPD.

COPD is a common disease and a major cause of mortality and morbidity worldwide [1]. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates the disease will be the third leading cause of death by 2030 [2]. This is primarily due to disease flare-ups, such as acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD) [3]. Severe AECOPD is defined as AECOPD requiring hospitalisation and comes with a risk of readmissions [4].

COPD is characterized by decreased airflow due to chronic airway inflammation [5]. However, over the past decades, the understanding of COPD has evolved rapidly, and it is now considered as a systemic disease, driven by persistent and severe inflammation [6]. The inflammation may be caused by COPD itself or comorbid conditions, which occur in more than 80% of patients with COPD [7].

Studies have described the association between systemic inflammation in chronic diseases and anemia, which is why anemia also is seen in patients with COPD [8]. Anemia is defined by WHO as hemoglobin levels < 12.0 g/dL in women and <13.0 g/dL in men [4]. Patients with COPD and anemia could experience a worsening of dyspnoea depending on the severity of the diseases, resulting in decreased physical performance [7,9]. The prevalence of anemia in patients with COPD is in literature estimated to be between 4.9% and 38% [8].

On the contrary, polycythemia, which is defined as hemoglobin levels > 15.0 g/dL in women, and > 17.0 g/dL in men, is associated with lower mortality and less admissions to the hospital in patients with COPD [8,10].

A previous study found the prevalence of polycythemia in patients with COPD was 18.1% [11]. Recently, prevalence has decreased, presumably due to better options for home oxygen therapy [12]. A more recent study found the prevalence of polycythemia in patients with COPD was 11.7% [10].

As both anemia and polycythemia are relevant conditions in patients with COPD, and hemoglobin levels are simple and cost-effective to measure, they could serve as potential predictors of readmission and mortality in these patients [7].

The hypothesis of the present study states that anemia and polycythemia influence the risk of readmission and the risk of death among patients with COPD admitted with acute exacerbation. The primary aim is to investigate the prevalence of anemia and polycythemia in patients with AECOPD and the characteristics of the patients in these groups. The secondary aims are to elucidate whether anemia and polycythemia may be used as single predictors for both one-year readmission and one-year mortality among patients admitted with AECOPD, when adjusted for age, gender, and number of comorbidities.

This retrospective real-life cohort study included patients admitted with AECOPD to a hospital in the North Denmark Region in 2018. Data-registrations were conducted in accordance with the protocol ‘EXAcerbations of COPD; Identification of riSkfactors for rEadmission’ (EXACISE) (Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark) [13]. Data were collected from the electronic patient record system, CSC Clinical Suite™ (Scandihealth A/S, Valby, Denmark), and were entered in the EXACISE database in REDcap® (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA).

Subjects were included if admitted with AECOPD (DJ44.0–9) as primary diagnosis, respiratory failure (DJ96) or pneumonia (DJ13–18) as primary diagnosis and COPD as secondary diagnosis [14]. Subjects were excluded if they did not have a diagnosis of COPD or were diagnosed during their first hospitalization.

Date of first admission, discharge, readmission(s) and mortality were included according to the EXACISE protocol. Hospitalisation was defined as overnight stay in 2018. Date of readmissions was included regardless of diagnosis the following 12 months of the first hospitalisation. The follow-up period regarding mortality was 365 days post date of discharge. The study included the number of comorbidities collected according to the COTE-Index in the EXACISE database for each subject [13].

Health factors included in the present study were accumulated pack-years and body mass index (BMI). The lung function described by FEV1 and FEV1/FVC-ratio was included if assessed three months prior to or after the first hospitalisation.

Hemoglobin level, erythrocyte volume fraction (EVF), and mean corpuscular volume (MCV) were included if the analysis was performed within 24 hours of the first hospitalisation. Hemoglobin was measured in unit mmol/L and converted to unit g/dL [15]. Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) was calculated by dividing hemoglobin levels with EVF. The subjects were categorized into three groups based on hemoglobin levels in anemia (female; < 12.0 g/dL, male; <13.0 g/dL), normemic (female; 12.0–15.0 g/dL, male; 13.0–17.0 g/dL) and polycythemia (female; >15.0 g/dl, male; >17.0 g/dL). The subjects were further divided by gender for the analysis of demographics and clinical characteristics.

The statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics for Macintosh version 28.0.1.1 (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA). Data are presented as mean and standard deviation. P-values (p) < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Clinical characteristics, including gender and hemoglobin subgroups, were compared by chi-square and Mann Whitney U test.

To compare hospitalisation, readmission, and mortality in hemoglobin subgroups, a Shapiro Wilks test was performed. For non-normally distributed data, a log10 transformation was conducted. To analyse the difference of means one-way analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA) was performed on the log10 transformed data. Post hoc Bonferroni correction was performed for significant findings. In order to interpret the results of the post hoc test, log10 transformed data were reversed.

Hazard ratio (HR) for one-year readmission and one-year mortality was assessed using COX proportional Hazards Regression (COX regression). Age, gender, and number of comorbidities were included in the analysis as covariates. Schoenfeld residuals proportional hazards were plotted to check for the assumption of proportionality. Kaplan-Meier were used to present one-year readmission and one-year mortality.

This study was approved November 2019 by the Danish Patient Safety Authority (31–1521–34). The local research ID: F2022–124.

In total, 1530 subjects were admitted with AECOPD. Five subjects were excluded due to missing hemoglobin data levels, resulting in a final cohort of 1525 subjects.

Table 1shows the demographics and clinical characteristics of the subjects included in the study. In total, 35.2% of the subjects were anemic, 58.0% were normemic and 6.8% were polycythemic. Among the subjects with anemia 9.9% were microcytic, 66.5% normocytic, and 18.2% macrocytic, while 45.4% were hypochromic, 51.5% normochromic, and 0.2% hyperchromic. Subjects with anemia were significantly older (p< 0.001), had significantly lower MCHC (p< 0.001) and had a significantly higher number of comorbidities (p< 0.001) than normemic subjects. The males with anemia had significantly higher FEV1/FVC-ratio than the normemic groups (p= 0.004). Younger age was the only significant difference between polycythemia and normemic groups (p= 0.002). Effect sizes for normally distributed data are demonstrated inAppendix 1.

Demographics and clinical characteristics of subjects admitted with AECOPD divided in hemoglobin levels and gender. Data is displayed as mean ± standard deviation, except for gender which is displayed as percent. The normemic groups are compared to the anemia and polycythemia groups, respectively, regarding demographics and clinical characteristics. The number of females and males are compared within the same group.

n: Number, BMI: Body mass index, EVF: Erytrocyte volume fraction, MCV: Mean corpuscular volume.

MCHC: Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, FEV1: Forced expiratory volume in one second, FVC: Forced vital capacity.

*p< 0.05, **p< 0.001 - Normal haemoglobin groups compared to anaemia and polycythaemia groups, respectively.

▲p< 0.001 - Comparison of genders within the same hemoglobin group.

Due to a greater extent of missing data, BMI, FEV1, FEV1/FVC-ratio, and pack-years are excluded from further statistical analyses. BMI was reported for 64% of the subjects, FEV1 and FEV1/FVC-ratio for 46% of the subjects and only 47% of the subjects had reported pack-years.

Table 2shows gender-specific information of hospitalisation and readmission for the hemoglobin groups. Males with anemia had a significantly longer duration of hospitalisation when compared to the normemic group (p < 0.001). No significant difference was found between anemic and normemic females. No significant differences were observed in the number of readmissions or the mean time to first readmission when comparing the anemic and normemic groups. Similarly, no significant differences were found between the polycythemia and normemic groups.

Characteristics of hospitalisation and readmission of subjects admitted with AECOPD divided in hemoglobin levels and gender. Data is displayed as mean± standard deviation.

Table 3shows the one-year readmission risk of the different hemoglobin groups without gender division. The one-year readmission risk for subjects with COPD and anemia was increased by one fourth compared to subjects with normal hemoglobin. No difference in risk of one-year readmission was found comparing the polycythemia and normemic group. Furthermore, neither gender nor age had an impact on the readmission risk. However, comorbidities increased the risk of one-year readmission significantly.

Hazard ratios for one-year readmission when adjusted for hemoglobin groups, gender, age, and number of comorbidities.

Figure 1shows readmission the following year in the three groups, with a difference between the anemic group and both the normemic- and polycythemia groups. Subjects were excluded at time of death.

Readmission curves of subjects readmitted the following year from discharge, divided in three groups based on hemoglobin levels.

Table 4shows gender-specific mortality during first hospitalisation displayed in percentage, and days until death post discharge among dead subjects with survivors excluded during the one-year follow up. The anemic females and males had significantly fewer days alive post discharge than the normemic groups (female:p= 0.025, male:p= 0.009). No difference was found between the polycythemia- and normemic groups for either mortality during first hospitalisation or mortality post discharge.

Characteristics of mortality of subjects admitted with AECOPD divided in hemoglobin levels and gender. Data is displayed as percentage regarding mortality during first hospitalisation and mean ± standard deviation.

Table 5shows both the crude HR for one-year mortality and when adjusted for gender, age, and number of comorbidities between the three groups. The present study found one-year risk of mortality for subjects with anemia admitted with AECOPD was increased by a half compared to subjects with normal hemoglobin when adjusted for covariates. However, no difference was found between the polycythemia and normemic groups. Additionally, age and number of comorbidities significantly affected the risk of one-year mortality, however gender did not.

Hazard ratios for one-year mortality both crude and when adjusted for hemoglobin groups, gender, age, and number of comorbidities.

Figure 2shows mortality the following year from first admission in the three groups, with a difference between the anemic group and both the normemic- and polycythemia groups.

Survival curves for one-year mortality risk of subjects admitted with AECOPD divided in three groups based on hemoglobin levels.

This study found 35.2% of the subjects admitted with AECOPD had anemia and 6.8% had polycythemia. The subjects with COPD and anemia had a longer duration of hospitalisation, and a higher risk of both one-year readmission and mortality, compared to subjects with COPD and normal hemoglobin levels. The presence of comorbidities was also found to be a risk factor for one year mortality for all subjects.

In this study more than one-third of subjects with COPD had anemia. Previous studies have demonstrated conflicting results on the prevalence of anemia among subjects with AECOPD, ranging from 9.8–37.7% [4,12,16–20]. Barba et al found that 9.8% of the subjects with AECOPD had anemia [20]. The study was not fully comparable to the present study as the anemia diagnosis was based on test results prior to admission, which may have led to a systematic under-coding of the diagnosis [16]. In contrast Cireli et al found that 37.7% of subjects admitted with AECOPD had anemia, which was comparable to the present study [20]. Furthermore, the study populations were comparable regarding clinical characteristics such as hemoglobin levels, BMI and FEV1 but differences in demographics, such as age and gender was found [20]. This suggests that demographics have less impact on the prevalence of anemia in subjects with AECOPD [8].

The prevalence of polycythemia in the present study was 6.8%, which was consistent with a study by Cote et al. which found a prevalence of 6% [21]. However, the subjects in the study by Cote et al. were stable outpatients with COPD and were not admitted with AECOPD. Cote et al found the subjects with polycythemia were younger than the subjects with anemia, which is similar to the present study. The studies were similar regarding the BMI of males with polycythemia which was higher than the normemic group. The higher BMI in males with polycythemia was also demonstrated in studies by both Kollert et al and Fawzy et al. [10,11]. One could speculate if alveolar hypoventilation based on obesity might be a confounding factor to secondary polycythemia of COPD [22]. Fawzy et al. found the prevalence of polycythemia to be 11.7% in outpatients with COPD and as such the study population differed from the one in the present study. It should be noted that subjects with anemia were excluded from the study by Fawzy et al., which predispose to a falsely high prevalence of polycythaemia [10]. The population in both the present study and the study by Fawzy et al. had more females than males, however the groups differed regarding both pack-years, BMI, and FEV1. Overall, the risk profile of the group with polycythemia did not differ considerably from the group with normal hemoglobin in the present study, which could indicate that polycythemia does not have a significant impact on the outcome of the disease.

In the present study the one-year readmission risk for subjects with COPD and anemia was increased by one fourth compared to subjects with normal hemoglobin. To these authors’ knowledge no previous studies have investigated anemia as a single predictor of one-year readmission. A study by Barba et al. found 25% increased risk of readmission within 30 days post discharge among a comparable cohort of subjects with AECOPD and anemia compared to subjects with AECOPD and normal hemoglobin and polycythemia when adjusted for covariates [20]. Since the time at risk for readmission differed between the study by Barba et al. [20] and the present study, it was not possible to make a direct comparison. However, the mean time to readmission in the present study was approximately three months, which was comparable to the findings of Barba et al. and another study [23]. Previous studies have demonstrated that higher symptom- and frailty scores and lower lung function are predictors of early readmission [24,25]. As such, anemia may be valid proxy for disease burden.

The present study found no significant difference in readmission risk between the polycythemia group and the normemic group. This was consistent with the findings by Fawzy et al. who found no difference in number of readmissions for the polycythemia group compared to the normal hemoglobin group [10]. However, it should be noted that Fawzy et al. also included subjects with AECOPD that did not require hospitalisation. This could explain why the average lung function of the subjects in the study by Fawzy et al. was higher than the present study, as a better lung function is associated with less admissions [26]. As the risk of readmission was similar to a population not admitted to hospital and with better lung function one could speculate that polycythemia is not associated with readmission at all.

The present study found an increased one-year risk of mortality for subjects with anemia admitted with AECOPD compared to subjects with normal hemoglobin by a half when corrected for covariates and twice the risk when not. This was consistent with a study by Toft-Petersen et al., where males with anemia had twice the risk compared to males with normal hemoglobin, and females with anemia had 83% increased risk compared to females with normal hemoglobin, not adjusted for covariates [17]. They divided the subjects into multiple hemoglobin levels and found that even mild anemia was associated with increased mortality in subjects with COPD [17]. Furthermore, a study by Cireli et al. found one- and two-year mortality rate among subjects with anemia admitted to hospital with AECOPD compared to subjects with normal hemoglobin []. They found subjects with AECOPD and anemia had 75% increased risk of death compared to subjects with AECOPD and normal hemoglobin, and when adjusted for covariates a risk of 48% []. The difference in the risk of mortality between the study by Cireli et al. and the present study could be explained by a smaller study population of Cirelli et al. (n= 300) as well as differences in demographics and clinical characteristics. The findings of Toft-Petersen et al. [17] and Cireli et al. [] were consistent with the present study, even though the time of risk differed between the studies. As such, the present study confirmed that subjects with anemia admitted with AECOPD had a higher risk of mortality compared to subjects with normal hemoglobin and AECOPD.

Furthermore, the results of the present study indicated that mortality in subjects with polycythemia did not differ from the subjects with normal hemoglobin. This was consistent with Toft-Petersen et al. who found the one-year mortality post discharge was 15.6% for subjects with normal hemoglobin and 15.3% for subjects with polycythemia [17]. Furthermore, they found no difference in risk of death post discharge between males and females with polycythemia and normal hemoglobin, respectively [17].

This study has some limitations. For one, it is an observational real-life retrospective study, and therefore there were missing data in the dataset, which increases the risk of biases and confounding factors. The lack of data regarding severity of COPD could induce selection bias, as the majority of mild COPD is treated in primary care and therefore was the lung function not assessable. Comorbidities are a potential confounder in this study as there was not distinguished between different diseases, nor the severity of comorbidities. In the present study, a division of the specific comorbidities would be associated with uncertainty due to the sample size. However, to address this, comorbidities were grouped together. It would have been relevant to investigate whether the association between anemia and COPD differs from the association between COPD and multimorbidity. However it would require more detailed data on comorbidities. Indeed, it remains a confounder, and future studies with a larger sample size could account for specific comorbidities, such as excluding malignancy. The present study did not include data on the subjects’ performance status. Future studies could benefit from including this for example through the clinical frailty score, as it provides value information about overall physical health. Lastly, there is a skewed distribution of the subjects based on their hemoglobin levels, as the polycythemia group is notably smaller than the other groups.

The present study also has strengths as it has a large sample size, data was collected conferred to a protocol. Furthermore, when performing the multivariate analyses confounders as age, gender, and number of comorbidities were accounted for.

In subjects admitted with AECOPD the prevalence of anemia was 35.2% and the prevalence of polycythemia 6.8%. Anemia was found to be a risk factor for both one-year readmission and -mortality, and polycythemia was not associated with increased risk of readmission or mortality, compared to the subjects with normal hemoglobin. This indicates that anemia could be used as a predictor of readmission and mortality in subjects with AECOPD.

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).