Hypotension frequently occurs following the initiation of general anaesthesia, particularly in older individuals, and is linked to adverse postoperative consequences when it is severe. This study was designed to compare the predictive effects of carotid ultrasound measurements and inferior vena cava (IVC) ultrasound measurements on postinduction hypotension (PIH) in older patients.

A total of 102 older adults who were scheduled for elective gastrointestinal surgery were included in the study. Before general anaesthesia induction, maximum IVC diameter (dIVCmax), minimum IVC diameter (dIVCmin), collapsibility index of IVC (IVC-CI), respiratory variation in carotid artery blood flow peak velocity (ΔVpeak) and carotid corrected flow time (FTc) were measured by ultrasound. FTc(B) and FTc(W) were calculated by applying Bazett’s formula and Wodey’s formula, respectively. Patients were divided into hypotensive and non-hypotension group according to whether the systolic blood pressure (SBP) decreased more than 30% from the baseline or the absolute value of SBP was less than 90 mm Hg within 15 min after anaesthesia induction.

After the induction, hypotension was observed in 49% of the patients. The area under the receiver operating characteristics curve (AUROC) of FTc(W), FTc(B) and △Vpeak for predicting PIH were 0.815, 0.691 and 0.713; the optimal cut-off values were 334.7 ms, 348.3 ms and 6.35%, respectively. The AUROC of IVC-CI, dIVCmax and dIVCmin for predicting PIH were 0.666, 0.680 and 0.702; the optimal cut-off values were 46%, 0.985 cm and 0.635 cm, respectively. The AUC of the FTc(W) was significantly higher than that of the FTc(B) (p=0.003), IVC-CI (p=0.024) and dIVCmax (p=0.046).

The FTc(W) values measured by ultrasonography were more accurate for predicting PIH in the older patients as compared with dIVCmax and IVC-CI. Furthermore, the predictive accuracy of FTc(W) is better than FTc(B).

The prospective study aims to compare predictive accuracy of carotid artery ultrasonography with inferior vena cava ultrasonography for predicting postinduction hypotension in older patients.

This study was conducted at a single centre with a limited sample size.

The results may contribute to evidence on perioperative circulation management of older patients.

As preoperative hypovolaemia is an important predictor of PIH, it is important to find reliable markers of intravascular volume status for perioperative circulatory management. Ultrasound measurements of inferior vena cava (IVC) diameter and collapsibility index (CI) during spontaneous respiration previously have been suggested as an effective method to assess fluid responsiveness8 9and predict PIH.10 11However, recent evidences suggests that IVC measurement parameters have limited effectiveness in predicting fluid responsiveness, particularly in patients with spontaneous breathing; furthermore IVC parameters in overweight patients are not easily measured by ultrasonography.12,14Carotid ultrasound measurement is a new technique for assessing the volume status. Multiple studies have shown that corrected flow time (FTc) and ΔVpeak are reliable predictors of fluid responsiveness15and PIH.16,18Compared with the IVC ultrasound measurement parameters, carotid artery ultrasound measurement parameters are easier to obtain and are not affected by the patient’s intra-abdominal pressure. In addition, the carotid artery FTc is seldomly affected by the patient’s breathing movement.

Therefore, we hypothesised that ultrasonography of the carotid artery is more reliable than ultrasonography of the IVC for predicting PIH in older individuals. Previous studies only analysed the ability of carotid artery ultrasound measurement parameters or IVC ultrasound measurement parameters to predict PIH. There was no comprehensive study compared the predictive power of carotid artery ultrasound measurement parameters and IVC ultrasound measurement parameters in the same prospective cohort.

In this study, we measured the IVC diameter and CI, carotid artery FTc, and ΔVpeak before general anaesthesia induction, and then compared the predictive effectiveness of carotid artery ultrasound measurement parameters and IVC ultrasound measurement parameters for PIH in older individuals.

The study protocol was registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR2100054532), conducting from January 2022 to June 2022. All patients signed informed consent.

The detailed eligibility criteria are as follows. Inclusion criteria: (1) Aged 65–75 years; (2) American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status II–III; (3) body mass index (BMI) 15–30 kg/m2; (4) Patients undergoing elective gastrointestinal surgery with general anaesthesia; (5) Retain spontaneous breathing without sedation and disturbance of consciousness; (6) Signed informed consent. Patients were excluded based on the following criteria: (1) Any history of neck surgery or trauma. (2) Significant peripheral vascular disease or vascular disease. (3) Cardiac comorbidities including: cardiomyopathy, valvular heart disease, unstable angina or ejection fraction less than 50%. (4) Non-sinus cardiac rhythm. (5) Implantable cardiac devices (pacemakers or cardioverter-defibrillators). (6) Right ventricular dysfunction. (7) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. (8) Respiratory distress. (9) Pulmonary hypertension (mean PA pressure >25 mm Hg at rest). (10) Elevated intra-abdominal pressure (>12 mm Hg). Patients were excluded from the study if satisfactory ultrasound measurements could not be obtained or if an unexpected difficult airway arose after recruitment. None of the patients had received premedication. In the preparation room before anaesthesia, carotid ultrasonography and IVC ultrasonography measurements were performed by two independent examiners with extensive experience in sonography. The examiners were unaware of the measurement results of each other and the haemodynamic parameters of the patient.

The patient was supine. A wisonic ultrasound machine (Wisonic Medical Co. Shenzhen, China) was used to acquire images of FTc and ΔVpeak. The examiner longitudinally placed a 6–13 MHz variable frequency linear array transducer on the neck, with the probe marker facing the patient’s head. A B-mode image of the right common carotid artery was captured along its long axis at the lower boundary level of the thyroid cartilage. Next, the specimen size was positioned at the midpoint of the arterial passage, 2 cm closer to the carotid division. The ultrasonic beam should have an angle of less than 60° with the direction of blood flow. Once the pulsed wave Doppler spectrum appeared, the sampling volume and angle were fine-tuned to achieve a pleasing spectrum (figure 1a). Subsequently, the image was frozen, and measurements of FTc and ΔVpeak were taken for the carotid blood flow. The measurement of FT started at the beginning of the systolic upstroke and extended until the dicrotic notch. Heart rate (HR) was determined by measuring the time between heartbeats during the initial upstroke of the Doppler flow. FTc was determined using Bazett’s formula and Wodey’s formula, respectively. FTc(B)= ST/CT,19FTc(W)=FT+[1.29×(HR−60)].20The highest and lowest peak systolic speeds were acquired from the Doppler tracing of four consecutive peak speeds, and the ΔVpeak was calculated using the formula: (Vmax peak velocity–Vmin peak velocity)/[(Vmax peak velocity+Vmin peak velocity)/2]×100%.21The examiner performed the measurements of FTc and ΔVpeak during three continuous respiratory periods. The average of the three values was employed for analysis.

In the patient’s supine position, the measurements were conducted by the examiner using a curvilinear ultrasound transducer (2–5 MHz) for a B-mode scan. The examiner placed the transducer longitudinally under the xiphoid process and observes the long-axis view of the IVC, including IVC, hepatic vein and right atrial entrance of the IVC. IVC measurements were performed approximately 2 cm distal to the IVC-right atrial junction (figure 1b). The IVC was pinpointed using Doppler waveform, compressibility and phasic collapse with respiration. The IVCmax and IVCmin over the same respiratory period were measured. The IVC-CI was calculated using the following equation: IVC-CI=(IVCmax–IVCmin)/IVCmax×100％,8and the average values from three consecutive respiratory periods were adopted for analysis.

The patient was then transferred to the operating theatre where standard monitoring was conducted, which encompassed the ECG, HR, pulse oxygen saturation, systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP) and mean arterial pressure (MAP). Radial artery puncture was performed under local anaesthesia. Following a stabilisation period lasting 3–5 min, the average of three measurements taken at 3 min intervals was used to calculate the baseline invasive blood pressure and HR. PIH was defined as a >30% decrease in SBP from the baseline or SBP <90 mm Hg within 15 min following anaesthesia induction.16Anaesthesia was induced intravenously with remimazolam (0.2–0.3 mg/kg), sufentanil (0.3–0.4 µg/kg) and rocuronium (0.6 mg/kg). Following tracheal intubation, the anaesthesia was sustained by administering sevoflurane (0.9–1.2 vol%) through inhalation in oxygen-enriched air. During the induction and maintenance periods, the bispectral index was maintained between 40 and 60, and invasive BP and HR were recorded at least every 1 min. During the analysis period, the patients were kept in a supine position while receiving an infusion of crystalloid fluid at a rate of 10 mL/kg/hour. Only limited stimulation, such as the insertion of a urinary catheter and preparation of the surgical area, was permitted. Patients experiencing PIH received intravenous administration of ephedrine (3 mg) or phenylephrine (50 µg). For significant bradycardia (HR below 40 beats/min), atropine was administered at a dosage of 0.3 mg. No additional haemodynamic data were collected after the surgical procedure was commenced. The anaesthesiologist in charge of the patient was not informed of the ultrasound measurement results.

The sample size was calculated using the PASS software (V.15.0; NCSS Statistical Software). Referring to related literature,12 13we assumed that the IVC diameter and CI, FTc and ΔVpeak might have lower predictive validity of 0.7 for PIH in elderly individuals. With this outcome, a group of 82 individuals (assuming that half of the patients will experience hypotension) attained 90% statistical power by employing a two-tailedz-test at a significance level of 0.05. Assuming a dropout rate of 20%, 99 patients need to be included.

Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Shapiro-Wilk tests were used to evaluate the distribution of normality. Data exhibiting a normal distribution (eg, BMI, HR, SBP, DBP, MAP, percentage of decline in MAP, FTc (W), FTc (B), IVC-CI and maximum IVC diameter (dIVCmax)) are presented as the mean±SD, and data exhibiting a nonnormal distribution (eg, age, minimum IVC diameter (dIVCmin), percentage of SBP decline, ΔVpeak) are presented as median (IQR). Categorical data (eg, sex, ASA grade, type of surgery, concomitant diseases and types of medication) were expressed as frequencies or percentages. A comparison was made between patients who experienced hypotension and those who did not using an independent-sample t-test for normally distributed data. Categorical variables were analysed using either χ2test or Fisher’s exact test, depending on their appropriateness.

The Mann-Whitney U test was used for data that were not normally distributed. Spearman correlation coefficient was used to test the relationship between the ultrasound measurement parameters and the percentage decrease in SBP after anaesthesia induction. The performance of dIVCmax, dIVCmin, IVC-CI, FTc and ΔVpeak in predicting PIH was evaluated through receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve analysis. The optimal cut-off value was selected to maximise the Youden index. Differences in the area under the curve (AUCs) between the various ultrasound measurement parameters were evaluated using the Delong test in MedCalc. To establish a range of inconclusive IVC and carotid artery ultrasound measurement parameters, the method known as the grey zone approach, as explained by Coste and Pouchot,22was employed. The grey zone boundaries were established based on the values linked to a sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 90%. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software (V.26.0; IBM), MedCalc (V.23.3.1) and GraphPad Prism V.8 software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA). Statistical significance was defined as p<0.05.

No patients or the public were involved in the design, conduct, reporting and dissemination plans of this research.

A total of 120 participants were enrolled in this research (figure 2). 18 (15%) were excluded because of poor IVC visualisation. Ultrasound measurements of the carotid artery were feasible for every individual. The analysis was conducted using the data from the remaining 102 individuals. There were no instances of challenging or extended intubation among patients. 35 individuals were previously diagnosed with hypertension. Among these, four individuals were prescribed ACEi drugs, eight individuals were taking calcium channel blockers, and 23 individuals were not on medications. ACEI drugs were discontinued in the morning of the operation day. Following the administration of anaesthesia, 50 patients (49%) developed hypotension. The baseline characteristics of the patients who experienced hypotension were similar to those of the patients who did not (table 1).

Values are mean (SD), number (proportion) or median (IQR (range)).

ACEi, ACE inhibitor; ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; BMI, body mass index; CCB, calcium antagonist.

According totable 2, the baseline HR and SBP were significantly higher in the hypotension group (p<0.05), but there was no notable difference in the baseline MAP and DBP between the two groups (p>0.05). Following the administration of anaesthesia, the hypotension group experienced a significantly greater reduction in both SBP and MAP than the non-hypotension group (p<0.001). Patients who developed hypotension had smaller FTc(W) (p<0.001), FTc(W) (p<0.001), dIVCmax (p<0.005), dIVCmin (p<0.001) and larger △Vpeak (p<0.001), IVC-CI (p<0.005).

DBP, diastolic blood pressure; dIVCmax, maximum IVC diameter; dIVCmin, minimum IVC diameter; FTc(B), corrected flow time in the carotid artery calculated by Bazett’s formula; FTc(W), corrected flow time in the carotid artery calculated by Wodey’s formula; HR, heart rate; IVC, inferior vena cava; IVC-CI, collapsibility index of IVC; MAP, mean arterial blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood pressure; ΔVpeak, respiratory variation in carotid artery blood flow peak velocity.

The percentage decrease in SBP after induction was significantly negatively correlated with FTc(W) (r=−0.52, p<0.001,figure 3a) and slightly negatively correlated with FTc(B) (r=−0.26, p=0.008,figure 3b); the percentage decrease in SBP was weakly positively correlated with △Vpeak (r=0.40, p<0.001,figure 3c) and IVC-CI (r=0.36, p<0.001,figure 3d); the percentage decrease in SBP was low negatively correlated with dIVCmax (r=−0.28, p=0.004,figure 3e) and dIVCmin (r=−0.36, p<0.001,figure 3f).

Figure 4andtable 3demonstrate the predictive capacity of dIVCmax, dIVCmin, IVC-CI, FTc and ΔVpeak for PIH. The area under the ROC curve (AUROC) of FTc(W), FTc(B) and △Vpeak for predicting PIH were 0.815 (0.733 to 0.898, p<0.001), 0.691 (0.589 to 0.792, p<0.001) and 0.713 (0.614 to 0.812, p<0.001). The optimal cut-off value for FTc(W) was 334.7 ms (sensitivity of 68.0%, specificity of 84.6%); for FTc(B) was 348.3 ms (sensitivity of 62.0%, specificity of 71.2%); for △Vpeak was 6.35% (sensitivity of 92.0%, specificity of 42.3%). The AUROC of IVC-CI, dIVCmax and dIVCmin for predicting PIH were 0.666 (0.560 to 0.772, p=0.004), 0.680 (0.576 to 0.785, p=0.002) and 0.702 (0.598 to 0.807, p<0.001). The optimal cut-off value for IVC-CI was 46% (sensitivity of 48.0%, specificity of 84.6%); for dIVmax was 0.985 cm (sensitivity of 46.0%, specificity of 86.5%); for dIVCmin was 0.635 cm (sensitivity of 62.0%, specificity of 78.9%). It appears the grey zone for FTc(W) was between 332.3 to 348.6 ms and contained 37.3% of patients; for FTc(B) was between 335.6 and 363.1 ms and contained 58.8% of patients; for Vpeak was between 6.6% and 10.2% and contained 49% of patients. The grey zone for IVC-CI was between 30.2% and 48.1% and contained 60.8% of patients; for dIVCmax was between 0.94 and 1.50 cm and contained 66.7% of patients; for dIVCmin was between 0.53 to 1.03 cm and contained 62.7% of patients.

AUROC, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; dIVCmax, maximum IVC diameter; dIVCmin, minimum IVC diameter; FTc(B), corrected flow time in the carotid artery calculated by Bazett’s formula; FTc(W), corrected flow time in the carotid artery calculated by Wodey’s formula; IVC, inferior vena cava; IVC-CI, collapsibility index of IVC; ΔVpeak, respiratory variation in carotid artery blood flow peak velocity.

The AUC of the FTc (W) was significantly higher than that of the FTc (B) (p=0.003), IVC-CI (p=0.024) and dIVCmax (p=0.046). However, no significant differences were observed in the AUCs between other comparisons (p>0.05).

We found that carotid FTc (W) was more valuable than IVC-CI and dIVCmax in predicting PIH in older individuals. The value of FTc (W) for predicting PIH in older individuals was higher than that of FTc (B). The cut-off value for predicting PIH was 334.7 ms for FTc (W).

It is frequent for hypotension to occur following the administration of general anaesthesia.23Our research was supposed to be the first study from this field, using remimazolam induction. In our study, 49% of older patients developed hypotension after induction. In a prospective observation study involving 200 older patients (aged 65–75) undergoing non-cardiac surgery, 63.6% of the patients developed PIH.3This study defined PIH as hypotension within 10 min after anaesthesia induction, and anaesthesia was induced by sufentanil and etomidate and was maintained by sevoflurane. Huanget al18found that the incidence of PIH within 3 min after induction of anaesthesia in older patients was 65.2%. The incidence of PIH in these studies was higher than that in our study, which showed remimazolam caused less PIH compared with etomidate and propofol. In addition to optimising the selection of anaesthesia induction drugs, it is particularly important to pay attention to the preoperative intravascular volume status of patients. It may be possible to avoid the occurrence of PIH if we use a method to detect hypovolaemia accurately before induction.

The IVC ultrasound has been widely accepted as a reliable method for rapid evaluation of intravascular volume status owing to its immediate availability, non-intrusiveness, simplicity of acquisition and rapid execution. A smaller IVC diameter combined with increased respiratory variability is indicative of low volume status.24The IVC diameter and its respiratory variability are used to evaluate fluid responsiveness in different scenarios8 9and predict PIH.10 25However, recent research indicates that the IVC diameter and its respiratory variability have limited predictive efficacy for fluid responsiveness, especially in patients with spontaneous respiration.12,14There are many technical limitations and confounding factors that can affect the accurate measurement of IVC, such as foreshortening error and off-axis collaps of IVC, thoracic factors and abdominal factors.26In our study, the AUROC of IVC-CI, dIVCmax and dIVCmin for predicting PIH were 0.666 (0.560 to 0.772), 0.680 (0.576 to 0.785) and 0.702 (0.598 to 0.807), respectively. The grey zone for IVC ultrasound measurement parameters contained more than 60% of patients. Our study showed that IVC ultrasound measurement parameters have limited predictive value for PIH in older patients. The scan failure rate of IVC is reported to be 13.5%–20%,10 27 28our scan failure rate of 15% was similar to that in other studies.

We are still desperate for a reliable non-invasive method to predict PIH in the spontaneously breathing older patients. The FTc of the carotid artery is a recently developed indicator of fluid responsiveness that can be easily assessed using sonography and remains unaffected by breath frequency and tidal volume. Kimet al15evaluated the effectiveness of carotid FTc and ΔVpeak in predicting fluid responsiveness in patients who breathe spontaneously and found that FTc was better than ΔVpeak. Huanget al18found that carotid FTc had high accuracy in predicting hypotension within 3 min after induction of anaesthesia in older patients, the optimal cut-off value of FTc was 334.95 ms. In our research, we optimised the anaesthetic induction drugs by chosing the remimazolam which has less influence on blood pressure, and the definition of PIH is more in line with the clinical practice. In our present study, we evaluated the performance of FTc(W), FTc(B) and ΔVpeak in predicting PIH in older individuals and found that FTc(W) was a reasonable predictor of PIH in elderly individuals. The AUROC for predicting PIH for FTc(W) was 0.815, which was significantly higher than those for the IVC ultrasound measurement parameters. And the grey zone of FTc(W) was significantly smaller than those of IVC ultrasound measurement parameters. These initial findings reveal that, compared with IVC-CI and dIVCmax, carotid FTc(W) may serve as precise and non-invasive alternatives for predicting PIH in older individuals with spontaneous breathing undergoing elective delivery.

FTc is a parameter obtained by correcting the HR according to the systolic time and is usually calculated using Bazett’s formula. Wodeyet al20suggested that Bazett’s formula ignored the error caused by slow or fast HR in calculating FTc, so Wodey’s formula was proposed. In our study, the AUROC of FTc(W) was significantly greater than that of FTc(B) for predicting PIH in older patients, and the grey zone of FTc(W) was significantly smaller than that of FTc(B). This indicates that FTc(W) is more valuable than FTc(B) for predicting PIH in older patients. Some studies have found that preoperative optimisation strategies using point-of-care ultrasound to guide fluid management can prevent PIH.29 30In the future, we should further investigate whether carotid artery ultrasound measurement parameters and IVC ultrasound measurement parameters can be used to guide fluid management to reduce perioperative hypotension.

Our study had several limitations. First, our study did not compare arterial line-derived parameters with FTc, and that such a comparison is planned for a future study. Second, FTc serves as a comprehensive indicator encompassing preload, afterload and cardiac contractility; it also exhibits an inverse correlation with systemic vascular resistance.31Hence, numerous additional factors that affect afterload may modify FTc. Third, we did not evaluate the interobserver and intraobserver variability of FTc and ΔVpeak. However, the reproducibility of FTc and ΔVpeak among different observers in previous research was outstanding,15and the operator in our study possessed extensive expertise in ultrasonographic measurements. Fourth, our study represents the first investigation in this field to employ remimazolam induction, which simultaneously constitutes a limitation that may affect generalisability.

Our findings suggest that ultrasonography-based measurements of FTc(W) may be more reliable indicators of PIH in older individuals than dIVCmax and IVC-CI. Moreover, FTc(W) demonstrated higher predictive accuracy than FTc(B). Additional research is required to determine its significance in various surgical procedures and vulnerable populations, including older groups and those with severe cardiovascular disease.

We express our gratitude to all the research personnel for their valuable support in the recruitment of patients and gathering of data.