Approximately 70 species ofCryptococcushave been identified, some of which are human and animal pathogens, while others are environmental saprophytes.Cryptococcus neoformansis one of the most important pathogenic species, and pigeon droppings serve as the most important ecological niche. This study aimed to investigate the frequency ofC. neoformansin pigeon droppings from various Iranian provinces, as well as assess the pathogenic factors and antifungal susceptibility of the isolates.

428 pigeon droppings samples were collected from 10 Iranian provinces and cultured on Niger seed agar. DNAs were extracted, and CNLAC1 (Outer and Inner) and STR1 primers were used for the detection of species and varieties ofC. neoformans, respectively. Virulence factors were also identified using specific culture media under appropriate conditions. Antifungal susceptibility testing was conducted against 8 antifungals using CLSI guidelines.

Out of the 428 examined samples, 37 (8.6%) were positive forC. neoformans. All isolates exhibited capsule production and dark brown pigmentation as key pathogenic factors. Urease and catalase activities were present in all isolates. Based on the established ECVs guidelines, all isolates displayed wild-type phenotypes against voriconazole and 5-flucytosine. While 100% isolates were non-wild type against amphotericin B.

The frequency ofC. neoformanswas 8.6% in Iranian cities, with a high (31.5%) frequency in Kermanshah and a low (3.1%) frequency in Fars province. All isolates showed sensitivity to voriconazole and 5-flucytosine. Additionally, pathogenic factors were present in all strains to varying degrees.

Cryptococcosis is an opportunistic deep mycosis with worldwide distribution, especially in tropical and subtropical conditions. However, the disease is not common, and only a few cases of infection have been reported from different cities in Iran. In a meta-analysis study, the prevalence of cryptococcosis in animals and humans was 1.7% and 2.8% in Iran, respectively [1]. Cryptococcosis occurs through the inhalation of basidiospores or dehydrated yeast cells ofCryptococcusspecies from environmental sources such as soil or plant materials, as well as bird feces, especially pigeon droppings [2]. Individuals with a strong immune system usually exhibit subclinical forms, which can result in either the elimination of the cryptococci or long-term latency. It can be said that the pathogenicity of cryptococci is linked to cell-mediated immunity and other host factors [2].

Out of 70 known species of the genusCryptococcus, the etiologic agent in almost all cases of human cryptococcosis isCryptococcus neoformans, followed byC. gattii[3,4]. However, rare cases of infection due toC. albidus,C. luteolus, andC. laurentiihave been reported in the literature [5–7].C. neoformansoften causes cryptococcal infections in immunosuppressed patients, such as those with HIV, corticosteroid users, and organ transplantation recipients, whileC. gattiiprimarily occurs in immunocompetent hosts [8].Cryptococcusspecies have several pathogenic factors, including extracellular enzymes, melanin production, capsule formation, and temperature tolerance. These factors provide suitable conditions for yeast to survive in environmental changes and develop resistance to antifungals [9].

Although there are several available antifungals, a few are commonly used for the chemotherapy of cryptococcosis, such as a combination of amphotericin B and 5-flucytosine, fluconazole, and itraconazole [10,11]. Consequently, new effective antifungals could be introduced for the treatment of cryptococcosis. A previous study demonstrated the high efficacy of luliconazole againstC. neoformansstrains in vitro [12]. However, there is currently no oral or injectable formulation of this antifungal available. Therefore, further studies are needed to develop suitable formulations for systemic therapy of cryptococcosis.

The present study aimed to investigate the frequency ofC. neoformansin pigeon droppings from several cities in Iran. Additionally, the pathogenic factors of the isolates were assessed, and the antifungal susceptibility against eight antifungals (itraconazole, voriconazole, amphotericin B, 5-flucytosine, fluconazole, luliconazole, caspofungin, and micafungin) was also evaluated.

Four hundred and twenty-eight samples of pigeon droppings were collected from 10 different provinces of Iran including Alborz (n= 41), Kermanshah (n= 54), Kohgiluyeh and Boyer-Ahmad (n= 87), Khuzestan (n= 45), Golestan (n= 36), Mazandaran (n= 22), Ilam (n= 35), Esfahan (2n= 0), Fars (n= 32) and Chaharmahal and Bakhtiari (n= 56) (Fig.1). The samples were transferred to the Department of Medical Mycology, School of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

The 5 g of each pigeon dropping were transferred to a sterile Falcon tube containing 50 ml of sterile distilled water with penicillin 1.200 U (1 g/L), gentamicin (20 µg/L) (Pharmco Jabir Hayyan, Iran), and chloramphenicol (1 g/L) (Bio Basic, Canada). The prepared suspension was thoroughly mixed for a few minutes by vortex and allowed to sediment for 30 min. Then 0.2 mL of supernatant was removed and streaked on Niger seed agar, NSA (5%Guizotia abyssinicaseeds, 0.1% glucose, 0.1% KH2PO4, 0.1% creatinine, 0.1% biphenyl, 1.5% agar) containing penicillin, gentamicin, and chloramphenicol. The cultures were incubated at 32 °C and monitored for mucoid and dark-brown colonies for up to 2 weeks [4].

The primary identification of isolates was based on morphological and microscopic studies. Indian ink smears of suspected colonies ofCryptococcuswere prepared, and the presence of capsules confirmedCryptococcusspecies [13]. Brown colonies were subcultured on fresh NSA to obtain single and pure colonies. Finally, pure colonies were subcultured on Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) (BioLife, Italia) slant tubes and stored at room temperature until use [4].

The genomic DNA of isolates was extracted from fresh cultures using the Makimura et al. method with some modifications [14], and the purified DNAs were stored at − 20 °C until subsequent analysis. Briefly, yeast strains were inoculated on SDA agar and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. A small portion of yeast cells was then suspended in 100 µL lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% w/v SDS, 30 mM EDTA). The suspension was thoroughly mixed for 5 s and then incubated at 100 °C for 15 min. Next, 100 µL of 2.5 M lithium acetate (CDH, New Delhi, India) was added to the suspension and kept on ice for 60 min before being centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min. DNA was precipitated from the supernatant with an equal volume of isopropanol (Merck, Germany). The extracted DNA was washed with 0.5 mL of 99% ethanol, dried, and resuspended in 100 µL of distilled water.

In the present study, a specific gene ofC. neoformans(CNLAC1 gene) was selected to identifyC. neoformans[15,16]. A nested PCR was performed using two sets of primers, CNLAC1 outer primer pair and CNLAC1 inner primer pair, which produced products with lengths of 1386 and 690 bp, respectively (Table1) [16]. A total volume of 25 µL of reaction mixture containing 2 µL of CNLAC1 outer primer pair (10 µM), 2.5 µL of template DNA, 8 µL of distilled water, and 12.5 µL of 2X master mix (Amplicon, Denmark) was used for primary amplification. For secondary amplification, a total volume of 25 µL of reaction mixture containing 2 µL of CNLAC1 inner primer pair (10 µM), 0.1 µL of the first set PCR product, 10.4 µL of distilled water, and 12.5 µL of 2X master mix was used. The thermal conditions for primary and secondary reactions are described in Table1. Both PCR products were analyzed by electrophoresis in a 1.5% agarose gel in tris-acetate-EDTA (TAE) [100 mM Tris HCl (pH 9.0), 40 mM EDTA] containing ethidium bromide (Sinaclon, Iran) and visualized by transillumination under ultraviolet (UV) (Uitec, England). The size of the amplified products was estimated by comparison with a 100 bp DNA ladder (Sinaclon, Iran).

A PCR test was conducted using the STR1 primer set (F: 5’-GAGATTCGGCAGGAAGAAGC-3’) and (R: 5’-CGTAAGGGATGACGAAAAGGTA-3’) to determine the variety ofC. neoformans. The goal was to identify different types ofC. neoformansisolates following the method outlined by Feng et al., which was later modified by Mirpurian et al. [16,17]. The thermocycler conditions were as follows: 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 30 cycles of denaturation for 30 s at 95 °C, annealing for 30 s at 60 °C, 30 s at 72 °C, and a final extension step at 72 °C for 5 min. PCR conducted with the primer pairs mentioned above yielded 224–274 bp products in a total volume of 25 µL. Specifically,C. neoformansvar.neoformansand var.grubiiproduced 224 bp and 274 bp fragments, respectively [16].

A loopful of overnight colonies ofC. neoformansisolates was inoculated onto RPMI 1640 (Gibco, UK) and diluted Sabouraud dextrose broth (1:10) (BioLife, Italy) with a pH of 7.3. The samples were then incubated at 32 °C under CO2conditions. After 3 days of incubation, the formation of the capsule was investigated. To do this, a smear was prepared using yeast suspension and Indian ink in a 1:1 ratio. At least five different fields of microscope slides were randomly searched for capsule production [4].

To stimulate melanin production, 30 µL of 0.5 Mc Farland standard suspension of isolates was inoculated on NSA and incubated at 30 °C for 1 week. Afterward, the colonies were qualitatively assessed by visually determining the brown color. The color intensity of the colony was then scored as very high, high, moderate, or low pigmentation [4].

All strains underwent various temperature tolerance assays. A small amount of a fresh colony of each isolate was cultured on SDA plates. The plates were then incubated at 4 °C, 30 °C, 37 °C, 42 °C, and 45 °C for durations of 1 month, 48 h, 48 h, 48 h, and 24 h, respectively. The plates that were kept at 4 °C and 42 °C were transferred to 30 °C. Plates were monitored daily, with only those requiring long incubation times being checked every 10 days [4].

The urease activity of isolates was determined using urea agar base (Merck, Germany) supplemented with 50 ml/L 40% urea (Merck, Germany). 0.5 McFarland standard suspension of each isolate was inoculated into urea agar plates and incubated at 37 °C for 7–10 days. The coloration of urea agar was graded from 1 + to 4+, which indicates the intensity of urea hydrolysis [4]. Additionally, a small portion of a fresh colony (incubated at 35 °C for 48 h) was suspended in a drop of H2O2on a clean microscope slide and monitored for catalase activity [4]. All isolates were sub-cultured on SDA medium at 35 °C for 48 h.

In vitro, antifungal susceptibility testing was conducted using the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) document M27-4th protocol [18]. The study included 8 antifungals amphotericin B, 5-flucytosine, itraconazole, voriconazole, caspofungin, micafungin (Sigma - Aldrich, Germany), fluconazole (Serva, USA), and luliconazole (APIChem Technology, China), Since there are no establishe breakpoints for these antifungals againstCryptococcusspecies, the epidemiological cutoff values (ECVs) outlined in the CLSI M59 guidelines were used for interoperating the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) results [19].

The frequency of isolates was calculated using Excel (Office 16), and the MIC50, MIC90, and MICGMwere calculated using an online geometric mean calculator (https://www.hackmath.net/en/calculator).

Out of 428 tested pigeon droppings, 37 (8.6%) were positive forC. neoformans. The isolates grown on the NSA medium were identified using classical methods, including the Indian ink test and urease production. Confirmation ofC. neoformanswas achieved using the CNLAC1 (outer) and CNLAC1 (inner) primer pair, resulting in bands of 1386 bp and 690 bp (Fig.2A and B). Additionally, a product of 274 bp using the STR1 primer set confirmed the presence ofC. neoformansvarietygrubii(Fig.2C).

Table2displays the frequency details ofCryptococcusin various provinces of iran. the data reveals thatCryptococcushad the highest frequency in Kermanshah (31.5%) and the lowest in Fars (3.1%). Interestingly,Cryptococcuswas not detected in four iran.an provinces, esfahan, alborz, Kohgiluyeh and Boyer-Ahmad, and Chaharmahal bakhtiari.

In the present study, all isolates produced polysaccharide capsules in both examined culture media, RPMI 1640 and SDB (Fig.3A). However, the capsule formed on RPMI 1640 was larger than in SDB. Additionally, large capsules (8.1%) were found in samples from Kermanshah, Ilam, and Mazandaran provinces. AllC. neoformansisolates showed excellent growth at 37 °C and 30 °C, while no growth was observed at 45 °C. Furthermore, the ability to grow at 42 °C was only present in 15 (40.53%) isolates. Although 97.3% of isolates showed growth at 4 °C after 1 month, the growth rate varied at 10, 20, and 30 days. The details of the tolerance to different temperatures by isolates are shown in Table3. In this study, 100% of tested isolates were positive for catalase and urease activity (Fig.3B). The pigmentation intensity of the isolates was evaluated at 30 °C for 1 week (Fig.3C). Our results indicate that 29.72% of isolates had very high pigment intensity, followed by high intensity (29.72%), moderate intensity (5.40%), and low intensity (35.13%) pigmentation.

The results of in vitro antifungal susceptibility tests for 37C. neoformansisolates are shown in Table4. It can be observed that lowest MIC range was correlated with voriconazole (0.0625 –0.0156 µg/mL), while fluconazole exhibited the highest MIC range, (2–16 µg/mL), According to the defined ECVs by CLSI M59 guidelines, our data indicated that all isolates were of the wild-type phenotype (WT) for voriconazole and 5-flucytosine. In contrast, 100% of isolates showed non-wild type phenotype (non-WT) for itraconazole and amphotericin B, whereas only 2.7% of isolates exhibited non-wild type phenotype for fluconazole.

Cryptococcosis has a worldwide distribution, especially in tropical and subtropical regions, with its etiologic agents isolated from all parts of the world [12,20–24]. Many researchers have confirmed that pigeons serve as the main reservoir forC. neoformans. The recovery ofC. neoformansfrom pigeon droppings in different provinces of Iran has supported these findings. The frequency ofCryptococcusin pigeon droppings or other resources has been reported in limited Iranian provinces [4,13,25–30]; however, there is no data about the overall frequency of this pathogenic yeast or its distribution in Iran. Our results show that the lowest frequency (3.1%) was attributed to specimens from Fars province in South Central Iran, whereas the specimens from Kermanshah in Western Iran had the highestCryptococcusfrequency (31.5%). It appears that factors such as geographical conditions and pigeon population density affect the distribution of this species. Kermanshah is one of the Iranian provinces with a higher population density of pigeons and pigeon fanciers compared to Fars province. Overall, the mean frequency was 8.6% for the studied provinces. We could not isolateCrypto/coccusfrom pigeon droppings in Esfahan, Alborz, Chaharmahal Bakhtiari, Kohgiluyeh, and Boyer-Ahmad; however, the reported frequency rate ofC. neoformanswas 2.5% in the Soltani et al. study from Esfahan [31], with no available data onCryptococcusfrom other provinces. The high frequency ofCryptococcus(33%) from Golestan and Mazandaran provinces could be attributed to high moisture conditions that preservedCryptococcusin pigeon droppings for a long time. Although a few studies in Iran have confirmed the presence ofC. neoformansin pigeon droppings, other wild birds, and clinical samples, there is no further data aboutCryptococcusvarieties [4,16,32]. In a study by Ghaderi et al., the frequency ofC. neoformanswas 77.5% inColumba liviadroppings [33]. While 17.17% of parrots in northeast Iran were found to have preservedC. neoformansin their droppings [34].

In this study, using the STR1 primer set, we found that all recovered isolates wereC. neoformansvarietygrubii(serotype A/VNI genotype), indicating that this variety is the primary agent in Iranian provinces.C. neoformansvarietygrubii(VNI) was also the dominant genotype in the study by Moslem et al., which utilized the MLST technique [12]. However, Pakshir et al. and Agha Kuchak Afshari et al. found that 88% and 90% of isolates, respectively, were VNI genotype in their studies using ITS rDNA and D1/D2 sequencing region [30,35]. Additionally, Zarrin et al. identifiedC. neoformansin 11.1% of samples from pigeon droppings in Ahvaz using morphological features [13].

Several virulence factors, including melanin, polysaccharide capsule, growth at 37 °C, different temperature tolerance, and enzymatic profiles, have been reported forCryptococcusspecies [4,9,31,36]. The production of polysaccharide capsules inC. neoformansis considered one of the main pathogenic factors, as strains without capsules are unable to induce infection [37,38]. Additionally, Casadevall et al. believed approximately 25% of the total virulence composite inC. neoformansis attributed to polysaccharide capsules [38]. In our study, capsules of different sizes were observed during incubation at CO2and 37 °C for 72 h. Capsules formed on RPMI 1640 were larger than those formed on SDB. Furthermore, we detected 3 isolates (8.1%) from Kermanshah, Ilam, and Mazandaran with large capsules.

The ability of melanin production to protect against immune cells and reduce the permeability of the cell wall byCryptococcusis another important virulence factor [9]. All 37 isolates produced yeast cells with varying intensities of melanin in the NSA medium. Previous studies in this field have yielded similar results to those of this study [4,30]. Pini et al. demonstrated that shown, a few clinical and environmental strains were negative for melanization [36]. Melanin production is a significant virulence factor inCryptococcusspecies, and a decrease or absence of melanin is associated with reduced pathogenicity. Exposure to stress, different temperatures, and the heavy metal composition of culture media can affect the melanin production inCryptococcusspecies [9]. Both urease and catalase enzymes are effective virulence factors ofC. neoformansthat protect the yeast from phagosomes and oxidative damage. Consequently, these enzymes facilitate the spread of yeast in the host and accelerate pathogenicity [3,9,39]. All studied isolates exhibited positive urease and catalase activities, consistent with the findings of other studies [4,22,40]. However, varying degrees of these enzymes were observed in the isolates.

All strains grew well at 37 °C, indicating the pathogenicity of these strains. When examining the temperature tolerance of these strains, plates incubated at 4 °C for one month began to grow after being placed at 30 °C. However, only 5.40% were unable to grow even after being transferred from 42 to 30 °C. Additionally, 64.86% of isolates incubated at 45 °C were unable to grow after being transferred to 30 °C. It appears thatC. neoformanscan produce different types of heat shock proteins that protect the organism against varying temperatures, allowing it to adapt to mammalian body temperature [41,42].

Satisfactory inhibition activity was found against isolates with voriconazole (100%), 5-flucytosine (100%), and fluconazole (97.29%), which were considered wild-type strains (susceptible). Moslem et al. [12] and Chen et al. [43] also found similar results for these antifungals. Moslem et al. reported that 53.3% and 10% of isolates were non-wild type against itraconazole and amphotericin B, respectively [12], while all isolates in our study were non-wild type for amphotericin B and itraconazole. In contrast, Chen et al. found that all isolates were sensitive to amphotericin B and itraconazole [43]. Additionally, Prakash et al. revealed that Indian isolates ofC. neoformanswere significantly less susceptible to amphotericin B, 5-flucytosine, and itraconazole [20]. Bandalizadeh et al. found that 50% of clinical isolates ofC. neoformanswere wild type against itraconazole [44] and showed the synergistic effects of amphotericin B with 5-FC, amphotericin B with fluconazole, and fluconazole with 5-FC against 37%, 31%, and 12.5% of the isolates, respectively. Loyse et al. believed that resistance against flucytosine remained at 1–2% in studies from Spain, Egypt, and South America. While 35% and 68% of North America and Latin America were susceptible to flucytosine. They suggested that geographical conditions could affectCryptococcussusceptibility to antifungal agents [45].

Maligie and Selitrennikoff reported a MIC of 16 µg/mL of caspofungin againstC. neoformansand believed that this species is intrinsically resistant to echinocandins [46]. Our results show that 10.8% of isolates were sensitive to caspofungin (MIC = 0.25 µg/mL) and micafungin (MIC = 0.125 µg/mL). Papon et al. and Maligie and Selitrennikoff have shown thatC. neoformans1,3-β-glucan synthase activity is highly sensitive to caspofungin. Therefore, they suggested that chitin contents in the cell wall ofCryptococcuscould affect the sensitivity to echinocandins [10,46]. Although the sensitivity of isolates against luliconazole was relatively low (MIC = 0.25–2 µg/mL), the results are not interpretable due to a lack of breakpoints or ECVs for this azole.

In the present study, we collected pigeon droppings from 10 of 31 Iranian provinces. To accurately determine the frequency ofCryptococcusin Iran, sampling from additional provinces is necessary. It is recommended that other researchers investigate the frequency and type ofCryptococcusin different regions of Iran to gain a better understanding of the distribution of this pathogenic yeast. Furthermore, our study was limited to a single season for sampling. Therefore, conducting sampling during various seasons would reveal any seasonal changes in the frequency ofCryptococcusin each province. Additionally, due to insufficient financial support, we were unable to utilize molecular lineage data through MLST sequencing.

The recovery frequency ofC. neoformansin Iranian cities was 8.6%, with Kermanshah having a high frequency (46%) and Shiraz having a low frequency (3%). Additionally, theC. neoformansvarietygrubiiwas identified as a uniqueCryptococcusvariety. All isolates demonstrated pathogenic factors, such as capsule production, growth at 37 °C, and pigmentation. Furthermore, extracellular enzymes were observed in all isolates with varying ranges. Sensitivity testing showed that all isolates were sensitive to voriconazole and 5-flucytosine. Interestingly, 100% of the isolates had resistant profile (non-wild type) against amphotericin B and itraconazole, while only 2.7% of the isolates were resistant against fluconazole.

“We are thankful to the Department of Medical Mycology affiliated to Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran. Moreover, the authors express their gratitude to Mr. Jalal Hamzehee for collecting samples.“.