In dural arteriovenous fistulas, bridging veins are connecting vessels that drain venous blood from the surface of the brain to the surrounding dural sinus. It is rare for the fistulous point and the bridging vein to be at different levels.

A 71-year-old man presented with progressive spinal symptoms of 8 months’ duration. Angiography showed that the jugular branch of the ascending pharyngeal artery was the feeding artery, with the fistulous point at the jugular foramen and the bridging vein at the foramen magnum level, draining into the spinal vein. Direct surgery was performed via a transcondylar fossa approach, allowing visualization of both the fistulous point and the bridging vein, and successful venous outflow occlusion was achieved. The surgery was completed without complications, and the patient’s spinal symptoms gradually improved over time.

For jugular foramen dural arteriovenous fistulas with a bridging vein at the foramen magnum level, a direct surgical approach via the transcondylar fossa, which allows visualization of both the fistulous point and the bridging vein, was useful for achieving a safe and definitive occlusion.

Jugular foramen dural arteriovenous fistulas (JF-DAVFs) account for approximately 3%–6% of all DAVFs.1,2There are two main types of drainage pathways in JF-DAVFs: one drains directly into the internal jugular vein and the other drains into the veins surrounding the brainstem via a bridging vein (BV).2A BV is defined as a connecting vessel that drains venous blood from the surface of the brain to the surrounding dural sinus.3We report the case of a JF-DAVF with a fistulous point at the jugular foramen that was successfully treated by surgical disconnection of the draining veins that traveled over the dural surface and drained into the veins around the medulla and spinal vein via a BV at the foramen magnum level.

A 71-year-old man with a history of hyperuricemia and lumbar disc herniation developed abnormal sensation in both upper limbs 8 months prior. Six months prior, head MR angiography showed abnormal blood flow at the left jugular foramen, and cervical T2-weighted MRI showed a faint intramedullary high signal from the lower medulla to the upper cervical spinal cord (Fig. 1A andB). At that time, these MRI abnormalities were not recognized by previous physicians. Over time, the patient developed altered sensation in both lower limbs and residual urine. Due to abnormal findings detected on cervical MRI, he was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. He had decreased sensation to touch, pain, and vibration in both upper and lower limbs, as well as urinary retention. Head MRI showed an abnormal flow void at the left jugular foramen and a dilated vessel extending from the left margin of the foramen magnum to the left lateral medulla (Fig. 1C–E). Cervical T2-weighted MRI showed an intramedullary high signal from the lower medulla to the upper cervical spinal cord at the C3 level (Fig. 1F). CT angiography showed abnormal blood flow at the left jugular foramen and dilation of both the anterior and posterior spinal veins (Fig. 1G andH).

Preoperative images.A:Axial head MR angiogram obtained 6 months before surgery, showing abnormal blood flow at the left jugular foramen (white arrow).B:Coronal cervical T2-weighted MR image obtained 6 months before surgery, showing a faint intramedullary high signal from the lower medulla to the upper cervical spinal cord.C:Axial head MR angiogram obtained immediately before surgery, showing abnormal blood flow at the left jugular foramen (whitearrow).D and E:Axial head MR angiogram (D) and coronal T2-weighted MR image (E) showing dilated vessels from the left edge of the foramen magnum to the lateral side of the left medulla (white arrowheads).F:Sagittal T2-weighted MR image showing an intramedullary high signal from the lower medulla to the upper cervical spinal cord.G and H:Axial (G) and sagittal (H) contrast-enhanced CT scans showing abnormal blood flow at the left jugular foramen (white arrow) and dilated anterior and posterior spinal veins.

Angiography via the left external carotid artery revealed an arteriovenous shunt with the ascending pharyngeal artery serving as a feeding artery. Selective microcatheter angiography of the ascending pharyngeal artery demonstrated that the jugular branch served as a feeding artery and that a fistulous point was located at the tip of the intrajugular process within the jugular foramen. The draining vein coursed caudally along the medial aspect of the left foramen magnum, forming a BV at the foramen magnum level, and then extended to the left lateral surface of the caudal medulla, ultimately draining into the left transverse medullary vein (Fig. 2). From this point, the venous outflow pathway bifurcated: one branch coursed caudally into the anterior spinal vein and the other directed cranially into the median anterior medullary vein. The cranial branch subsequently bifurcated again, with one venous stream draining into the posterior spinal vein via the right transverse medullary vein and the lateral medullary vein, and the other venous stream coursing through the median anterior medullary vein, the left vein of the pontomedullary sulcus, and the left lateral medullary vein, ultimately draining caudally into the left sigmoid sinus via the BV at the jugular foramen level. Based on the angiographic findings, a diagnosis of a left JF-DAVF, classified as Borden type III and Cognard type V, was made. The patient developed myelopathy due to elevated venous pressure secondary to shunted flow into the anterior and posterior spinal veins. Although endovascular embolization was initially considered, surgical interruption of the draining veins via craniotomy was ultimately planned due to the risk of lower cranial nerve palsy associated with endovascular embolization. The patient had adequate physiological reserve to undergo surgery, and surgical access to the draining veins and fistulous point was feasible. Although the fistulous point was at the jugular foramen, the BV was at the foramen magnum level. Thus, the disconnection site could be either at the jugular foramen or on the medial side of the left foramen magnum. A left transcondylar fossa approach was used to intraoperatively confirm drainage into the posterior spinal vein.

Preoperative images of the left ascending pharyngeal artery.A–C:Anterior (A), lateral (B), and oblique (C) digital subtraction angiograms.D–F:Posterior superior view of a 3D cone beam CT scan using a threefold diluted contrast medium (D) and axial (E) and oblique (F) sections of maximum intensity projection.Blackandwhite arrowsindicate the fistulous point at the jugular foramen,black arrowheadsindicate the draining veins on the left medial side of the dura at the foramen magnum, andwhite arrowheadsindicate the BV at the foramen magnum level.

The patient was placed prone with the head flexed and turned leftward. A hockey stick–shaped skin incision was made, extending from the spinous process of C3, passing through the external occipital protuberance, and continuing toward the left mastoid process. A midline suboccipital craniotomy, C1 laminectomy, and drilling of the left condylar fossa were performed.

Upon opening the dura mater, a dilated reddish posterior spinal vein was observed, coursing along the dorsal surface of the spinal cord, and a BV was identified on the left lateral surface of the caudal medulla at the foramen magnum level (Fig. 3A). Tracing this BV cranially toward the jugular foramen revealed a draining vein extending from the fistulous point at the jugular foramen along the dural surface (Fig. 3B). Indocyanine green angiography showed the draining vein running along the dural surface from the fistulous point at the jugular foramen to the BV at the foramen magnum level (Fig. 3C). The BV at the jugular foramen level, which drained into the left sigmoid sinus, was coagulated and transected to expose the fistulous point at the jugular foramen (Fig. 3D). The draining vein running from the fistulous point at the jugular foramen along the dural surface and the BV at the foramen magnum level were coagulated, followed by transection of the BV at the foramen magnum level (Fig. 3E). After transection, the distal vein changed from arterialized red to typical venous blue (Fig. 3F). Indocyanine green angiography after transection confirmed disappearance of shunt flow during the arterial phase and preservation of flow into the posterior spinal vein during the venous phase. The surgical wound was closed in a standard fashion, and the procedure was concluded.

Intraoperative findings.A:Observation within the dura revealing a BV connected to the left lateral side of the caudal medulla at the foramen magnum level.B:The fistulous point at the jugular foramen is visualized.C:Indocyanine green angiogram showing the draining vein running along the dural surface from the fistulous point at the jugular foramen to the BV at the foramen magnum level.D:The BV draining into the left sigmoid sinus at the jugular foramen level is transected to expose the fistulous point at the jugular foramen.E:The draining vein running from the fistulous point at the jugular foramen along the dural surface and the BV at the foramen magnum level were coagulated and transected.F:The distal portion of the transected BV at the foramen magnum level, showing a color change from arterial red to venous blue.Blackandwhite arrowsindicate the fistulous point at the jugular foramen,black arrowheadsindicate the draining veins on the left medial side of the dura at the foramen magnum, andwhite arrowheadsindicate the BV at the foramen magnum level.

Postoperatively, the patient’s neurological symptoms improved over time. Cervical T2-weighted MRI performed 6 days after surgery showed a reduction in the intramedullary high signal from the lower medulla to the upper cervical spinal cord compared with preoperative images (Fig. 4A). MR angiography 12 days after surgery showed that abnormal blood flow at the jugular foramen had disappeared (Fig. 4B). Digital subtraction angiography 13 days after surgery confirmed the disappearance of the shunt flow from the ascending pharyngeal artery (Fig. 4C andD). Cervical T2-weighted MRI 1 month and 6 months after surgery showed a further reduction in the intramedullary high signal from the lower medulla to the upper cervical spinal cord. Mild sensory disturbance in the lower limbs and urinary retention persisted 6 months postoperatively.

Postoperative images.A:Sagittal cervical T2-weighted MR image obtained 6 days after surgery, showing a reduction in the intramedullary high signal from the lower medulla to the upper cervical spinal cord compared with the preoperative images.B:Axial head MR angiogram obtained 12 days after surgery, showing disappearance of abnormal blood flow at the jugular foramen (white arrow).C and D:Lateral views angiograms of the left external carotid artery (C) and the left ascending pharyngeal artery (D) obtained 13 days after surgery, showing disappearance of the shunt flow.E and F:Sagittal cervical T2-weighted MR images obtained 1 month (E) and 6 months (F) after surgery, showing a further reduction in the intramedullary high signal from the lower medulla to the upper cervical spinal cord.

The necessary informed consent was obtained in this study.

The majority of JF-DAVFs drain directly into the internal jugular vein, and drainage into the veins surrounding the brainstem, as in this case, is rare,2with only 6 such cases reported (Table 1).5–8Mitsuhashi et al. conducted a comparison between petrosal vein–draining DAVFs and medulla BV-draining DAVFs, which were previously described as DAVFs at the craniocervical junction, foramen magnum, or spinomedullary junction.9They reported that medulla BV-draining DAVFs often present with progressive neurological symptoms due to venous hypertension or hemorrhage caused by cortical venous reflux and that direct surgery was effective for BV-draining DAVFs. In JF-DAVFs, while the internal jugular vein drainage type primarily presents with symptoms such as tinnitus and ocular symptoms associated with temporal lobe hemorrhage,1the BV drainage type is associated with symptoms related to hemorrhage and edematous changes in the cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord, indicating a significant difference in the pathophysiology between the two types. Ozaki et al. have defined classifications of BVs surrounding the brainstem on the basis of Hiramatsu’s typology of BVs.3,8They have identified the following types of DAVFs on the basis of the location of the involved BV and the fistulous point: jugular vein-BV DAVFs (those in proximity to the jugular fossa), anterior condylar vein-BV DAVFs (those in proximity to the anterior condylar canal), marginal sinus-BV DAVFs (those on the lateral surface of the foramen magnum), and suboccipital cavernous sinus-BV DAVFs (those in proximity to dural penetration of the vertebral artery). This research assumes proximity between the involved BV and the fistulous point. In this case, the fistulous point was connected via a vein running caudally along the dural surface to a BV at the foramen magnum level. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a JF-DAVF with an intervening vein between the fistulous point and a BV at a different anatomical level.

AMV = anterior medullary vein; APA = ascending pharyngeal artery; APMV = anterior pontomesencephalic vein; ASV = anterior spinal vein; hgb = hypoglossal branch; jb = jugular branch; LMV = lateral medullary vein; NA = not available; NBCA =N-butyl cyanoacrylate; OA = occipital artery; PMA = posterior meningeal artery; PMV = posterior medullary vein; PSV = posterior spinal vein; smb = stylomastoid branch; TAE = transarterial embolization; VA = vertebral artery.

Treatment for DAVFs includes endovascular therapy and direct surgery. Complete obliteration of the arteriovenous shunt is critical to alleviate venous hypertension.10Incomplete occlusion poses a risk of hemorrhage, so it is important to choose a treatment method that ensures complete closure. As shown inTable 1, all previously reported cases initially underwent endovascular therapy, and one reported by Peto et al. was treated via a far-lateral approach during recurrence.7This is the first report of a case of a JF-DAVF that was successfully treated primarily with surgical occlusion of the draining veins. The jugular branch, which is likely the feeding artery in all cases of a JF-DAVF, generally does not exhibit strong flexion, making microcatheter guidance feasible;8however, the degree of flexion can complicate access, potentially leading to incomplete occlusion. Additionally, the neuromeningeal trunk of the ascending pharyngeal artery, which supplies blood to the 9th, 10th, and 11th cranial nerves,11poses a risk of lower cranial nerve deficits when targeted in endovascular therapy. Byun et al. have reported postoperative lower cranial nerve deficits in such cases.5In this case, the fistulous point and draining veins at the foramen magnum level, including the posterior spinal vein, were identified through a transcondylar fossa approach via a suboccipital craniotomy. In cases such as this, where the patient has adequate physiological reserve to undergo surgery and surgical access to the draining veins and fistulous point is feasible, direct surgery may be advantageous to avoid lower cranial nerve injury and achieve curative outcomes.

Spinal vascular lesions, such as spinal DAVFs and spinal arteriovenous malformations, pose a therapeutic challenge due to their complex angioarchitecture and the risk of progressive myelopathy.12The primary treatment goal is to eliminate the abnormal arteriovenous shunt while preserving normal spinal cord perfusion. Treatment options include endovascular embolization and microsurgical disconnection, and the appropriate option is selected based on the lesion’s type, location, and vascular anatomy. The timing is crucial to perform venous removal (or disconnection) safely. Once the arterial feeders are controlled or disconnected, the venous component can usually be safely addressed. Because premature venous occlusion before securing the feeding arteries can result in venous hypertension and spinal cord infarction, the timing of venous disconnection must be individualized and guided by detailed angiographic analysis and intraoperative findings. A recent study has emphasized the importance of preoperative imaging to identify the exact drainage pattern and to plan the sequence of vascular disconnection.13A careful assessment of the venous drainage pattern, along with the use of intraoperative angiography when available, can help determine the optimal timing for venous removal. A staged approach that prioritizes arterial disconnection before venous intervention remains the cornerstone of safe and effective treatment.

For JF-DAVFs with a BV at the foramen magnum level, a direct surgical approach via the transcondylar fossa, which allows clear visualization of the fistulous point and BV, represents a safe and effective option for achieving reliable shunt occlusion.

We thank Ms. Miho Kobayashi for the English-language editing.

The authors report no conflict of interest concerning the materials or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this paper.