Over a century has passed since the discovery that the female anopheline mosquito is a vector of malaria, prompting extensive efforts to combat the disease. Vector control remains the primary malaria prevention strategy, accounting for a remarkable 65% reduction in malaria cases between 2000 and 2015. A thorough understanding of the fundamental biology of malaria vectors is essential for national malaria control programmes, governments, and local communities to implement sustainable and effective vector control measures. This article explores the key aspects of mosquito biology, such as adult and juvenile life stages, the intrinsic incubation period, and blood-seeking behaviour, within the context of the mosquito life cycle. By emphasizing the importance of this knowledge, we illustrate how it can inform community-level control initiatives and guide national programmes in designing more effective interventions for vector-borne disease management. Furthermore, the article underscores how researchers can harness these biological insights to develop and deploy innovative tools that have the potential to revolutionize malaria control efforts.

Illustration of how the mosquito lifecycle could be exploited to control mosquito populations by targeting mosquito developmental stages to support effective malaria control initiatives.

On 20 August 1897, one of the renowned scientists, Sir Ronald Ross, while working on dissected guts ofAnophelesmosquitoes, discovered that the femaleAnophelesmosquito was responsible for the transmission of malaria, for which he received a Nobel prize in 1902 (CDC2015). Since that discovery, the world commemorates 20th August as the World Mosquito Day with an aim of raising awareness about mosquitoes and the efforts being put in place to help curb and fight their impact on human health.

Despite control efforts in place, the mosquito remains the world’s deadliest animal (CDC2019). There are different kinds of mosquitoes, causing various diseases including the deadly malaria. Malaria is transmitted to humans when an infected femaleAnophelesmosquito bites a healthy individual (WHO2023). In 2021, there were approximately 247 million malaria cases and 593,000 deaths, with over 90% of these cases and deaths coming from Africa (WHO2024).

The adage, “prevention is better than cure”, aptly applies to malaria control strategies. Vector control, which is a preventive measure aimed at managing or eradicating disease-spreading insects, is regarded as the primary method of preventing malaria and other mosquito-transmitted diseases. According to a study by Bhatt et al. (2015), vector control has contributed significantly to malaria prevention, averting over 65% of all malaria cases between 2000 and 2015 (Bhatt et al.2015). Additionally, although traditional vector control strategies (insecticide-treated bed nets and indoor residual spraying) have been effective, they do not fully account for the diversity in mosquito ecology and behaviour (Ferguson et al.2010a; Debrah et al.2021; Msugupakulya et al.2023). Changes in ecological characteristics over time may alter habitat suitability of other vectors, increasing their prevalence while reducing the suitability of other malaria vectors (Msugupakulya et al.2023).

When planning and implementing vector control strategies for sustained malaria control, a good understanding of the biology, ecology, and behaviour of theAnophelesmosquitoes is critical (Godfray2013). This article outlines fundamental facts and behavioural characteristics about the vectors of malaria, often referred to as the “deadliest animals in the world”. We also aim to critically assess how gaps in our understanding of mosquito ecological diversity and how behavioural diversity may hinder malaria control efforts.

By highlighting the role of community health education, this article underscores how equipping local communities (in malaria endemic regions) with basic knowledge about the malaria vector biology and ecology can empower them to adopt cost-effective prevention measures. It further explores how leveraging this knowledge can help malaria control programmes, governments, and researchers to enhance their strategies to combat these lethal and debilitating creatures. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to consolidate evidence on mosquito characteristics and facts and demonstrate their significance in enhancing malaria control efforts, with a particular focus on integrating health education and innovations. The article highlights how basic knowledge of the mosquito biology can enable local communities, malaria control programmes, and governments in Africa to implement more cost-effective and sustainable malaria prevention approaches.

The lifecycle of mosquitoes begins in water when an adult female lays fertilized eggs following a successful mating (Graphical abstract). Eggs typically hatch within 48 h, releasing larvae that are very active and feed voraciously on microorganisms and organic matter. The larvae develop through four stages (first instar, second instar, third instar, and fourth instar larva stages) before molting to pupae (which is less active and non-feeding) after several days before emerging as adult mosquitoes (Abd2020; Abed and Kareem2022). Juvenile-stage development in mosquitoes typically spans 1 to 2 weeks from egg to adult, depending on environmental factors such as food availability (Abed and Kareem2022).

While the aquatic environment provides the life necessities for the juvenile stages to complete development (Hawkes and Richard2021), their confinement to one specific location makes them particularly vulnerable to targeted interventions (Tusting et al.2013). This is because human interventions targeting their habitats can significantly disrupt their development, rendering the juvenile stages helpless (Tusting et al.2013). Anthropogenic activities such as larval source management (LSM), that can disturb or manage these aquatic habitats, can effectively disrupt the mosquito life cycle and reduce mosquito populations that survive to adulthood (WHO2013).

Larval source management (LSM) is one historical approach that has been used for decades to curb the development of juvenile stages (WHO2013). LSM, which may include habitat modification and larviciding, was one of the key strategies used by countries that succeeded in eliminating malaria during the global malaria eradication campaigns in the mid-twentieth century (Killeen et al.2013). While LSM is often perceived as resource-intensive, it can be highly effective when strategically implemented. Targeted LSM, focusing on aquatic habitats that are manageable such as stagnant and small water bodies, may be a cost-effective way of controlling juvenile water stages of mosquitoes (Fillinger et al.2008; Fillinger and Lindsay2011; Worrall and Fillinger2011). On the other hand, the application of larvicides in large or fast-flowing water bodies is considered impractical due to resource constraints or the likelihood that larvicides could be washed away (Fillinger and Lindsay2011). Thus, to enhance cost-effectiveness and precision, integration of innovative tools should be employed to help identification of high-risk larval habitats and support data-driven LSM implementation. This could ensure control efforts are focused on contexts where they are likely to yield impact. This may increase LSM efficacy and optimization as a complementary intervention, mainly in contexts where adult-focused control strategies are inadequate to interrupt malaria transmission.

Cutting-edge technologies such as the use of geospatial techniques and use of drone technology to map mosquito habitats could revolutionize LSM as a mosquito control tool and reduce operational costs involved with mosquito habitat identification which may require more people. Previously, studies have highlighted the role of cutting-edge technologies such as drones, machine learning, and geospatial modelling in advancing malaria control efforts (Hardy et al.2017; Hardy2024). These tools facilitate high-resolution mapping of mosquito habitats and provide valuable insights on the role of waterbodies on the prevalence of vector-borne diseases (Hardy et al.2017; DJI2020; Joshi and Miller2021; Stanton et al.2021; Hardy2024). By streamlining juvenile mosquito habitat identification, such technologies could potentially reduce the reliance on large-field teams during larval sampling or LSM interventions (DJI2020). Furthermore, drones can accelerate larvicide applications in expansive breeding sites where manual application would be challenging (DJI2020).

Despite these technological advancements, research on understanding mosquito biology remains mostly focused on adult stages, mainly indoor-biting vectors (Mukisa et al.2024). Thus, majority of field studies on malaria vectors have focused on adult mosquito activities, which align with the operational hours of insecticide-treated nets (ITNs). This has been attributed to the creation of a significant gap in understanding vector behaviours during daytime periods, including juvenile mosquitoes, early evening and morning mosquito behaviours (Mukisa et al.2024). Thus, knowledge about mosquito juveniles and the role of zoophilic and zoophagic vectors remains limited, especially within local communities. Therefore, the empowerment of communities with a holistic understanding of mosquito biology and life cycle is necessary for sustainable control. It should, therefore, be important if the same level of understanding that communities have around ITNs for indoor mosquito control should be extended to include the egg, larval, and pupal stages, as well as outdoor residual vectors (Kamndaya et al.2021). Increased awareness campaigns on juvenile-stage control and outdoor mosquito control would enable communities to meaningfully contribute to interventions such as LSM, elimination of backyard breeding sites, and reducing mosquito exposure behaviours.

Mosquitoes, like many insects, have a short lifespan. While some mosquitoes may live up to 2 months, most mosquitoes will live for less than 1 month (Abd2020; Nkahe et al.2020; Cui et al.2021). This short lifespan drives mosquitoes to promptly start host-seeking behaviour upon reaching a reproduction maturity (Graphical abstract) to find a potential blood meal that ensures successful reproduction (Abd2020). While they typically mate only once throughout their lifetime, female mosquitoes can lay multiple egg batches, with each batch needing a separate blood meal to aid development (Abd2020). This necessitates the need for repeated blood meals (Abd2020), enhancing their vector competence, as each feeding episode increases the chance of parasite transmission. Despite their short lifespan, mosquitoes’ swift growth and repeated blood-feeding make them remarkably efficient vectors as they rapidly initiate and complete the reproductive cycle and maximize their vectorial capacity within a limited timeframe. This biological drive, consequently, presents a prevention challenge, as mosquitoes act quickly to fulfill their life cycle (National Academic Press1991; Mitchell and Catteruccia2017), making targeted and timely interventions critical in the control of malaria.

Mosquitoes' swiftness could swiftness could be exploited strategically. The use of integrated vector control tools designed to disrupt mosquito-host contact can limit their access to blood meals (Musoke et al.2018). Effective implementation of existing interventions, such as ITNs, topical repellents, and insecticide-treated clothing (Graphical abstract) can potentially reduce the frequency of mosquito bites (WHO2019). Thus, these measures could lower the risks of malaria transmission. When widely adopted and accessible at the local community level, such interventions could offer both individual and community-wide protection, with the potential to substantially reduce malaria incidence over time (WHO2015; Musoke et al.2018). Thus, a multifaceted malaria control approach that involves combining various interventions and active community involvement may increase possibilities of achieving significant reductions of malaria transmission and mosquito density.

Male mosquitoes, including maleAnopheles, do not bite as they rely exclusively on sugar and water (Foster1995). Female mosquitoes, on the other hand, need blood in addition to sugar, as blood contains important proteins that help the maturation of their eggs (Abd2020; Weng and Shiao2020). Thus, without blood, mosquitoes will not reproduce (Foster1995). This biting behaviour presents us with opportunities for mosquito control. For example, ITN use and other mosquito-bite-protective strategies like body repellents exploit this behaviour by minimizing the number of mosquitoes that have access to blood, eventually reducing mosquito density as their reproduction is reduced. The mosquito’s need for blood has been exploited for decades using ITNs and indoor residual spraying (IRS) which are currently the primary mosquito control tools. The achievements from these interventions cannot be ignored from the successes that have been accomplished over the years (Bhatt et al.2015).

Despite their success, the effectiveness of ITNs and IRS to drive malaria transmission towards zero is limited by the diverse and complex behaviours such as outdoor biting and change in biting patterns that allow mosquitoes to evade contact with these lethal interventions (Killeen et al.2013; Killeen2014a). To achieve malaria eradication, it requires that available intervention options should be able to fully interrupt the transmission of pathogens (Feachem and Sabot2008). One way to do this is the use of complementary tools targeting both indoor and outdoor malaria vectors through integrated vector management (IVM) (Govella and Ferguson2012; Musoke et al.2018; Sherrard-smith et al.2019). Although primary vector control machinery such as ITNs and IRS can suppress transmission and alleviate disease burden (Sharp et al.2007; Killeen et al.2007), ITNs and IRS alone are inadequate to contribute to malaria elimination in endemic settings such as in Africa where the entomological inoculation rate (EIR) can reach up to one thousand infectious bites per person per year (Smith et al.2005,2007). Modelling has predicted that even a 100% coverage of ITNs in an entire population may not be able to take EIR below the elimination threshold within a local community (Samir et al.2015; Schmit et al.2024). This sustains malaria transmission.

Malaria transmission that persists despite the achievement of universal coverage of ITNs and IRS is known asresidual transmission (Hii et al.2021). Residual transmission is recognized as a barrier to achieve control and elimination of malaria (WHO2023). This is also one of the biggest malaria control challenges faced by malaria control stakeholders and national malaria control programmes (NMCPs) in Africa, where a significant proportion of malaria transmission is due to residual transmission (Killeen et al.2017a). In the recent years, we have seen an estimated 10% increase in mosquitoes that are biting outdoors, avoiding contact with the routine malaria control tools that are biassed towards indoor mosquitoes (Sherrard-smith et al.2019). This has consequently increased yearly malaria cases by approximately 10.6 million (Sherrard-smith et al.2019). More innovations and studies exploiting mosquito behaviours, including outdoor feeding behaviour, are required if we are to realize malaria elimination.

There is growing evidence that outdoor and residual transmission of malaria continues to undermine the effectiveness of core malaria interventions. Yet, research and the implementation of outdoor malaria control strategies remain limited in many African settings. As a result, routine tools often remain the main, and sometimes over-relied-upon tool for malaria prevention, even in contexts where their impact is reduced due to changing mosquito ecology and behaviour (Sougoufara et al.2014).

Malaria control initiatives need to be tailored to specific mosquito behaviours and ecological contexts for effective and sustainable control (Godfray2013; Nzioki et al.2023). Implementation of strategies without a thorough and up-to-date understanding of such factors can result in suboptimal outcomes (Godfray2013). In some settings, interventions have been deployed without proper understanding of the local vector species, breeding habitats, ecology, biting patterns, and/or resting habits (Mapua et al.2021a; Nzioki et al.2023). This blanket approach does not only limit the effectiveness of control tools but also delays the implementation of more appropriate, context-specific strategies, highlighting the need for locally focused entomological surveillance to provide updated data on mosquito ecology and behaviours (Mapua et al.2021a; Nzioki et al.2023). Thus, national malaria programmes can better implement targeted vector control interventions tailored to the local contexts to maximize impact and closing gaps left by conventional methods.

To address this, there is an urgent need for greater engagement with national policy makers, implementation partners, and NMCPs on the importance of integrating strategies that complement routine tools. While routine tools have been instrumental in reducing the burden of malaria, continued reliance on such tools alone is no longer sufficient (Ferguson et al.2010b; Killeen2014a). It is critical that residual transmission is not only acknowledged but proactively addressed through integrating complementary novel strategies into national malaria control toolkits (WHO2020). These interventions should be tailored to local ecological and behavioural context (WHO2020). By increasing the scope of control strategies and embracing innovative solutions to tackle residual transmission, NMCPs can strengthen their efforts, moving closer towards the goal of eliminating malaria.

Variability in the attractiveness of local plant sugars toAnophelesmosquitoes (Paré et al.2024) underscores the importance of understanding local mosquito feeding behaviours to optimize control tools. Further studies are thus crucial to better understand these dynamics across diverse settings in Africa. Such insights could explain the variations observed in the performance of ATSBs across different countries.

Additionally, despite the continued reliance on ITNs as a frontline tool for preventing malaria, universal ITN distribution has been attributed to increased insecticide resistance due to over-reliance on pyrethroid insecticides (Oxborough et al.2024). Universal coverage with ITNs, where majority of households have ITNs access, may overlook critical factors such as insecticide resistance profiles and outdoor biting which might undermine ITNs’ long-term effectiveness (Silalahi et al.2022; Oxborough et al.2024). As discussed earlier, distribution of ITNs is often done with limited consideration of the local vector ecology or insecticide resistance challenges (WHO2019; Oxborough et al.2024). This approach may undermine the long-term sustainability of vector control programmes. Thus, there is a pressing need to move beyond coverage statistics and invest in innovations that are tailored to enhance the effectiveness of existing tools to the local contexts (Oxborough et al.2024).

For example, while ITNs remain essential, their effectiveness can be improved. Innovations to improve ITNs could be explored to minimize the development of insecticide resistance in primary vectors. One potential way could be to explore the use of insecticides with different modes of action (WHO2012a; Silalahi et al.2022). To illustrate, a pyrethroid could be mixed with a carbamate or an organophosphate or used through rotations as part of insecticide resistance management to reduce cross resistance. However, it is important to make sure that successive mosquito generations are not exposed to insecticides with the same mode of action during rotations (IRAC2025).

Importantly, such innovations should not be implemented in isolation. As discussed already, their success depends on up-to-date vector surveillance that can inform where and when specific insecticide combinations or strategies are appropriate. This could be based on local resistance profiles and mosquito behaviour (Burkot et al.2019; Hancock et al.2024). By coupling resistance management to routine vector surveillance and localized ecological knowledge, malaria programmes can shift from reactive to proactive control, an approach currently lacking in most malaria-endemic regions (Dusfour et al.2019).

Another vector control method that can exploit the feeding behaviour of mosquitoes is the use of endectocides (Graphical abstract) which are antiparasitic drugs that are active against parasites such as the malaria parasite,Plasmodiumsp. (Foy et al.2011). When given to humans or livestock as part of mass drug administration for the control of nematodes, endectocides have additional benefits, rendering human or animal blood meals toxic for the mosquito vector (Foy et al.2011). In recent years, there has been an increase in studies interested in exploring the potential of using endectocides such as ivermectin for malaria control in livestock such as cattle (Chaccour and Killeen2016; Njoroge et al.2017; Ruiz-Castillo et al.2022). Administering ivermectin to animals is a potential One Health approach as it may help improve the health of domestic animals while indirectly improving human health by controlling parasites such asPlasmodium falciparum(Ruiz-Castillo et al.2022). Endectocides can kill the mosquito, or negatively affect mosquito fitness, fertility, and can also inhibit development of theP. falciparumin the mosquito (Slater et al.2020).

While IRS has effectively targeted indoor resting behaviour of mosquitoes, outdoor resting behaviour remains understudied, presenting a significant gap in current vector control tools. This is becoming more challenging with the increasing evidence that many malaria vectors are becoming adapted to biting and resting outdoors, reducing the effectiveness of ITNs and IRS (Russell et al.2011; Killeen2014b; Killeen et al.2017b).

One of the fascinating characteristics of the mosquitoes is the ability to take up blood volumes up to three times their body weight during a single feeding session. This is facilitated by the expansion of their stomachs which expand when feeding on blood (Gonzales et al.2018). Putting this into perspective, it would be equivalent to a 50 kg human being consuming food weighing 150 kg in a single sitting. Thus, if the previous blood-feeding attempts were not successful, this substantial blood requirement often necessitates multiple blood-seeking attempts. This increases the likelihood of mosquitoes biting several individuals. Recent genotyping and microscopy studies on blood meal analysis of malaria mosquitoes in Malawi and Malaysia, respectively, have shown that mosquitoes can take several blood meals if previous attempts were not successful (Jeyaprakasam et al.2022; Mbewe et al.2023). Therefore, the more homes are protected by ITNs and IRS, the higher the chances that mosquitoes visiting such homes, seeking blood meals, are likely to be exposed to and thus killed by chemicals in ITNs and IRS. Although IRS is expensive to use in highly malaria-endemic settings such as the typical African communities, ITNs are relatively cheap and easily accessible (WHO2022a). In most African countries, ITNs are distributed to local communities approximately every 3 years as part of routine malaria control campaigns (Koenker et al.2023).

As ITNs are the primary malaria control tools, the global malaria fight has been principally geared towards using them (Onyinyechi et al.2023). ITN use has proven as the most cost-effective malaria prevention method (Nyarango et al.2006; WHO2014) making it the most supported malaria vector control intervention in malaria-endemic countries (WHO2012b,2014). As already discussed, ITN use should still be supported but should not only be the main vector control tool in contexts where the vectors are primarily endophagic. It should be complemented with other outdoor-based interventions (Govella et al.2010; Govella and Ferguson2012; Kaindoa et al.2021).

However, the use of ITNs has generally plateaued since 2016 in Africa (Bertozzi-Villa et al.2021). Some of the factors contributing to low ITN usage could vary from socio-economic reasons to behavioural characteristics that make people avoid ITNs or use them for other purposes other than mosquito control. Thus, lack of ITN access, warm temperatures (associated with most malaria-endemic settings), poor perception of ITNs (i.e., claiming that ITNs reduce fertility rates of couples), and lack of basic malaria control knowledge are some of the factors that have been reported previously as barriers to ITN use in some parts of Africa (Slater et al.2020; Nkahe et al.2020; Cui et al.2021). Another study has previously reported behavioural factors involving misuse of ITNs as people use ITNs as substitutes for curtains and fishing nets or sell them after receiving from distribution campaigns (Killeen et al.2013).

Knowledge of the age structure of mosquito populations is important for control of malaria. Only old mosquitoes have the capability to transmit diseases (Johnson et al.2020). This is because a mosquito is not born with parasites.They get parasites once they bite an infected individual. As already highlighted above, mosquitoes take their first blood meal for the development of eggs (Abd2020), which can happen mostly during their 4th or 5th day after emergence from water. Once they get infected with the parasites, the parasites cannot be directly transmitted to another person as they will need to undergo several development stages until they reach the infective stages, a process that can take up to 10 days (Johnson et al.2020). This means a young mosquito is less likely to transmit the malaria parasites. Therefore, if proper prevention strategies that target young mosquitoes are put in place, few mosquitoes would manage to grow old enough to transmit; thus, control of malaria can be achieved. Implementation of the novel ATSBs which are more likely to kill sugar-seeking young mosquitoes (Graphical abstract) could potentially help minimize mosquito density by reducing the population of mosquitoes that grow old enough to transmit diseases (Müller et al.2010c). If infected malaria mosquitoes are killed before the parasites inside them reach the sporozoite stage, then malaria transmission would be reduced, contributing to malaria control.

In line with the theme for 2025 World Malaria Day, “Malaria Ends With Us: Reinvest, Reimagine, Reignite”, there is an urgent need for renewed commitment and innovations focused on novel and context-specific control tools. This global call emphasizes the importance of revitalizing efforts at all levels, beginning from international policy making, national policy making to the grassroot level. Thus, we need to look back over the years and see where we are coming from and where we are going in as far as control of malaria is concerned. The battle against malaria mosquitoes requires joint hands by researchers, funders, governments, communities, and all stakeholders to put more resources, innovations, and energy in the fight against mosquitoes.

In line with the them of the 2023 World Malaria Day, “Time to Deliver Zero Malaria: Invest, Innovate, Implement,” there is a great need for robust investments in new tools that will facilitate the malaria elimination goal. Innovative approaches such as the use of the ATSBs (Attractive Targeted Sugar Bait Phase III Trial Group2022) could revolutionize malaria control. Preliminary results on ATSBs have highlighted a great potential both in the laboratory and field, with some studies reporting over 80% mosquito reduction and over 50% reduction in malaria incidence (Müller et al.2010b; Stewart et al.2013). It is expected that the ATSB might achieve the WHO-prequalification listing (WHO2022a), as one of the complementary malaria control tools to target residual mosquitoes not targeted by routine tools.

Additionally, applying para-transgenesis techniques using novel methods like CRISPR/Cas9 (Sander and Joung2014) could be exploited to change the mosquito microbiome as a potential strategy for vector control. This could be achieved by knocking out microbial genetic material responsible for vectorial capacity in vectors. Transfecting malaria mosquitoes with transgenic bacteria such asWolbachiacould also potentially be explored for malaria control. Learning from the success ofWolbachiain dengue control (Iturbe-Ormaetxe et al.2011), there is a great need for more experiments to determine if this could have an application in malaria mosquitoes as well although previous trials inAnopheleswere unsuccessful due to limitations ofWolbachia’s ability to induce cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI) inAnopheles(Gomes et al.2017). This challenges the release ofWolbachia-infectedAnophelesmosquitoes, requiring further research to develop genetically modifiedWolbachiathat can naturally induce CI inAnophelesmosquitoes (Gomes et al.2017).

With the recent invasion ofAnopheles stephensiin Africa (WHO2022b), malaria elimination goals seem threatened. The threat is partly due to their adaptation to breeding in urban environments, including breeding in unused tyres (Graphical abstract). Due to an increase in unplanned cities across Africa, the threat posed by this species to Africa is palpable (WHO2022b; Mosquito matters2022; Ochomo et al.2023). As such, there is a need for African governments, researchers, and everyone including those in countries that have not yet reported the presence of this species to sound the alarm and put up measures to contain it.

This article recommends integrated vector management (IVM) approaches as one control strategy might not be effective. IVM approaches involve making rational decisions that optimize resource use in vector control implementation (WHO2012c). It aims at contributing to achievement of the global malaria control targets by using local evidence and easily available resources, making vector control more efficient, cost-effective, and sustainable (Beier et al.2008; WHO2012c). Integrated control measures for malaria vectors could include approaches that target all life stages of the mosquitoes (Graphical abstract). They could involve LSM to target mosquitoes from their juvenile stages (to minimize the population that make it to adult stages), coupled with approaches such as the ATSBs that target young and newly emerged sugar seeking mosquitoes and strategies targeting old blood-seeking mosquitoes both indoors and outdoors such as ITNs, IRS, and mosquito repellents (Shiff2002; Beier et al.2008; WHO2012c). Together, these could potentially reduce the density of mosquitoes that survive to complete the extrinsic incubation period, minimizing both mosquito density and parasite transmission (Müller et al.2010c; Beier et al.2012).

Insecticide resistance is a big threat to the success of ITNs and IRS, both of which depend on a limited set of insecticide classes (WHO2022c). It arises following repeated exposure of vectors to insecticides, allowing individual vectors with resistance traits to endure and survive and consequently reproduce. Over time, the resistant populations become dominant, reducing the impact of control interventions.

There are multiple mechanisms through which resistance can develop. These may include target-site mutations, such as behavioural changes (limiting contact with treated surfaces), knock down mutations (kdrmutations), and metabolic resistance (WHO2022c). These compromise the efficacy of insecticides and lead to vector species composition shifts or changes in vector behaviour, which further complicates vector control efforts.

Management of insecticide resistance is critical but difficult. This requires coordinated approaches such as rotation of insecticides with different modes of action in IRS, deployment of combination products (such as dual-treated ITNs), and integration of other tools such as LSM and house improvement (WHO2017a). Nevertheless, the success of such approaches depends on robust national capacity for routine monitoring of resistance, access to alternative combination products, and the proper use of surveillance data for decision making guidance (WHO2017a,2022c).

Despite guidance from the world health organization (WHO) and frameworks such as the global plan for insecticide resistance management (GPIRM), many low-income countries (which are also malaria-endemic) have challenges in implementing resistance management due to limited entomological capacity, resources, and poor infrastructure (WHO2017a).

To sustain the efficacy of existing tools and ensure long-term impact, there is need that national programmes should prioritize insecticide resistance monitoring, build capacity for entomological surveillance and response, and invest in new insecticides and delivery methods (WHO2017a).

Entomological surveillance may provide an up-to-date information of key entomological indicators. The indicators include such as mosquito abundance (i.e., number of mosquitoes in a population), vector species composition (i.e.,A. funestus,A. arabiensis,A. gambiaes.s.), human biting rate (HBR) (how often mosquitoes feed on humans), sporozoite rate (the proportion of mosquitoes infected with malaria parasites), entomological inoculation rate (EIR) (HBR × sporozoite rate), and insecticide resistance profiles (which is crucial for choosing suitable vector control tools) (MEI2020; Kouassi et al.2023). Surveillance of adult mosquitoes is thus critical for guiding vector control strategies, by informing decision making on which control tools to deploy, when and where to deploy them (MEI2020; Kouassi et al.2023). Thus, surveillance data can help in determining whether ITNs or IRS are suitable and where these should be prioritized. Additionally, this knowledge can guide whether there is need for complementary strategies such as LSM or spatial repellents in response to increased outdoor-biting vectors, underscoring the role of mosquito surveillance in enabling targeted and context-specific malaria control (MEI2020; Kouassi et al.2023).

Despite this, surveillance of adult mosquitoes is often underutilized particularly in endemic countries due in part to funding gaps and limited entomological capacity (Coulibaly et al.2023). Nevertheless, it is critical to invest in robust entomological surveillance systems and integrate these into NMCPs if we are to ensure that interventions are timely and locally suitable and to enhance their impact and sustainability (MEI2020; Kouassi et al.2023). The World Health Organization Global Technical Strategy for Malaria (2021–2030) and the Global Vector Control Response (GVCR) 2017–2030 recommend surveillance systems incorporating entomological and epidemiological surveillance, advocating that surveillance should become a core intervention (WHO2017b,2021).

While indoor-based tools like IRS and ITNs remain fundamental for malaria control (Bhatt et al.2015), effective IVM strategies require complementary strategies tailored at targeting mosquitoes in different ecological settings and at multiple life stages (WHO2004,2011,2012c). Additional tools such as ultra-low volume adultcides spraying (ULV) and LSM using larvicides could play important roles in targeting mosquitoes outside the reach of routine interventions (Fillinger and Lindsay2011; Preftakes et al.2011; Tusting et al.2013).

Larviciding usingBacillus thuringiensis israelensis(Bti) has shown success by reducing adult mosquito emergence in several settings. Bti, a biological method, is cost-effective, species-specific, and environmentally safe, increasing its operational acceptance by communities (Mpofu et al.2016; Derua et al.2019; Brühl et al.2020). Additionally, larviciding agents such as temephos (Marina et al.2014) are also effective though their operational use is constrained in part by cost and frequency of application, particularly in low-income settings, due to limited donor support.

Despite inadequate donor support, larviciding remains a vital tool for IVM, particularly in urban and peri-urban areas where larval habitats are accessible and well-defined (Castro et al.2010). Furthermore, LSM is most effective when complimented with surveillance and community-based reporting of larval habitats (WHO2013).

Furthermore, novel outdoor interventions such as ultra-low volume (ULV), which involve spraying small quantities of insecticides, dispersing fine droplets that target adult mosquitoes in outdoor settings, in addition to ATSBs, ivermectin, and other proposed outdoor tools could complement routine tools like ITNs and IRS (Shiff2002; WHO2004; Beier et al.2008; Preftakes et al.2011; WHO2012c). While the efficacy of ULV against malaria vectors is debatable, its use in dengue and other arboviral diseases has been successful (Farajollahi et al.2012). However, deploying ULV during periods of peak mosquito activity and following the right formulation have shown efficacy in reducing outdoor malaria vector densities (Chaskopoulou et al.2011).

Community engagement is critical for sustainable malaria control. Empowering community members with basic knowledge of mosquito biology and ecology, and how these relate to disease transmission, is essential in enhancing community-driven prevention efforts (Godfray2013; Nganga et al.2019; Awasthi et al.2024). A good example is the human animator approach, where local volunteers were trained to identify malaria mosquitoes and larval habitats in Malawi (Malenga et al.2017; Kaunda-Khangamwa et al.2019; Tizifa et al.2022). Whereas high-tech tools such as remote sensing, machine learning, and drones could potentially optimize LSM (Hardy et al.2017; Stanton et al.2021; Hardy2024), simple and low-tech tools such as dippers and locally made scoops remain effective and should not be overlooked (WHO2013). These could remain critical components when embracing community-led vector surveillance and control. Such tools are affordable and easy to use and can empower local communities to identify and monitor larval habitats (WHO2013). This may not only promote early detection but also support timely and targeted interventions and strengthen grassroot participation in malaria control, fostering ownership of control initiatives (WHO2013).

This model can be expanded to include training community members on how to identify both primary and secondary malaria vectors and understanding mosquito behavioural shifts, such as increased zoophilic and zoophagic behaviours, which reduces the protective efficacy of ITNs.

A community equipped with this knowledge can make more informed decisions such as avoiding late-night exposures or outdoor sleeping and supporting the adoption of complementary outdoor vector control measures (Monroe et al.2015). Therefore, malaria-related health promotion and education interventions must go beyond encouragement of ITN use to encompassing broader topics like behaviour change, vector ecology, and environmental management (Monroe et al.2015; Abrar Hamza2017; Ingabire et al.2017). Thus, NMCPs and government health departments should prioritize culturally tailored health education strategies. This is critical not only to improve the correct usage of ITNs, but also to build long-term community resilience and ownership of malaria vector control efforts, which is crucial as we strive to eliminate malaria (Ingabire et al.2017).

One of the barriers for malaria elimination and control of vector-borne diseases in Africa is the limited number of trained local vector biologists (Killeen et al.2002; George and Bockarie2022). This creates a gap and limits the capacity of national programmes to conduct context-specific surveillance and control initiatives. Additionally, this limits the ability to understand vector-specific behaviours and tailoring of control strategies to meet local ecological needs, resulting in implementation of intervention without addressing the ecological and behavioural diversity of vectors (Killeen et al.2002; George and Bockarie2022).

Therefore, community engagement needs to extend beyond awareness and participation of local community members but should include local scientific empowerment (Killeen et al.2002). Investing in capacity building to train new vector biologists, particularly at postgraduate level, could bridge this gap. Thus, there is a need to facilitate training in research and involvement in capacity building on issues that link fundamental insect biology with human diseases in low-income countries. For example, PhD trainees could focus their research on the development and field testing of novel surveillance and monitoring tools targeting both indoor and outdoor vectors, and the application of innovative vector control technologies.

This may help to strengthen local expertise in Africa, equipped to generate context-specific scientific evidence, guide proper vector control strategies, and reduce reliance on approaches that are externally driven (Killeen et al.2002; George and Bockarie2022). In the long term, this skilled workforce of vector biologists would not only improve the vector control work force but also boost regional research capacity, innovation, and mentoring of future scientists. This could ensure sustainability and independence in vector-borne disease management, critical for vector-borne disease elimination. However, stable funding is also essential to retain expertise and support entomological infrastructure, ensuring continuity of vector control programmes and mosquito surveillance (WHO2017b). Unreliable financial support may lead to reduced impact of interventions even when there are well-trained vector biologists and innovative ideas. Capacity building should therefore go hand in hand with stable funding as this is essential for resilient vector control efforts (WHO2017b).

KZ: conception and writing the first draft of the manuscript, PKK: writing and editing; FB: writing and editing. All authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript and reviewed the final draft.