High-temperature
heat pumps are preferred for decarbonizing many
industrial processes, but are still being adopted slowly. Major barriers
to adoption are low efficiency, leading to high operational cost,
and the need for custom-made designs, increasing investment cost.
In this work, refrigerant mixtures are exploited to overcome these
barriers for high-temperature heat pump adoption. Mixtures have been
known to improve heat pump efficiency if their nonisothermal phase
change is matched to heat source and sink temperature changes. Beyond
that, we improve standardization by using mixture composition as an
additional degree of freedom to tailor a standard heat pump designed
for a specific refrigerant pair to various applications. By model-band
screening of 703 refrigerant pairs across 81 combinations of heat
source and sink temperature changes, we identify a maximum COP advantage
of 26% for a refrigerant mixture when the maximum heat source and
sink temperature changes of 40 K occur. Several mixtures are identified
yielding near-optimal efficiencies across all 81 heat source and sink
temperature changes. The best all-rounder mixture, diethyl ether/cyclopropane,
retains, on average, 97% efficiency of the individually optimal mixtures.
These findings support the development of more efficient and less
costly high-temperature heat pumps, a crucial step in the heat transition.

However,
HTHPs currently only supply a minor share of industrial
process heat. Industrial processes impose challenging requirements
on HTHPs, such as high supply temperatures and large temperature changes
in heat source and sink.,Current HTHPs only
yield moderate efficiencies for these challenging process conditions.
Moreover, industrial processes are diverse, and so are their requirements
for process heat. The high diversity in
industrial heat demand is currently accounted for by customizing HTHP
systems. The small-scale manufacturing
of HTHP systems and a lack of standardization increase investment
costs.

A promising approach to increasing
both HTHP efficiency and standardization
is the use of refrigerant mixtures. Refrigerant mixtures offer additional
degrees of freedom: Selecting the pure components determines a range
of thermo-physical properties that can be specifically optimized by
adjusting the mixture composition. Zeotropic mixtures, in particular,
have a unique feature as they change temperature during evaporation
and condensation, unlike pure refrigerants. This temperature glide
can be used to align the refrigerant’s temperature changes
with the heat source and sink (glide matching), thereby reducing exergy
losses in the heat exchangers and increasing heat pump efficiency.

The exploitation of the temperature glide
to increase heat pump
efficiency has been investigated in several studies. Primarily focusing
on residential heat pumps, these studies confirm the theory of glide
matching and demonstrate the efficiency benefits of zeotropic mixtures
with temperature glide.−However, the actual efficiency
advantages of mixtures over pure refrigerants only range within a
few percent.,The small efficiency gain from
zeotropic mixtures in residential heat pump applications may be attributed
to the typically minor temperature changes of residential sources
and sinks (5–10 K), reducing the relevance of glide matching.

The situation is different for industrial HTHPs: Industrial heat
sources and sinks often undergo significant temperature changes during
heat transfer (typically 5–60 K). Thus, glide matching seems particularly attractive for improving
heat pump efficiencies. The COP improvements
of high-glide refrigerant mixtures were analyzed for HTHPs in several
studies. Zühlsdorf et al. modeled
a standard heat pump cycle and studied four combinations of heat source
and sink temperature changes considering a refrigerant mixture set
based on 14 natural refrigerants. No advantage of mixtures could be
found for small temperature changes of the source (ΔTso=Tso,in–Tso,out= 5 K). For large heat source and sink
temperature changes (ΔTso= 20 K,
ΔTsi=Tsi,out–Tsi,in= 40 K), the study
identified a COP advantage of 27% for the best refrigerant mixture
(dimethyl ether (40 mass-%)/isopentane (60 mass-%)) compared to the
best pure refrigerant (isopentane). Additionally, the temperature
change of the heat source was shown to impact the refrigerant mixture
COP advantage more than the temperature change of the heat sink. Abedini
et al. considered three case studies
for refrigerant mixtures in HTHPs, represented by combinations of
heat sources and sinks (isothermal and nonisothermal). A considerable
impact of glide matching on the COP of mixtures was only observed
for a completely sensible heat source (ΔTso≈ 10 K) and sink (ΔTsi= 60 K), where ethanol/p-xylene outperformed the
best pure refrigerant methanol by over 10%. For isothermal/latent
heat sources, mixtures did not provide significant COP advantages,
regardless of the heat sink temperature change. The study of Brendel
et al. experimentally investigated mixtures
of R1336mzz­(Z), R1233zd­(E), R1224yd­(Z), R1234yf, andR32. Mixtures at various compositions were compared against the pure
refrigerants for a heat source inlet temperature ofTso,in= 60 °C, a heat sink outlet temperature
ofTsi,out= 100 °C, and source/sink
temperature changes. For heat source and sink temperature changes
of ΔTso= ΔTsi= 35 K, a refrigerant mixture (R1336mzz­(Z)/R1234yf)
increased COP up to 16% compared to the best-performing pure refrigerant
(R1234yf). Based on further measurements, Brendel et al. conclude
that good glide matching at heat source and sink temperature changes
of 35 K could enable COP improvements of up to 37% assuming sufficiently
large heat exchangers. Analogous tests
on synthetic and natural refrigerants showed propane (70 mass-%)/pentane (30 mass-%) achieving
the largest
COP increase of 19% relative to the best pure refrigerant (butane).

Present studies on high-glide refrigerant
mixtures suggest a considerable
efficiency potential for industrial HTHPs. However, the models and
experiments are restricted to a small number of case studies and a
sparse refrigerant set. Furthermore, model studies often neglect the
influence of refrigerant-dependent compressor efficiency that was
shown to be particularly decisive for the evaluation of mixture COPs.,The potential for improving HTHP efficiency through the use of refrigerant
mixtures with temperature glide has not yet been systematically explored
across the wide variety of industrial process conditions.

While
the potential of refrigerant mixtures to improve efficiency
has been recognized, mixtures could be a breakthrough technology for
standardizing industrial heat pumps: Adjusting a mixture’s
thermo-physical properties and the temperature glide through composition
allows for convenient tailoring to various applications without changing
the pure components. Given a targeted selection of the pure mixture
components, manufacturers can develop a corresponding standardized
heat pump design, achieving near-optimal COPs for many applications
through composition tailoring. Such a standardized design can reduce
investment costs. Standardizing HTHPs through refrigerant pairs that
achieve near-optimal efficiency for various process conditions has
not been considered to date.

In this contribution, we close
the gap by systematically analyzing
the potential of zeotropic refrigerant mixtures to increase efficiency
and standardize industrial HTHPs. We screen an extensive refrigerant
set for various heat sources and sinks. The screening employs an HTHP
process model that optimizes the COP for each refrigerant (pure +
mixture). A loss-based compressor model accounts for refrigerant-dependent
compressor efficiencies. In the analysis
of the screening data set, we focus on the temperature glide as a
key driver for the cycle efficiency of mixtures. From the screening
data set, we identify the specialists among refrigerant mixtures that
maximize efficiency advantages compared to pure refrigerants, specific
to heat source and sink. Furthermore, we target all-rounder refrigerant
pairs that yield near-optimal efficiencies across various heat sources
and sinks if their composition is adapted.

Our findings provide
insights into the process conditions that
allow for the efficient use of mixtures and those that do not. High-efficiency
all-rounder refrigerant pairs are introduced.

We evaluate the benefits
of refrigerant mixtures through a large-scale
screening of systematically selected heat source and sink pairings
(representing HTHP applications) and a refrigerant set covering a
wide range of molecular properties. By optimizing the heat pump process
toward the COP for each pure refrigerant/refrigerant mixture and heat
source and sink pairing, a comprehensive data set is obtained to evaluate
the potential of refrigerant mixtures.

Sectionpresents
the considered heat pump process,Sectionlists the component models, andSectionfeatures process
optimization, whileSectionintroduces the case study.

The study considers
a subcritical heat pump cycle with an internal heat exchanger (IHX)
as an additional component to the evaporator, compressor, condenser,
and throttle (Figure). After full condensation and subcooling in the condenser, the liquid
refrigerant enters the IHX, and heat is transferred to the fully evaporated
refrigerant at the evaporator outlet to provide superheating. The
IHX increases the COP for most refrigerants, is comparatively inexpensive
to purchase, and is often used in industrial applications.,Superheating at the compressor inlet is assumed to be fully provided
by the IHX. The calculation scheme of the process’s thermodynamic
states (1, 2, 2s, 3sc, 3, 4) is provided inTable.

Heat pump flow sheet (left) and temperature-enthalpy diagram (right).
States 1, 2, 3sc, 3, 4 refer to the heat pump’s refrigerant,
whereas states so,in, so,out and si,in, si,out refer to the heat source
and sink at the heat exchanger inlets and outlets, respectively.

We use the heat pump’s
COP as the main evaluation metric.
The COP is defined as the ratio of the useful heat provided by the
heat pumpQ̇hand the compressor
powerPcomp.

The reversible cycle delineates the
thermodynamic cycle efficiency
limit (COPrev). The reversible cycle’s COPrevcan be derived from the heat source’s and sink’s thermodynamic
mean temperaturesTsoandTsi, respectively
(eq, so-called Lorenz
COP).

The heat
source’s and sink’s thermodynamic mean temperatures
are calculated as the ratio of the mass-specific enthalpy and entropy
differences between the respective heat exchanger’s inlet and
outlet states assuming isobaric conditions (eq).

The heat exchangers
are modeled as counter-flow and assumed to be isobaric and adiabatic.
Following a standard approach in heat exchanger modeling, we use pinch models to connect process temperatures,
such as evaporation and condensation temperatures, and heat source
and sink temperatures. Pinch models map the temperature difference
between the refrigerant and the secondary fluid (called approach temperature
ΔTapp) during heat transfer. Small
approach temperatures are favored regarding cycle efficiency but lead
to larger heat transfer areas. Restricting a minimum allowed approach
temperature ensures efficient heat transfer and reasonably sized heat
exchangers. We track the approach temperature at several points along
the heat transfer isobar in each heat exchanger to account for the
potentially nonlinear temperature glide.

The compressor is modeled using an isentropic compressor efficiency. The isentropic compressor efficiencies are determined
by a loss-based compressor model that, in particular, accounts for
refrigerant dependency. The compressor
model’s parameters are refitted using experimental HTHP data
to achieve plausible efficiency predictions for industrial applications
(consult Supporting Information,Table SI1, for pure refrigerant isentropic compressor efficiencies at reference
process conditions). The throttling of the refrigerant after the condenser
is assumed to be isenthalpic.

To adapt the
cycle, we optimize the heat pump process for every heat source and
sink pairing (gray dots,Figure) and refrigerant (mixture) considered. The optimization
variables are the evaporation and condensation temperaturesTevandTco(defined
at the dew line, respectively), the superheating at the compressor
inlet ΔTsh, and the subcooling at
the IHX inlet ΔTscwhich are optimized
for COP (eq).

Heat source and sink pairings considered in
the study. ForTso,in= 60 °C andTsi, out= 100 °C, heat source and
sink pairings are
configured by varying the heat source and sink temperature changes
ΔTso, ΔTsibetween 0 and 40 K.

The optimization is subject to equality and inequality
constraints
(h(X) andg(X), respectively) and variable boundsXlb,Xubto ensure a feasible
heat pump process (eq). Inequality constraints are employed, e.g., to keep the minimum
approach temperature in the heat exchanger, guarantee dry compression,
and limit process pressures. All constraints are summarized inTable.

The minimum evaporator pressure
is often limited to ambient pressure
to rule out air suction into the system and ensure high densities
at the compressor inlet (associated with high compressor efficiencies).
However, constraining the minimum evaporator pressure to 1 bar substantially
reduces the number of feasible refrigerants for HTHPs. In the interest
of fundamentally exploring the refrigerant mixture potential, we set
the minimum allowable evaporator pressure topev,min= 20 kPa. We believe that evaporation pressures of 20
kPa are manageable in an industrial context and worth pursuing.

To ensure sound process optimization, the optimization variablesXare limited within thermodynamically reasonable parameter
ranges, defined by lower and upper boundsXlbandXub, respectively (Table). The evaporation temperature’s
upper bound and the condensation temperature’s lower bound
are given by the heat source’s highest temperatureTso,in= 60 °C and the heat sink’s
lowest temperatureTsi,in= 100 °C
– ΔTsi, respectively. The
condensation temperature’s upper bound ensures a subcritical
process, considering a temperature difference of 10 K between the
refrigerant’s critical temperatureTcritand the condensation temperatureTco. The evaporation temperature’s lower bound is set to comply
with the process constraint on the evaporator pressurepev. The superheating ΔTshand subcooling ΔTscare both limited
by a lower bound of 3 K to ensure full evaporation and condensation;
A temperature margin of 25 K establishes the respective upper bounds.

The process
optimization algorithm is written in Python, leveraging
the SciPy library’sminimizefunction with
the Sequential Least Squares Quadratic Programming (SLSQP) method
to address the Nonlinear Programming (NLP) problem.

To
systematically explore
the potential of refrigerant mixtures for various applications, the
heat pump process model is evaluated across various heat source and
sink pairings. The temperature levels and temperature changes of the
heat sources and sinks examined in this work are aligned with process
conditions typically encountered in industrial sectors suitable for
HTHP integration.,Thus, the source inlet temperature
and the sink outlet temperature are set toTso,in= 60 °C andTsi,out=
100 °C, respectively. The source outlet temperatureTso,outand the sink inlet temperatureTsi,inare systematically varied over a range of 40 K in
5 K intervals, resulting in 81 unique heat source and sink pairingsijwith indicesi(source),j(sink) ∈ [0, 5, 10,..., 40]. The considered heat source and
sink temperature changes are typical for heat supply intensive processes
in important industries.

We consider
a refrigerant set comprising 38 preselected pure substances, from
which 703 binary refrigerant pairs are derived (full refrigerant set
in Supporting Information,Table SI2).
The pure refrigerants cover various substance groups (Table) and include both typical refrigerants
and substances not yet commercially utilized. We only choose pure
refrigerants with an Ozone Depletion Potential (ODP) = 0 and a Global
Warming Potential (GWP) < 150. In addition to the pure refrigerants,
nine compositions are considered for each binary refrigerant pair
fromxmol= 0.1 ... 0.9 with dxmol= 0.1 mol/mol. The overall refrigerant set
hence comprises 6365 refrigerants in total. The resulting set of pure
refrigerants and mixtures represents a wide range of thermo-physical
properties and mixture behaviors, providing a comprehensive basis
for mixture assessment. The mixtures yield temperature glides spanning
from 0 K to 60 K (Figure) and, thus, cover the temperature changes of heat source
and sink between 0 K and 40 K.

Distribution of temperature glides (0−60
K) and vapor pressures
(0−60 bar) for all refrigerants considered in the screening
study (pure refrigerants and refrigerant pairs with discretized composition
dx= 0.1 mol/mol). Vapor pressurepvapat a dew line temperature ofTdew= 60 °C. Temperature glide at vapor pressurepvap, ΔTglide=Tdew–Tbubble.

All fluid property data is obtained using the REFPROP
fluid property
database. Even though REFPROP provides
highly accurate pure fluid property data,,the authors are aware that high-quality mixing rules might not be
available for all refrigerant pairs contained in the refrigerant screening
set. This lack of genuine mixing rules might sometimes lead to inaccurate
property predictions. Potential inaccuracies in the refrigerant property
data underlying the screening study may limit the reliability of detailed
statements about individual pure refrigerants and refrigerant mixtures.
However, this study primarily aims to explore trends in the efficiency
of refrigerant mixtures across a range of typical industrial applications.
The primary focus of our study is to investigate mixture performance
and derive general guidelines for the efficient use of refrigerant
mixtures, with less focus on pinpointing individual mixtures. Thus,
we assume that the vast molecular space allows the generation of refrigerant
mixtures exhibiting the discussed properties in this work, justifying
the drawn conclusions.

In principle, all refrigerants, including pure
refrigerants, can
be applied over various heat source and sink pairings. However, the
efficiency can substantially decline since the thermo-physical properties
may no longer match the requirements of the process. Binary refrigerant
pairs offer a much greater all-rounder potential, as thermo-physical
properties (namely the temperature glide) can be tailored between
the pure refrigerant’s properties by adjusting the composition.
To advance standardization in industrial heat pumps, a standard heat
pump design can be adapted to a suitable all-rounder pair (material
compatibility, licensing), and subsequently tailored to various industrial
heat sources/sinks simply by adjusting the all-rounder’s composition.

We proceed as follows to identify all-rounder refrigerants from
the data gathered during the refrigerant screening. The pure refrigerants
and refrigerant mixtures that yield feasible heat pump cycles across
all heat source and sink pairings are considered all-rounder refrigerants.
To evaluate and rank an (all-rounder) refrigerant’s performance
for a given heat source and sink pairingij, we introduce
the Relative Coefficient of Performance RCOPij. The refrigerant’s maximum COPijfor a specific
heat source and sink pairingijis related to the
COPijobtained for the COP-optimal specialist refrigerant. The
COP-optimal refrigerants are selected from all pure refrigerants and
mixtures included in the screening.

This section
analyzes
the refrigerant screening results across
all heat source and sink pairings. The analysis focuses on the temperature
glide of refrigerant mixtures and its role as a key driver for efficiency
improvement. The study’s data set captures various refrigerant
properties that influence cycle efficiency and reflect trade-offs,
such as evaporation enthalpy and isentropic compressor efficiency.
However, the temperature glide is the unique property of mixtures
and the key differentiator offering potential for efficiency improvement.
Accordingly, we focus on the impact of the temperature glide and discuss
the influences of other refrigerant properties only marginally.

First, general trends of the COP as a function of composition are
discussed to guide the search for high-efficiency refrigerant mixtures
(Section). Subsequently,
specialist mixtures are investigated that deliver the maximum COP
for given heat source and sink temperature changes (Section). Finally, all-rounder
refrigerant pairs are targeted that yield near-optimal COPs over a
range of heat source and sink temperature changes if the composition
is tailored (Section).

The heat pump COP highly depends on the mixture compositionxmol. For the heat source and sink pairing of
ΔTso= ΔTsi= 25 K (Figure), many mixtures yield higher COPs than the COP-optimal pure
refrigerant (cyclopropane, COP25,25= 3.9). The COP-optimal refrigerant
pair (diethyl ether/cyclopropane) surpasses the highest pure refrigerant
COP by up to 16%.

COP as a function of the second mixture component’s
mole
fractionxmolfor all refrigerant pairs
yielding feasible heat pump processes. Heat source and sink temperature
changes of ΔTso= 25 K, ΔTsi= 25 K. Four characteristic COP profiles
are highlighted: R1233zd­(E)/R1224yd­(Z), pentane/R1233zd­(E), 1-pentene/cyclopropane,
cyclohexane/butane. Cyclopropane (blue dot) yields the highest pure
refrigerant COP and sets the reference for the COP advantage of mixtures.
The table displays relevant refrigerant pair properties. Maximum refrigerant
pair temperature glide at a dew line temperature of 60 °C: ΔTglide= max­(Tdew(p*,xmol) –Tbubble(p*,xmol)), forp* =pvap(60 °C) andxmol∈ [0.1,..., 0.9].

The first group of refrigerant pairs
shows no COP improvements over composition while the pure components’
COPs are similar (red line,Figure). These refrigerant pairs typically have low temperature
glides and the pure components yield similar compressor efficiencies
(see Table inFigure). R1233zd­(E)/R1224yd­(Z) is a typical example for this group of refrigerant
mixtures.

The second
group of refrigerant pairs
does not significantly improve COP either. However, the pure components’
COPs differ (orange line,Figure). These refrigerant pairs exhibit low temperature
glides and, therefore, do not provide a significant benefit in COP.
The COP differs over composition mainly due to the changing isentropic
compressor efficiency between the pure refrigerants (see Table inFigure). In close approximation,
the compressor efficiency changes linearly with the composition between
the pure substance efficiencies. A typical
example of this group of mixtures is pentane/R1233zd­(E).

The third group of refrigerant pairs
yields the desired COP increase in the mixture (COP increase of 16%
over pure cyclopropane, blue line,Figure). The refrigerant pairs are characterized
by substantial temperature glides, while the maximum temperature glide
closely matches the heat source and sink temperature changes. The
pure components’ COPs are high but may differ (see Table inFigure). A typical representative
is 1-pentene/cyclopropane. According to Roskosch et al., even greater COP benefits can be expected if
the compressor efficiency remains constant over the mixture, along
with a well-matching temperature glide.

The last group of refrigerant pairs
is characterized by a maximum temperature glide significantly larger
than the heat source and sink temperature changes. At a certain composition,
a too-large temperature glide shifts the evaporator pinch point, causing
a drop in COP as showcased by cyclohexane/butane (green line,Figure). For compositions
with even larger temperature glides cycles may not be feasible, truncating
the COP profile.

Each refrigerant pair
group may include pairs where only one pure
component allows a feasible heat pump cycle, while the other violates
process constraints (e.g., too low critical temperature). As a result,
the COP profiles can be truncated for compositions toward the nonfeasible
component.

The diversity of COP profiles demonstrates that the
refrigerant
set employed in our study encompasses a wide range of thermodynamic
properties, allowing for general conclusions. Simultaneously, the
COP profiles illustrate that finding optimal refrigerant mixtures
is challenging and involves addressing multiple aspects from thermo-physical
properties and equipment behavior (e.g., compressor) to process design.

To map the efficiency advantage of zeotropic refrigerant mixtures,
the highest refrigerant mixture COP is related to the highest pure
refrigerant COP, COPij= COPij/COPij, for each pairing
of heat source (i) and sink temperature changes (j) (Figure).

Mixture COP advantage COPadvas a function of heat source
and sink temperature change (Tso,in=
60 °C,Tsi, out= 100 °C).
The black dots refer to the heat source and sink pairings mentioned
in the discussion (cf.Supporting Informationfor temperature-enthalpy diagrams,Figure SI3).

Refrigerant mixtures achieve higher
COPs than pure refrigerants
(COPadv> 1), except for very low heat source temperature
changes (ΔTso≤ 5 K). The
advantage of mixtures COPadvmonotonically increases along
the parity line (ΔTso= ΔTsi, black dashed line,Figure) toward larger temperature changes of heat
source and sink. The refrigerant mixture COP advantage of 26% (COP40,40= 1.26)
is maximal for the heat source and sink pairing with the largest temperature
changes (ΔTso= ΔTsi= 40 K). The COP-optimal mixture for this heat source
and sink pairing is cyclopentane (30 mol %)/cyclopropane (70 mol %)
with COP = 4.4 corresponding to 69% of the reversible process COP40,40= 6.3 (eq). The COP-optimal pure
refrigerant cyclopropane, however, only achieves COP
= 3.4.

The COP increase of refrigerant mixtures
is attributed to the temperature
glide: If the temperature glide matches the temperature changes of
heat source and sink, the ratio of thermodynamic mean temperatures
in the evaporator and condenserTev/Tcois increased, yielding higher COPs (cf.eq). If heat source
temperature changes are small, mixtures with nearly no temperature
glide are selected (quasi-azeotropic mixtures) and yield the highest
COPs among all mixtures (Figure, left edge). However, they are still outperformed
by pure refrigerants (Figure, left edge). The COP-optimal refrigerants along the parity
line achieve glide matching with temperature glides similar to the
temperature changes of both heat source and sink (Figure). Following basic thermodynamics,
COPadvincreases toward large heat source and sink temperature
changes (along the parity line,Figure) as the potential COP benefit of glide matching increases.
Thus, the COPadvis anticipated to further increase for
even larger temperature changes of heat source and sink.

Temperature
glide of the COP-optimal refrigerant mixture for every
heat source and sink pairing. Temperature glide at a representative
dew line temperature ofTdew= 60 °C.
The black dots refer to the heat source and sink pairings mentioned
in the discussion (cf.Supporting Informationfor temperature-enthalpy diagrams,Figure SI3).

However, the temperature changes
of heat source and sink in industrial
applications often differ, in particular heat source temperature changes
are rather small for environmental heat sources (e.g., surface water)
or low-temperature waste heat. Therefore, heat source and sink pairings
off the parity line have particular significance for industrial applications.
To analyze the influence of unequal temperature changes of heat source
and sink, we start from a point of equal temperature changes (ΔTso= ΔTsi=
20 K, middle dot inFiguresand ) and move to unequal temperature
changes in all directions (remaining dots inFiguresand ). The associated
heat pump processes are shown in temperature-enthalpy plots (Supporting
Information,Figure SI3), which are arranged
in the same configuration as the dots inFiguresand .

For
ΔTso= ΔTsi= 20 K the COP-optimal refrigerant mixture is 1-pentene
(20 mol %)/cyclopropane (80 mol %), yielding a COP advantage of 17%
(COPadv= 1.17). The mixture’s temperature glide
is 21 K (Figure),
which closely matches the temperature changes of heat source and sink.
For heat source and sink pairings with constant heat source temperature
changes (vertically arranged dots,Figuresand ), the COP remains
nearly constant when the heat sink’s temperature change increases
(upper dot) but decreases when the heat sink’s temperature
change decreases (lower dot). Nevertheless, 1-pentene (20 mol %)/cyclopropane
(80 mol %) remains the COP-optimal mixture; the mixture’s temperature
glide of 21 K matches the heat source temperature change but is either
too small or large for the heat sink temperature changes of ΔTsi= 30 K and ΔTsi= 10 K, respectively. Hence, glide matching in the
evaporator (heat source) is more important for a high COP than glide
matching in the condenser (heat sink). This trend is generally observed:
The COP-optimal temperature glide follows the temperature change of
the heat source (Figure).

The dominant influence of glide matching in the evaporator
is attributed
to a higher capability for cycle adjustments in the condenser (deheating,
subcooling). Moreover, the two-phase heat transfer represents more
of the entire heat transfer in the evaporator than in the condenser.
In the evaporator, all heat is transferred during evaporation since
superheating is performed in the IHX. Here, glide matching can significantly
increase the thermodynamic mean temperature of evaporation and thus
the COP.

In the condenser, only a part of the heat is transferred
during
condensation. Heat transfer during deheating and subcooling is not
affected by glide matching (Figure), naturally limiting the temperature glide’s
impact on decreasing the condenser’s thermodynamic mean temperature.
The limited effect of glide matching in the condenser is further restricted
by the narrow dome at close-to-critical temperatures. Furthermore,
the subcooling increases flexibility to adapt the heat pump cycle
to the heat sink. If the temperature glide is smaller than the heat
sink’s temperature change, subcooling is increased to decrease
the thermodynamic mean temperature and vice versa. However, the possibility
of reducing the subcooling is limited (here: ΔTsc,min= 3 K). If the temperature glide is still too large,
the condensation temperature must be increased to ensure heat transfer.
As a result, the COP decreases substantially.

For the heat source
and sink pairings with constant heat sink temperature
changes (horizontally arranged dots,Figure), the mixture COP advantage is almost constant
when the heat source temperature change is increased (right dot) but
reduced when the heat source temperature change is decreased (left
dot). The COP-optimal temperature glide is aligned to the heat source’s
temperature change (Figure) and achieved by distinct mixtures. Going from the middle
dot (balanced heat temperature changes) to the left dot, the 1-pentene
(20 mol %)/cyclopropane (80 mol %) is replaced by cyclobutene (60
mol %)/propylene (40 mol %). The COP-optimal mixture for the right
dot is pentane (20 mol %)/cyclopropane (80 mol %).

An imbalance
with a smaller temperature change in the heat source
reduces the mixture COP advantage (left dot,Figure). The lower heat source temperature change
generally decreases the glide matching COP potential in the evaporator.
Still, the heat sink temperature change can be exploited by adequate
subcooling, enhancing the mixture COP advantage achieved through glide
matching.

For an imbalance with a larger temperature change
in the heat source,
the mixture COP advantage remains nearly constant (right dot,Figure). Even though the
larger temperature change in the heat source benefits the mixture
COP advantage, the resulting temperature glide is too large for the
condenser, leading to an increase in the condensation temperature.

In summary, refrigerant mixtures yield significant COP advantages
over pure refrigerants, with the benefit primarily driven by glide
matching to the heat source temperature change. The mixture COP advantage
is retained even with an imbalance between the temperature changes
in the source and sink, provided that the heat source has a sufficiently
large temperature change. An imbalance with higher temperature changes
in the heat sink does not substantially affect the mixture COP advantage
as glide matching in the condenser is less important and subcooling
can be used to better match the temperature change of the heat sink.
Extreme imbalances, however, can reduce the mixture COP advantage.

Discretizing the composition of mixtures by increments of dx= 0.1 mol/mol makes finding azeotropic points very unlikely
and may contribute to the fact that no mixture COP advantage is found
for low heat source temperature changes ΔTso≤ 5 K. Continuously optimizing the composition or
choosing a higher resolutiondxcould potentially
reveal COP advantages of azeotropic mixtures for quasi-isothermal
sources due to mixture properties beyond the temperature glide. However,
we estimate the advantage of azeotropic mixtures for increasing efficiency
to be low and have excluded the analysis of azeotropic mixtures from
our study.

COP-optimal specialist mixtures are highly diverse
across all heat
source and sink pairings: 21 refrigerant pairs are selected for the
81 heat source and sink pairings (full list in Supporting Information,Table SI3. CompareFigures SI1, SI2). Even though the COP is among the decisive criteria
for refrigerant selection, such a highly diverse and specialized refrigerant
portfolio is disadvantageous for manufacturers and operators of HTHPs:
Highly specialized mixtures require custom-designed HTHPs, ensuring
that all components are approved by the manufacturer for the particular
mixture. In addition, regulations regarding safety and environmental
protection must be observed, which are becoming increasingly complex. Consequently, when considering practical HTHP
application in industry, refrigerants would be preferred that can
be applied over a wide range of heat sources and sinks while still
achieving near-optimal COPs.

Moving on from the specialist refrigerant mixtures,
we now search
for versatile all-rounder refrigerants that yield high COPs over a
wide range of industrial applications, represented by various heat
source and sink temperature changes. With the composition as a degree
of freedom, all-rounder mixtures promise high COPs while undercutting
the effort associated with numerous application-specific refrigerants
and can be a decisive step toward standardizing industrial high-temperature
heat pumps.

The ranking of best all-rounder refrigerants across
all heat source and sink pairings confirms the higher all-rounder
potential of mixtures compared to pure refrigerants: The best all-rounder
pure refrigerant ranks 73th (Table) and only achievesRCOP®≈89%(eq). The best all-rounder refrigerant pair is diethyl ether/cyclopropane
withRCOP®≈97%. Beyond diethyl ether/cyclopropane, we
find many more all-rounder refrigerant pairs enabling application
across various heat source and sink pairings with only slightly decreased
efficiencies compared to the respective COP-optimal refrigerants.
However, refrigerant mixtures also can have significantly worse all-rounder
performance than pure refrigerants (cf. lowest rankTable, isobutane/R1224yd­(Z)), exemplifying
the need for careful selection.

The top ten refrigerants, the best
pure refrigerant, and the worst refrigerant are displayed. ΔTgliderepresents the maximum temperature glide at a dew line reference
temperature of 60 °C.plow®andphigh®refer to the low and high pressure,VHC®refers to the volumetric heating
capacity
of the refrigerant averaged across all case studies, respectively.

The best all-rounder pairs
yield very similar near-optimal performance
with close values for the Average Relative COP (RCOP®). Similarities can be observed
in the thermo-physical
properties of the top-ranked all-rounder refrigerant pairs. The corresponding
pure components typically exhibit properties that favor high COPs:
high isentropic compressor efficiencies and evaporation enthalpies.
Furthermore, the top-ranked all-rounder refrigerant pairs mostly have
maximum temperature glides corresponding to the greater heat source
and sink temperature changes in the case study (right column,Table). Tailoring the composition
can then adapt the all-rounder’s temperature glide to most
of the heat source and sink temperature changes. Simultaneously, the
nonexcessive maximum temperature glides help avoid pinch point shifts
in the heat exchangers and thus composition-dependent COP drops (Section).

The
best-performing all-rounder refrigerant, diethyl ether/cyclopropane,
yields near-optimal COPs for most heat source and sink pairings (Figure). Only for minimal
source temperature changes (ΔTso≤ 5 K), the relative COP drops to around RCOP5,5≈ 91%. In this case, pure cyclopropane (xmol= 1,Figure, left) is the most efficient in the diethyl ether/cyclopropane
mixture but is outperformed by more efficient pure refrigerants (Table SI3). The COP-optimal compositions of diethyl
ether/cyclopropane adapt the temperature glides to the respective
heat source temperature changes (Figuresand , middle and right),
exploiting the COP advantages achievable through glide matching.

Relative
COP (RCOP,eq) of diethyl
ether/cyclopropane across all heat source and sink pairings.

Temperature-enthalpy diagrams of the best-performing all-rounder
refrigerant mixture, diethyl ether/cyclopropane, for three heat source
and sink pairings (ΔTso, ΔTsi) = (0 K, 0 K), (20 K, 20 K), (40 K, 40 K)
(cf. parity line,Figure). Solid blue and red lines represent the heat source and
sink, respectively. Heat sink outlet and heat source inlet temperatures
are constant, indicated by the dashed red and blue lines.xmol, CPindicates the molar fraction of
cyclopropane.

Temperature glide of diethyl ether/cyclopropane (at COP-optimal
composition) at a dew line reference temperature of 60 °C.

From an application-oriented perspective,
it may be interesting
to find high-efficiency all-rounder refrigerants for a narrower range
of heat source and sink temperature changes. In practice, applying
the all-rounder concept to a specific subset of heat source and sink
pairings (i.e., a manufacturer’s heat pump portfolio or an
operator’s industrial heat pump applications) could increase
process performance even further (shown in Supporting Information,Table SI4). Due to their higher all-rounder potential,
refrigerant pairs outperform pure refrigerants for every subset of
heat source and sink pairings.

All-rounder refrigerant mixtures
are proposed to standardize HTHPs
and, therefore, reduce total cost. By maintaining high COPs across
various heat sources and sinks, all-rounder mixtures decrease the
dominating operational costs in industrial applications (high annual
operating hours). Additionally, all-rounder mixtures have the potential
to reduce capital costs by minimizing the design effort, outclassing
application-specific high-efficiency refrigerants (specialists): The
all-rounder’s fixed pure components enable a basic heat pump
design employing selected equipment (material compatibility, licensing).
However, the presumed capital cost advantage of all-rounder mixtures
depends on the cost and, therefore, the size of the equipment. To
factor in equipment size/cost, the search for all-rounders must be
expanded to selection criteria beyond cycle efficiency: Pressure levels
and volumetric heating capacity (VHC) have a significant impact and
vary considerably among all-rounder refrigerants (Table).

Because volumetric
heating capacities vary, using a fixed compressor
geometry results in different heating capacities depending on the
refrigerant. A product design targeting a fixed heating capacity would
require a refrigerant-specific compressor size selection. This study
focuses on evaluating the all-rounder concept primarily with respect
to efficiency. A fixed compressor geometry has limited impact on the
analysis, as compressor efficiency is considered mainly dependent
on the refrigerant properties rather than on compressor size.

The top all-rounder mixtures contain cyclopropane. The high COPs
achievable with cyclopropane in HTHPs align with findings from current
literature.,However, chemical theory indicates
low thermal stability for cycloalkanes due to the ring structure.
Decomposition at high temperatures can produce noncondensable gases
and deposits that reduce heat transfer rates, damage components, and
compromise safety. Given the potentially
high relevance of cycloalkanes as refrigerants in HTHPs, further research,
particularly experimental results on thermal stability, can advance
this field of study. Alongside mixtures featuring components that
require further investigation, our screening identifies promising,
ready-to-use all-rounder mixtures with components already tested in
heat pumps such as 1-pentene/dimethyl ether.

This work aims to assess
the potential of refrigerant
mixtures
for increasing efficiency and standardizing industrial high-temperature
heat pumps (HTHPs). In the study, a representative set of 38 pure
refrigerants was used to form 703 binary refrigerant pairs that were
investigated across numerous compositions. A subcritical heat pump
cycle with an internal heat exchanger was optimized for each refrigerant
(pure + mixture) across 81 heat source and sink pairings, which were
defined by systematic variations of temperature changes based onTso,in= 60 °C andTsi,out= 100 °C.

We found the highest COPs for refrigerant
mixtures with temperature
glides closely matching the temperature changes of heat source and
sink and high isentropic compressor efficiencies. Refrigerant mixtures
are particularly advantageous compared to pure refrigerants for similarly
large heat source and sink temperature changes. The maximum COP increase
of a mixture compared to pure refrigerants of 26% was observed for
the maximum temperature change in the heat source and sink (ΔTso= ΔTsi=
40 K). Glide matching in the evaporator is the main driver for the
increased COPs. Mixtures still yield a COP advantage over pure refrigerants
in case there is an imbalance between the heat source’s and
sink’s temperature changes, provided that the temperature change
in the heat source is greater than 5 K.

We searched for all-rounder
refrigerant pairs that yield near-optimal
COPs across numerous heat source and sink pairings simply by adjusting
the mixture composition. Diethyl ether/cyclopropane was the best all-rounder
refrigerant pair, yielding on average 97% of the highest COP obtained
by specialist mixtures. The all-rounder potential is clearly attributed
to the additional degree of freedom provided by mixtures, namely the
adjustment of the composition. Pure all-rounder refrigerants showed
substantially lower COPs if used across various heat source’s
and sink’s temperature changes.

In this study on the
concept of all-rounder mixtures, simple equipment
models such as pinch-based heat exchangers were used. For a dedicated
techno-economic analysis, detailed physical equipment models should
be applied that allow for sizing during optimization. Optimizing the
heat pump process and equipment size toward a techno-economic objective
(e.g., total cost) can provide insights into the economic feasibility
of all-rounder mixtures. The sizing strategy can follow a worst-case
approach, where the heat pump equipment is sized according to the
most challenging heat source and sink for which the all-rounder is
intended to be used. Alternatively, a modular approach can be chosen,
where different sizes of basic equipment are selected depending on
the all-rounder application. It is currently unclear how much differently
sized equipment is required to cover the full working range, presenting
an interesting optimization problem with economic trade-offs. These
investigations must follow the fundamental introduction of the idea
presented here.

Our study demonstrates the potential of refrigerant
mixtures for
high-temperature heat pumps. Refrigerant mixtures substantially increase
the COP, particularly for applications with higher temperature changes
in the heat source. Furthermore, refrigerant mixtures offer all-rounder
potential, enabling the standardization of high-temperature heat pumps,
which is a decisive step toward cost reduction and accelerated market
introduction. We identified several promising binary mixtures that
should be tested experimentally in future studies.

This work was funded by BRIDGE as part of the project
“High-Efficiency
High-Temperature Heat Pumps with Temperature Glide”. We are
grateful to the Swiss National Science Foundation SNSF and Innosuisse
for their support.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsengineeringau.4c00060.

CRediT:Philip Widmaierconceptualization, formal analysis, methodology,
software, visualization, writing - original draft;Leon P. M.
Brendelinvestigation, validation, writing - review & editing;Stefan S. Bertschfunding acquisition, resources, validation,
writing - review & editing;André Bardowconceptualization,
funding acquisition, project administration, resources, supervision,
writing - review & editing;Dennis Roskoschconceptualization,
formal analysis, investigation, methodology, supervision, validation,
writing - review & editing.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.