Polar codes are the only error-correcting codes that have been mathematically proven to achieve the Shannon limit to date, playing a crucial role in the control channels of 5G mobile communication systems. For control channels, although the sphere decoding (SD) algorithm boasts excellent performance, its high computational complexity and significant latency present clear limitations in practical applications. In contrast, the list sphere decoding (LSD) algorithm strikes a balance between performance and complexity. This paper proposes a construction method that delays the decoding of specific information bits with the minimum row weight to mitigate the impact of error propagation. For scenarios where the total number of delay-decodable bits is limited, we introduce a segmented construction strategy. Through mathematical analysis, this strategy effectively increases the number of delay-decodable bits, thereby significantly reducing the impact of error propagation without changing the number of transmitted bits. Simulation results show that the decoding performance of the proposed algorithm is comparable to that of the SD algorithm at medium and low code rates (with a difference of less than 0.2 dB), but it abandons the concept of search radius in the SD algorithm and does not require a backtracking process. Furthermore, under high code rate conditions, such asP(32, 20), the proposed algorithm also maintains excellent performance.

In the field of communications, with the continuous increase in data transmission rate and system complexity, the demand for efficient and reliable channel coding schemes is also increasing. Against this backdrop, polar codes emerged. This coding theory was proposed by Turkish scientist Erdal Arikan in 20081,2, and it has attracted widespread attention because it can theoretically achieve the Shannon capacity of symmetric binary-input discrete memoryless channel (B-DMC). For this reason, polar codes were ultimately selected as the control channel coding scheme in the 5G communication standard2. Compared to the heavy data transmission relying on long codes over data channels, the payload of control channels is relatively small, which requires new constructions for short codes and improvements to their corresponding decoding algorithms.

The successive cancellation (SC) decoding algorithm is the most basic decoding algorithm for polar codes1. Subsequently, the successive cancellation list (SCL) decoding algorithm and the cyclic redundancy check (CRC) aided SC list (CA-SCL) decoding algorithm have been introduced3–5. CA-SCL performs well on long codes but has limited performance in short-code application scenarios. It is based on the concept of channel polarization, starting from the least reliable bit and decoding bit by bit, using the results as auxiliary information for the decoding of the next bit. The advantage of the SC decoding algorithm is its simple structure, ease of implementation, and performance that approaches channel capacity as the code length increases. However, the disadvantages of the SC decoding algorithm are also apparent; its error propagation problem leads to a sharp decline in performance when errors occur, and for short codes, its performance is not optimal.

Sphere decoding (SD) is a nonlinear decoding method that achieves decoding by searching for the codeword closest to the received signal in the signal space. SD can be considered as an implementation of maximum likelihood (ML) decoding6, with the objective of finding the codeword with the minimum Euclidean distance from the received vector among all possible codewords in a higher-dimensional space. In ref.7, a stack SD (SSD) algorithm was proposed for polar codes. This algorithm organizes candidate paths in a stack sorted by descending path metrics, achieving ML performance while significantly reducing computational complexity. Reference8introduced a multiple sphere decoder search (MSDS) method, which executes sequential/hybrid tree traversals with early termination criteria to significantly reduce decoding latency and complexity. Additionally, an efficient software stack sphere decoder (ESSD) based on synchronized determination was developed in ref.9, reducing polar code decoding complexity while preserving error-correction performance comparable to the conventional SD algorithm for both low-rate and high-rate polar codes. In ref.10, an SD algorithm based on symmetric encoding was proposed to reduce complexity at an acceptable performance loss. The advantage of the SD algorithm is its ability to achieve near-optimal decoding performance, especially in the case of short code lengths and medium code rates. However, the computational complexity of the SD algorithm is high, as it requires traversal of the entire signal space for decoding, which restricts its applicability for practical communication applications.

List SD (LSD) is an improvement upon the traditional SD algorithm11. The LSD algorithm discards the search radius and backtracking process inherent in SD, opting instead to maintain a list of candidate codewords to reduce computational complexity, thereby striking a balance between performance and complexity. In ref.12, it was proposed that combining LSD with the SCL can effectively reduce algorithmic complexity. Reference13. introduced a matrix reordering technique that significantly enhances the performance of the LSD algorithm. Furthermore, ref.14presented a synchronized LSD algorithm, which defines a synchronization set based on the generator matrix of polar codes. By calculating the sum of all Euclidean distances within the synchronization set, the performance of LSD is improved.

Aiming for further performance enhancement, this paper initially proposes a construction method suitable for the LSD algorithm. Specifically, it aims to delay the decoding of as many information bits corresponding to rows with smaller weight as possible, thereby reducing the impact of decoding failures on error propagation throughout the entire codeword. Secondly, for cases where direct delay decoding construction cannot be applied to the codeword and where the number of delay-decodable bits is limited, this paper proposes a segmented construction strategy, which allows for better utilization of delayed decoding constructions. Furthermore, through mathematical analysis and experimental validation, we provide recommendations on whether to use segmented construction for polar codes under different circumstances. Finally, for decoding, this paper proposes the integration of segmented CRC bits during the segmented construction process, thereby incorporating an early-stopping mechanism without affecting decoding performance. Simulation results show that the algorithm reduces the required number of decoding operations, thereby lowering the decoding complexity of the algorithm while keeping performance loss moderate.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. “Preliminaries” section reviews the fundamental knowledge of SD and LSD. “Improved list sphere decoding algorithm” section illustrates the improved algorithms for the proposed delayed decoding construction and segmentation strategy. “Performance and complexity evaluation” section analyzes the performance and complexity. Finally, “Conclusion” section concludes the paper.

As a linear block code, polar codes utilize the phenomenon of channel polarization. For a binary polar codeP(N,K) with code rateR=K/Nand input sequenceU1n=(u1,u2,...,uN), which includes information bits and known frozen bits–the values of which are fixed and known by both the transmitter and the receiver–a polar code of lengthNcan be generated as follows:c1N=u1NGN, whereGNis the generator matrix, which can be constructed through thenth Kronecker product of the kernel matrixF=1011, namelyGN=F⊗n.

The polarization effect will produceNpolarized sub-channels with different reliabilities, within whichKof the most reliable sub-channels are used to transmit information bits, and the indices of these sub-channels are placed in the information setA. The remainingN-Ksub-channels transmit frozen bits, and the indices of these sub-channels are placed in the frozen setAc. For binary erasure channels (BECs), the Bhattacharyya parameter is typically calculated to assess channel reliability. For other types of channels, such as additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, methods including density evolution (DE)15,16or its simplified version termed Gaussian approximation (GA)17, and partial ordering of independent channels18can be used to evaluate channel reliability.

whereniis an AWGN term with a mean of zero and varianceσ2.

where1≤i≤N-1, andr0is the radius of SD, which is initialized to its maximum value.

After calculating the cumulative ED of all candidate paths for the current layer, we select theLpaths with the smallest EDs. Finally, when the decoding process reaches the first layer, we choose the decoding estimate sequence with the smallest distance metric from theLcandidate paths as the final output result.

The LSD algorithm proposed in ref.11abandons the search radius and backtracking process in SD, striking a balance between performance and complexity. However, the performance of this algorithm is greatly influenced by the length of the list. Simulations show that when the list length is limited, the performance gap between this algorithm and SD is significant10,14. To enhance the performance of the algorithm, we hereby correct and improve upon it, with specific descriptions as follows.

For any polar codeP(N,K) generator matrix, letk¯represent the average of the column indices of non-zero elements in theith row, and letm¯represent the average of the column indices of non-zero elements in thejth row. For any two indicesiandjthat satisfy1≤i<j≤N, if the row weight of theith row is equal to that of thejth row, then the following relation holds:k¯<m¯.

This contradicts Eq.(12). Therefore, the original assumption does not hold, and the opposite is thereby proven.

Common methods for constructing polar codes include construction based on equivalent Bhattacharyya parameters, density evolution algorithms, and Gaussian approximation constructions15–17. These construction methods all selectKreliable bits out ofNbit positions to transmit information bits, with the remainingN-Kbits used to transmit frozen bits.The LSD algorithm, in contrast, selects the path with the minimum ED as the decoding result, but it does not fully utilize the polarization characteristics of the channel. Therefore, during the decoding process, bits corresponding to rows with equal weights in the generator matrix exhibit small differences in reliability. As indicated in ref14.,gr,crepresents the impact of the value of therth bit on partial EDDcduring the decoding process. According to Theorem 1, for any two indicesiandjthat satisfy1≤i<j≤Nin the generator matrix, if the row weight of theith row is equal to that of thejth row, then the average column index of non-zero elements is positively correlated with the row number. Based on this, we can conclude that for two bits with the same row weight, if the decoding of the bit with the smaller row numberuifails, it will only affect the bits with smaller indices, and vice versa. In the LSD algorithm, the decoding judgment for each bit is made based on the cumulative ED. Obviously, when the bit with the larger index received is incorrectly decoded, it will inevitably propagate the error to the subsequent bit, leading to a degradation in decoding performance.

Based on the above observation, this paper proposes to place information bits with smaller row weights in the generator matrix at the front of bits with the same row weight, viz., to swap the information bits with larger indices to positions with the same row weight but smaller indices, thereby delaying the decoding of these bits. If the decoding of these bits fails, the failure will only affect the bits with smaller indices, thereby reducing the scope of error propagation and reducing its impact on decoding performance.

(1) WhenK=∑i=0jni+m0≤j≤n-1,0<m<nj+1, we first select∑i=0jni0≤j≤n-1bits with larger row weights as information bits as per the RM constraint rule. Let these∑i=0jniinformation bits correspond to the smallest row weightw′in the generator matrix, then the next step is to selectmbits from the remainingnj+1bits with row weightw′2and set them as information bits. Taking the polar codeP(8, 3) as an example, we first select30=1bits as information bits (w8=8), at this timew′=8. Next, we need to selectm=2bits from the remaining31=3bits with row weightw=w′2=4, viz., to choose two bits from the three bits with indices 4, 6, and 7 as information bits. The Gaussian approximation construction chooses the 6th and 7th bits as information bits, while the scheme proposed in this paper chooses the 4th and 6th bits as information bits. The difference between the two methods lies in the choice between the 4th and 7th bits. From the generator matrixG8, it can be seen that if the 4th information bit is decoded incorrectly, it will have an impact on the calculation of the Euclidean distance for the 4th, 3rd, 2nd, and 1 st bits; if the 7th information bit is decoded incorrectly, it will affect the decoding of the 7th, 5th, 3rd, and 1 st bits. Obviously, the value of the 4th bit will only have an impact on bits with smaller indices. Therefore, compared with the 7th bit, choosing the 4th bit as an information bit can reduce the negative impact of error propagation on the performance of the LSD algorithm. Figure1shows the construction differences and bit error rate (BER) performance of P(8,3) and P(16,8). It is evident that the proposed delayed decoding construction exhibits superior BER performance compared to the Gaussian approximation construction algorithm. When the BER is at level10-2, the delayed decoding construction algorithm achieves approximately a performance gain of 0.5 dB.

Construction differences and BER performance comparison of P(8,3) and P(16,8).

The proposed delayed decoding method, by postponing the decoding of rows with lighter weights, effectively mitigates the impact of error propagation, thereby enhancing the decoding performance of the LSD algorithm. However, there are scenarios where the direct application of the delayed decoding strategy is not feasible. To address this limitation, we introduce a novel approach termed thesegmentation strategy. This strategy offers a flexible alternative for managing decoding processes in situations where the standard delayed decoding cannot be applied, ensuring robust performance across a broader range of conditions.

LettingN′=2n-1=N2,K′=K2, we can see that in polar codeP(N′,K′), the number of delay-decodable bits reaches12n-1j. Therefore, in this situation, by dividing the codeword into two equal parts as described above, we can effectively increase the number of delay-decodable bits, thereby effectively reducing the impact of error propagation without changing the number of transmitted bits.

Taking polar codeP(64, 22) as an example, whereK=22=60+61+62, the number of rows with row weights of 64, 32, and 16 in the generator matrix are 1, 6, and 15, respectively. After selecting the bits corresponding to these positions as information bits, we find that there are no other rows with a row weight of 16 in the generator matrix. Therefore, we divide the codeword into two segments; that is, we divideP(64, 22) into two sub-codesP1(32,11)andP2(32,11)for transmission. In which, the two sub-codes use the same encoder. Obviously, the code length and the number of information bits of each sub-code become half of the original, i.e.,N2=32,K2=11=50+51+1252. It can be known that the number of delay-decodable bits for each sub-code is 5; that is, the total number of delay-decodable bits for the entire codeword has increased from 0 to 10, thereby effectively reducing the impact of error propagation. LetP(N′,K′)×2represent the use of our segmented strategy forPN,K, and the performance comparison of the two schemes forP(64, 22) is shown in Figure2. As can be seen from this figure, when the code lengthN=64and the length of information bitsK=22, the operation of increasing the number of delay-decodable bits through segmentation can bring a significant performance improvement.

FER performance comparison of two constructions for P(64,22) and P(64,28).

(1) If we do not use the segmented strategy, when0≤m<12nj+1, the total number of delay-decodable bits ism; when12nj+1≤m≤nj+1, the total number of delay-decodable bits isnj+1-m.

(2) If we use the segmented strategy, when0≤m<n-1j, the total number of delay-decodable bits isn-1j-m; whenn-1j≤m≤nj+1, the total number of delay-decodable bits ism-n-1j.

TDDN-SS:Total delayed decoding numbers with segmentation strategy.

TDDN-NS:Total delayed decoding numbers with non-segmentation strategy.

When12n-1j≤m≤12nj+1+n-1j, the total number of delay-decodable bits without using the segmented strategy is greater than or equal to the number of delay-decodable bits when using the segmented strategy; hence, it is recommended to use the non-segmented strategy forP(N,K) in this case.

When0≤m<12n-1jor12nj+1+n-1j<m≤nj+1, the total number of delay-decodable bits with the segmented strategy is greater than the number of delay-decodable bits without using the segmented strategy; hence, it is recommended to use the segmented strategy forP(N,K) in these cases.

For example, whenn=6andj=2, at this time, the information bit lengthKvaries in the following range:K=∑i=0jni+m=60+61+62+m=22+m0≤m≤63=20. We takemas the independent variable and the total number of delay-decodable bits as the dependent variable and plot the total number of delay-decodable bits under the use of segmented strategy and non-segmented strategy as shown in Figure3.

Total number of delay-decodable bits for two strategies in P(64,22+m) for0≤m<20.

It can be seen from the figure that when0≤m<5or15<m≤20, the total number of delay-decodable bits with the segmented strategy exceeds that without the segmented strategy.Therefore, in this case, it is recommended to use the segmented strategy proposed in this paper for the construction of polar codes. When5≤m≤15, the total number of delay-decodable bits with the segmented strategy is less than or equal to that without the segmented strategy; in this case, we recommend using the non-segmented strategy for the construction of polar codes.

The following two experiments verify the above conclusions.

Experiment 1considers the transmission code lengthN=64and information bit lengthK=22, corresponding tom=0. Obviously, we have0≤m<12n-1j=1252. Therefore, our recommendation is to use the segmented strategy. The decoding performance of polar codeP(64, 22) with and without the segmented strategy is shown in Figure2. It can be seen from this figure that under the segmented strategy, the decoding performance is effectively improved by using the delay decoding construction. When the frame error rate (FER) is at level10-1, this strategy exhibits an approximate 1.7 dB performance gain over the original algorithm.

Experiment 2considers the transmission code lengthN=64and information bit lengthK=28, corresponding tom=6. Obviously, at this time, we have12n-1j=5≤m≤12nj+1+n-1j=15is satisfied, and our recommendation is to use the non-segmented strategy. Figure2provides a performance comparison of polar codeP(64, 28) between using segmentation strategy and not using segmentation strategy. It can be seen from this figure that in the medium and low signal-to-noise ratio region, the performance without using the segmented construction is better; while in the high signal-to-noise ratio region, the performance with the segmented strategy and using delay decoding construction is better. Overall, it is better to use the non-segmented strategy in this case.

The above LSD construction selection strategy is described inAlgorithm 1.

In this section, we propose the integration of segmented CRC bits within the segmented construction to introduce an early stopping mechanism. Our aim is to reduce the decoding complexity to a certain extent while still benefiting from the performance gains associated with the segmented construction strategy. The specific description of the algorithm is as follows: Place the CRC bits at the end of the segmented information sequence in the CA-LSD decoding process. If the first segment of the codeword fails the CRC check, we terminate the decoding process early and abandon the transmission of subsequent codewords. The system block diagram of the improved CA-LSD algorithm is shown in Figure4, and the specific decoding process is described inAlgorithm 2.

Flowchart of the segmented CA-LSD decoding early stopping strategy.

LetP(N,k+r)represent the polar code concatenated with CRC bits, wherekis the length of the information bits, andris the length of the CRC check bits. For example, forP(64,16+8), if constructed without the segmented strategy under Gaussian approximation, the number of delay-decodable bits is 3, located in the 51 st, 53rd, and 57th bit positions, which can be delayed to the 8th, 12th, and 14th bit positions for decoding, respectively; if the segmented strategy is used, we divide the 8-bit CRC check bits into two segments and place them at the end of the two information sequences for transmission. If the front segment of the codeword fails the CRC check, we will terminate the decoding process early. Note that, in this way, the total number of delay-decodable bits increases from 3 ton-1j-m=52-2=8.

This section examines the FER performance characteristics of polar codes constructed using the algorithm presented in this paper over a binary input additive white Gaussian noise channel (BI-AWGNC) under different code lengths and rates through simulations. The total number of frames for our experimental simulation isT_total=106, with the termination condition being when the number of error frames exceeds 2, 000 or the total number of frames exceedsT_total.

Consider the polar codesP(64, 22),P(64, 24), andP(32, 20) with code rates of 11/32, 12/32, and 20/32, respectively. Figures5,6, and7illustrate the FER performance of these three codes, where ‘Proposed’ denotes the implementation of a delayed decoding strategy, and ‘early stop’ signifies the incorporation of an early termination mechanism.We have the following observations.

When the code lengthNis 64 and the list sizeLis 32, the CA-LSD algorithm, which is based on the delayed decoding segmented construction proposed in this paper, performs comparably to the SD algorithm at low code rates (within a 0.2 dB difference). It also matches the performance of the improved SD algorithm in ref.10and outperforms the improved LSD algorithm in ref.14. Moreover, by eliminating the backtracking process and decoding radius of the SD algorithm, the time complexity is adjusted toO(LN2), which is in consistent with the derivation in ref.20.

With the inclusion of the early stopping strategy, if the first segment of the codeword fails the CRC check, the transmission of the second segment is aborted. Simulations demonstrate that its performance is on par with that of the original algorithm (within a 0.1 dB difference).

Considering a code lengthNof 32 and non-frozen bitsKof 20, at a frame error rate (FER) equal to10-2, the CA-LSD algorithm, which is based on the delayed decoding construction, achieves approximately a 1.4 dB performance gain over the original CA-LSD algorithm, a 1 dB gain over the SD algorithm, and a 0.2 dB gain over the CA-SCL algorithm.This indicates that through the delayed decoding construction strategy, the improved CA-LSD algorithm can also perform well at high code rates. These findings highlight the potential of short polar codes in scenarios where low latency and high reliability are critical, such as in URLLC applications and resource-constrained devices.

For the delayed decoding construction scheme, once the transmission code length and the number of non-frozen bits are determined, its encoding complexity is fixed. The number of non-frozen bits with the smallest row weight is determined based on the structure of the generator matrix. The number of frozen bits with the same row weight is identified. By comparing the two values mentioned above, the algorithm in this paper selects the smaller one as the number of delay-decodable bits. Therefore, the construction method proposed in this paper has lower complexityO(N). Additionally, to determine whether a segmented strategy is needed, preliminary recommendations need to be made for scenarios with different code lengths and numbers of non-frozen bits.

In the proposed early stopping strategy, we employ a specific metricAverageListSize=ActualTotalNumberofDecodingsCodeLengthto measure the complexity optimization brought about by the early stopping mechanism21. Figure8presents the average decoding complexity ofP(64, 24) with list lengthsL=32andL=16. We have the following observations from the data presented in this figure.

Given decoding list lengthL=16and the signal-to-noise ratio to be 0.5 dB, the complexity of the decoder with the early stopping mechanism is reduced by 7.61% compared to the original scheme.

Given decoding list lengthL=32and the signal-to-noise ratio to be 0.5 dB, the complexity of the decoder with the early stopping mechanism is reduced by 0.99% compared to the original scheme. At the same time, the performance loss is within an acceptable range.

Average list lengths of CALSD P(64,24) decoders with different list sizes.

This paper presents a construction method referred to as delayed decoding, which enhances the performance of LSD by delaying the decoding of bits with the minimum row weight to mitigate the impact of error propagation. Based on the presence or absence of bits with the same minimum row weight as the information bits among the frozen bits, we have conducted a detailed discussion and proposed an improved strategy for segmented construction. Simulation results indicate that, by employing the segmented construction method combined with the delayed decoding strategy proposed in this paper, the CA-LSD algorithm exhibits decoding performance that is comparable to the SD algorithm at medium and low code rates, but it eliminates the concept of the search radius in the SD algorithm and does not require a backtracking process. Furthermore, under high code rate conditions, this scheme is also able to maintain excellent performance. Besides, it should be noted that the segmented strategy proposed in this paper only transmits the next segment of data after the first segment of the codeword passes the CRC check, and therefore, it is only suitable for communication scenarios that do not require real-time feedback.

This work was supported by the KR&DP of Guangxi (Nos. GuiKeAB23075200, GuiKeAD25069071) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 62261003, 62361003).