A 5‐year‐old neutered male domestic medium‐hair cat was referred to the internal medicine department with upper respiratory signs and limb pain. Computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse osteosclerosis, showing severe osseous thickening of the nasal turbinates and near‐occlusion of the nasal passages. No new or healed fractures were observed. Additional diagnostic tests revealed no infectious or neoplastic causes. The cat was treated supportively for pain and nasal inflammation. One year after the diagnosis, the cat was described as having an acceptable quality of life at home, despite ongoing clinical signs of nasal congestion.

Chronic upper airway congestion is a common presenting complaint in feline patients. This report describes the imaging findings in a cat in which upper airway signs were due in part to systemic bone pathology. Previous reports suggest that the most common causes of chronic nasal congestion are acquired conditions with poor prognosis, such as lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis, neoplasia, or fungal infection. Diseases that cause diffuse osteosclerosis in cats are poorly understood. This report describes a case of diffuse osteosclerosis in a young cat with no other known comorbidities. The clinical picture is similar to descriptions of an osteosclerotic bone disorder in humans commonly referred to as autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type 1. Since no targeted treatments are available to reverse the osseous changes, the patient was treated supportively with pain management and corticosteroids. Recent developments in our understanding and treatment of similar human diseases may guide future advances in veterinary medicine.

Chronic upper airway congestion is a common presenting complaint in feline patients. This report describes the imaging findings in a cat in which upper airway signs were due in part to a systemic bone pathology that was also leading to decreased mobility. Computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse osteosclerosis. The clinical picture is similar to descriptions of inherited osteosclerotic bone disorders in humans associated with increased bone mineral density.

A 5‐year‐old neutered male domestic medium‐hair cat weighing 4.9 kg was presented to the internal medicine department with a 1‐year history of upper respiratory signs and more recent progressive pelvic limb pain characterized by reluctance to move and crying out when handled. The cat had a reported lifelong history of reduced mobility compared with the other family cat, such as missing jumps and, more recently, difficulty using the stairs. Two weeks before presentation, the cat was seen by its primary care veterinarian for similar signs. A complete blood count (CBC) revealed a normal hematocrit of 33.2% (reference interval [RI] 28.2–52.7%), a low‐normal white blood cell (WBC) count of 4.0 K/µL (RI 3.9–19 K/µL), and a neutropenia of 1.6 K/µL (RI 2.62–15.17 K/µL). A chemistry profile was unremarkable. Tests for feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) antigen and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) antibody were negative (IDEXX SNAP Feline Triple, Westbrook, ME, USA). Upper respiratory disease RealPCR (IDEXX) was negative forBordetella bronchiseptica,Chlamydophila felis, feline calicivirus, feline herpesvirus type 1, influenza A virus, andMycoplasma felis. Radiography revealed diffuse, increased opacity of the skeleton, especially visible in the vertebral column and femur, suggestive of osteosclerosis. The thorax and abdomen were otherwise radiographically unremarkable. The cat was treated for a presumptive bacterial upper respiratory infection with cefovecin (8 mg/kg subcutaneously once) and mirtazapine (transdermal formulation 0.25‐inch strip q24h) for appetite stimulation. However, no improvement in the clinical signs was reported, and referral was recommended.

On presentation, the cat was alert, and vital signs were within normal limits. Airflow from both nostrils was subjectively reduced, and moderate stertor was noted. The cat experienced pain on palpation of both femurs and the lower lumbar spine and sacral region. No cranial nerve deficits were noted on the neurological examination. Repeated FeLV antigen and FIV antibody testing yielded negative results (Zoetis VetScan, Parsippany, NJ, USA).

The patient was anesthetized; computed tomography (CT) was performed with the patient in sternal recumbency using a Siemens SOMATOM go.Up (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany). Pre‐ and post‐contrast images were acquired in 1‐mm axial slices using bone, lung, and soft tissue algorithms for the head, lung, abdomen, and pelvic limbs. Important findings included diffuse thickening, crowding, and increased attenuation of the nasal turbinates, with a bone density similar to that of cortical bone. The airspace volume of the nasal passages and frontal sinus volume were reduced (Figure1). No abnormalities of the neural tissue within the cranial vault were noted. Diffuse cortical thickening of the long bones, ribs, vertebrae, and pelvis with increased attenuation of the medullary cavities was also observed (Figure2). The cortical thickening of multiple bones was not noted to affect the normal bone contours or size. Diffuse splenomegaly was noted on CT. The remainder of the abdominal organs were unremarkable.

Row 1: Axial computed tomography images reconstructed using the bone algorithm and displayed in the bone window. Images are arranged from rostral to caudal through the head. Severe diffuse irregular osseous proliferation throughout the nasal cavity causes almost complete occlusion of the lumen. Severe diffuse sclerotic thickening of the included osseous structures of the head (such as the maxillary, frontal, zygomatic, palatal, and mandibular bones) is also identified. Row 2: Reconstructed sagittal and dorsal computed tomography images of the head. Severe diffuse sclerotic thickening of all the osseous structures is observed. Severe osseous thickening of the nasal turbinates almost completely occludes the nasal lumen.

Reconstructed sagittal computed tomography images of the thorax and abdomen. Extensive diffuse sclerosis of all osseous structures is identified including the thoracolumbar spine, sacrum, caudal vertebrae, sternum, and pelvis.

A long bone biopsy was recommended but declined by the owner owing to the risk of fracture. A blind nasal biopsy was performed. Histopathology revealed chronic, multifocal, and moderately neutrophilic to‐lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis. Histopathology also supported the hypothesis of thickened bone as the cause of the turbinate thickening observed on CT, demonstrating multifocal, thickened amounts of irregular and mineralized but generally acellular bony material with no visible features of normal bone turnover, such as reversal lines to indicate normal osteoblast function, or Howship's Lacunae to identify resorptive cavities (Figure3). A sample for culture was not taken due to a low suspicion of a bacterial or fungal process, given the patient's history, previous antibiotic treatment, negative polymerase chain reaction results, and imaging findings.

Histopathological image of the nasal biopsy showing multifocal increased amounts of irregular and mineralized but generally acellular (necrotic) bony material. The woven bone contains no visible reversal lines (regular or irregular) or Howship's lacunae, or osteoclasts. No lacunae containing viable osteocytes are visible. The specimen pictured did not undergo decalcification.

The cat was discharged the following day with gabapentin (10 mg/kg by mouth q8‐12 h) for analgesia, prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg by mouth q24h) for inflammation in case of lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis or a similar condition, and mirtazapine as previously prescribed. Although fluticasone via a metered‐dose inhaler is the preferred treatment for chronic rhinitis, there was concern in this patient that the reduced air‐space volume in the nasal passages would limit its efficacy. Frunevetmab (7 mg subcutaneously once) was administered and recommended to be continued monthly. This was administered to control pain associated with concurrent osteoarthritis (OA) which could be contributing to the patient's reduced mobility.

One month after discharge, the cat was reportedly doing very well at home with the previously prescribed medications. Measurement of ionized calcium, parathyroid hormone, and vitamin D were discussed with the patient's primary care veterinarian, but ultimately declined by the family as the patient was doing well. Two months after discharge, a CBC revealed a hematocrit of 30.9% (RI 28.2–52.7%), a WBC count of 4.9 K/µL (RI 3.9–19 K/µL), and a neutrophil count of 3.7 K/µL (RI 2.62–15.17 K/µL). One year later, the cat was reported to have an acceptable quality of life, despite experiencing intermittent mucoid nasal discharge. A CBC at that time revealed a hematocrit of 30.3% (RI 28.2–52.7%), a WBC count of 4.5 K/µL (RI 3.9–19 K/µL), and neutropenia at 2.4 K/µL (RI 2.62–15.17 K/µL).

This report describes a case in which a 5‐year‐old male cat presented with upper respiratory signs and limb pain. Radiography revealed diffuse, increased opacity of the skeleton suggestive of osteosclerosis. These unusual imaging findings indicated that his upper airway symptoms were partly due to systemic bone pathology. This was visible in the head and was particularly evident in the vertebral column and femur. However, diseases that lead to diffuse osteosclerosis in cats are poorly understood. Literature review of similar conditions is further complicated by the constantly evolving nosology of human skeletal disorders, resulting in outdated or confusing terminology (Gregson et al.2013; Unger et al.2023).

Osteosclerosis is a term used to describe a general increase in bone density, traditionally identified via plain radiography (Tolar et al.2004; Beishuizen et al.2021; Hanel et al.2004). Dual‐energy X‐ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scans are used in human medicine to better quantify bone mineral density (BMD) and have allowed for a better understanding of BMD disorders (Gregson et al.2013). Access to this type of imaging is not currently readily available in veterinary medicine.

Normal bone turnover depends on osteoclasts, which cause acidification and dissolution of bone at their resorptive surface (Tolar et al.2004). This is followed by the recruitment of osteoblasts to generate a new bone matrix (Tolar et al.2004). Thus, high BMD can occur due to decreased bone resorption by osteoclasts or increased bone formation by osteoblasts (Gregson et al.2013). Conditions causing generalized high BMD can be further classified by the degree of fracture risk and whether they are inherited or acquired (Gregson et al.2013). The following discussion aims to outline considerations for inherited causes of high BMD in the reported young cat with diffuse osteosclerosis and to offer clarification on the varying terminologies associated with this finding.

Traditionally, a condition called osteopetrosis was diagnosed using plain radiography and was used to describe a varying group of skeletal dysplasias (Tolar et al.2004; Beishuizen et al.2021; Hanel et al.2004; Funck‐Brentano et al.2024). Osteopetrosis has been reported in humans, birds, and multiple mammalian species (Tolar et al.2004; Hanel et al.2004; Kramers et al.1988; Fujita et al.2007). Skeletal surveys show varying increases in bone density and skeletal mass, with possible obliteration of marrow cavities (Tolar et al.2004; Wu et al.2017). Complications may include fractures, osteomyelitis and other infections, hepatosplenomegaly due to extramedullary haematopoiesis, blood dyscrasias, dental disease, deafness, and cranial nerve deficits due to the growth of bone into foramina resulting in compressive stenosis (Tolar et al.2004; Wu et al.2017; Polgreen et al.2023).

In humans, three types of osteopetrosis have been described and further classified by severity and mode of inheritance (Tolar et al.2004; Wu et al.2017). Infantile/malignant autosomal‐recessive osteopetrosis (ARO) is most commonly caused by a mutation in the osteoclast proton pump. Intermediate ARO occurs most commonly because of a lack of carbonic anhydrase II, leading to concurrent renal tubular acidosis and cerebral calcification (Tolar et al.2004). Autosomal‐dominant osteopetrosis (ADO) is the most common form of osteopetrosis in humans (Tolar et al.2004). First reported in 1904 by radiologist Dr. Albers‐Schönberg, it is referred to as Albers‐Schönberg disease or “marble‐bone” disease (Beishuizen et al.2021; Kramers et al.1988; Polgreen et al.2023; Albers‐Schönberg1904). ADO occurs most commonly during young adulthood, with incomplete penetrance and variable gene expression resulting in a wide spectrum of phenotypes (Wu et al.2017; Polgreen et al.2023). The most common complications of ADO include frequent fractures of the brittle bones, avascular osteonecrosis, osteomyelitis of the mandible due to dental infections, chronic pain, and vision loss (Wu et al.2017; Polgreen et al.2023; Hamdan et al.2006). Bone marrow failure, OA, and chronic congestion due to poor sinus formation have also been reported (Wu et al.2017; Polgreen et al.2023; Hamdan et al.2006).

Historically, ADO was classified into two phenotypes: ADO1 and ADO2 (Polgreen et al.2023). Patients with ADO1 reportedly have more cranial involvement and no greater risk of fracture than those with ADO2 (Wright et al.2002). Human guidelines for diagnosis no longer require bone biopsy, as genetic tests have become more readily available (Wu et al.2017). These tests have shown that ADO1, often an incidental finding in adulthood, is caused by increased osteoblast function, most often from a mutation in the low‐density lipoprotein receptor‐related protein 5 (LRP5) gene (Polgreen et al.2023; De Mattia et al.2023; Zhao et al.2023). Mutations in osteoclast differentiation or function result in ADO2 (Polgreen et al.2023). The most common mutation is in theCLCN7gene for osteoclast chloride channels (Tolar et al.2004; Polgreen et al.2023). Studies in mice with osteopetrosis have primarily identified defects in osteoclast differentiation (Tolar et al.2004). To our knowledge, there are no reports on genetic causes of osteopetrosis in cats.

Monitoring recommendations include the measurement of calcium levels, CBCs, parathyroid hormone, and 25‐hydroxyvitamin D levels (Wu et al.2017). Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can be curative for severe infantile forms if the disease is caused by an intrinsic osteoclast defect (Wu et al.2017). Longitudinal multicentre studies of ADO are lacking, and treatment is symptomatic and supportive (Wu et al.2017; Polgreen et al.2023). High‐dose calcitriol was previously used in the hopes of promoting osteoclast differentiation (Polgreen et al.2023). It is no longer recommended due to concerns that it may instead increase bone mass (Polgreen et al.2023). Interferon gamma‐1b has been shown to stimulate superoxide anion formation and activation of osteoclasts, but it has not been shown to reverse disease or improve quality of life in people and is considered an experimental treatment (Wu et al.2017; Polgreen et al.2023). Calcium and vitamin D supplementation are recommended if there is evidence of secondary hyperparathyroidism, but the optimal intake quantities remain unknown (Wu et al.2017). Red blood cell transfusions are administered in cases with bone marrow failure, and some patients become transfusion‐dependent (Wu et al.2017). Corticosteroids are considered a second‐line therapy (Wu et al.2017). Improvement in cell counts has been reported in patients with ARO and possible haemolytic anaemias due to hypersplenism with steroid administration (Wu et al.2017; Dent et al.1965; Moe and Skjæveland1969). The spontaneous remission of severe infantile ARO with steroid treatment has also been reported when stem cell transplant was not possible (Wu et al.2017; Iacobini et al.2001). Steroids can interfere with bone mineralization which may yield an osteoporotic effect (Wu et al.2017; Staa et al.2002). However, this effect may not be beneficial if the defect is in the bone resorption capacity (Wu et al.2017). Gene silencing and other gene‐targeted therapies appear to be the next frontier in safe and effective treatments for all forms of osteopetrosis in humans (Polgreen et al.2023; Maurizi2022).

Genetic testing has also helped to further classify causes of increased BMD due to increased bone formation as hereditary osteosclerotic diseases, also called high bone mass (HBM) disorders (Unger et al.2023; Gregson et al.2013). Currently, these include Sclerosteosis, Van Buchem disease,LRP5HBM (formerly ADO1), andLRP4HBM (Unger et al.2023; Gregson et al.2013; De Mattia et al.2023; Zhao et al.2023). Sclerosteosis can cause syndactyly, gigantism, severely elevated intracranial pressure, and mandible enlargement. Van Buchem disease is a milder form of sclerosteosis, and both occur due to a mutation in theSOSTgene (Gregson et al.2013; Sebastian and Loots2018). Patients withLRP5HBM have radiographically thickened cortices in their long bones with no decrease in haematopoiesis, but also a heterogenous disease phenotype (Zhao et al.2023; Beals et al.2001; Huybrechts et al.2020). Case reviews have identified multiple complications ranging in severity, including headaches, facial nerve palsy, vision or hearing loss, bone pain, and mandible enlargement (Zhao et al.2023).

Few reports detail generalized osteosclerosis or osteopetrosis in cats, and no treatment descriptions are provided for the reported symptoms associated with this condition. Osteopetrosis is often associated with FeLV infection, as reported in 1974 by an experimental study that induced medullary sclerosis and suppressed bone formation and resorption (Hanel et al.2004; Kramers et al.1988; Hoover and Kociba1974). In contrast to the dysfunctional osteoclasts found in humans, FeLV‐infected cats had reduced numbers of osteoclasts and osteoblasts (Hoover and Kociba1974). Subsequently reported generalized osteosclerosis cases have been FeLV‐negative, as was the case in the current report, calling into question whether FeLV should be considered a primary differential diagnosis when osteosclerosis is clinically discovered (Beishuizen et al.2021; Hanel et al.2004; Kramers et al.1988; Fujita et al.2007).

Fujita et al. (2007) described a case of osteopetrosis‐like disease in an 8‐year‐old cat with epiphora and inspiratory stertor in which CT demonstrated increased bone density and severe nasal turbinate hypertrophy causing narrowing of the nasal passages. Biopsies were not obtained, no other conditions were noted, and no treatments were described (Fujita et al.2007).

A similar case report by Hanel et al. (2004) described a 12‐year‐old cat with stertorous respiration and epiphora. Imaging showed multiple healed rib fractures and generalized osteosclerosis with obliteration of the medullary cavities. CT images of the head were similar to those described in the present case and by Fujita et al. The cat was diagnosed with a fibrosarcoma of the right pelvic limb. Additional treatment was declined. Histopathological examination at necropsy revealed nasal turbinates replaced with woven and compact bone, normal‐appearing osteoblasts, low numbers of apoptotic osteoclasts, and reduced numbers of resorption lacunae. The report suggested a disease most similar to ADO2 but noted that on examination this patient's bones were hard, not brittle as expected with ADO2 (Hanel et al.2004). The patient described in our report was still alive at the time of writing. Full necropsy data were not available to assess long bone density and osteocyte distribution. However, histopathologic examination of the cat's nasal turbinates revealed similarities to Hanel's patient, including nasal turbinates replaced with woven bone. Our small biopsy sample did not show any reversal lines or Howship's lacunae on histopathological examination to further evaluate osteocyte presence.

An abstract by Wright et al. described three cases of incidental generalized osteosclerosis in cats where the bones were too hard to be sampled using a bone marrow biopsy needle (Wright et al.2002). Osteosclerosis was noted on radiographs of 14 cats with concurrent illnesses including leukaemia, lymphoma, systemic lupus, C‐cell tumour, myeloproliferative disorder, and kidney disease. The authors proposed the use of the description “diffuse skeletal osteosclerosis” over osteopetrosis in these cases and suggested that further investigation is warranted if such lesions are noted incidentally (Wright et al.2002). This aligns with the more recent shift in human medicine to differentiate osteopetrosis from other osteosclerotic disorders (Unger et al.2023).

More recently, Beishuizen et al. (2021) reported a 1‐year‐old cat with ADO2‐like disease that caused generalized bone dysplasia resulting in recurrent fractures without trauma. This cat was euthanized due to its condition. No evident resorption lacunae were noted in the tibia or lumbar vertebra sections. Special staining confirmed the presence of osteoclasts, suggesting a loss‐of‐function mutation leading to the brittle bones (Beishuizen et al.2021). In the present study, histopathologic exam of nasal biopsies did not reveal any identifiable regions of osteocyte activity, and special stains were not performed.

In this study, the cat showed radiographic changes similar to those reported in humans and in the cases described above, with no evidence of infectious or neoplastic disease. In combination with the patient's history and young age, this presentation was more indicative of a genetic rather than an acquired defect. The limited histopathologic findings, absence of historical fractures, and comparisons to reports in human medicine are most supportive of a defect in osteoblast function leading to increased bone formation. The clinical signs were most similar to those in humans with a mild ADO1 phenotype, including reduced mobility, long bone pain, and nasal congestion, with no evidence of brittle bones or previous fractures. Of note, the more recent reviews ofLRP5HBM did not include nasal congestion as a common finding (Zhao et al.2023). Previous reports of ADO1‐associated nasal congestion may represent a phenotypically similar but genetically distinct osteosclerotic disorder from the ones most commonly associated with mutations inLRP5.

Advanced genetic testing has changed the way we understand and classify diseases, complicating literature review and consensus on treatments (Tolar et al.2004; Polgreen et al.2023; De Mattia et al.2023). It has been suggested that ADO1 should no longer be classified as osteopetrosis since it is associated with osteoblast dysfunction (Tolar et al.2004; De Mattia et al.2023; Zhao et al.2023). Alternate terms that may be found in recent literature includeLRP5HBM, autosomal‐dominant osteosclerosis, autosomal dominant endosteal hyperostosis, and Worth‐type hyperostosis (De Mattia et al.2023; Zhao et al.2023). It is clear that our understanding of these conditions in humans continues to evolve. The genes identified in these osteosclerotic diseases in humans could guide future genetic testing in feline patients with similar findings. Until such testing is readily available, bone biopsy and histopathology to evaluate for areas of osteocyte function may help determine where defective genes may be found in cats (Beishuizen et al.2021).

The cat in this report was initially evaluated for common clinical signs of upper airway congestion with additional musculoskeletal discomfort. Upon further investigation, diffuse changes suggestive of osteosclerosis and associated complications were noted on CT. The patient reportedly did well with supportive care, pain management, and continued low doses of systemic corticosteroids, although signs did not completely resolve. Steroids were recommended to be continued for management of the lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis and in hopes that their osteoporotic effects would slow the progression of the presumed increased bone formation causing clinical signs.

Obtaining a thorough history and investigating comorbidities should be considered in cats with generalized osteosclerosis that is incidentally noted on radiography. Fracture history may also affect the index of suspicion for osteopetrosis versus another osteosclerotic disease. Osteosclerosis affecting the nasal turbinates should be included as a potential, albeit rare, differential diagnosis for chronic nasal congestion in cats. Given the genetic factors identified in other species and varying phenotypic expression, breeding should be discouraged, even in asymptomatic cats with generalized osteosclerosis on radiography. Patients with osteosclerotic disease should be monitored for complications reported in human patients that may affect quality of life, including bone pain, bone marrow failure, fracture, dental disease, vision loss, or hearing loss (Funck‐Brentano et al.2024).

The disease in this patient most resembled an inherited high bone mass disorder due to increased bone formation, such as conditions associated with mutations of theLRP5gene, previously known as ADO1. Bone biopsy, histopathology, and special staining may be helpful in further understanding skeletal disorders in cats. Due to some phenotypes of suspected osteopetrosis resulting in brittle bones, the risk of fracture during long bone biopsy was deemed too great and was not pursued in this case. Further research is warranted to investigate genetic testing for treating and diagnosing cats experiencing clinical signs of an osteosclerotic disorder. Genes associated with osteosclerotic diseases in human medicine, such asLRP5,SOST, andCLCN7, would be reasonable starting points for such testing.