To evaluate healthcare professionals’ knowledge, attitude, and practice regarding spinal cord injury neuropathic pain in Hunan Province, China. This cross-sectional study was conducted between August 2024 and September 2024 in Hunan Province and included healthcare professionals. The questionnaire was self-designed (Cronbach’s α = 0.954) to collect demographic and KAP data. A structural equation modeling (SEM) analysis was performed to determine the relationships among KAP dimensions. The analysis included 402 valid questionnaires. Among them, 28.1% were working in the rehabilitation department, 62.2% had experience in treating patients with SCI, 59.5% had experience in treating patients with SCI-NP, 79.6% were working in a public tertiary hospital, and 85.1% were working at a teaching hospital. The mean knowledge, attitude, and practice scores were 13.02 ± 8.24 (/28, 46.5%), 34.80 ± 5.99 (/40, 87.0%), and 21.56 ± 8.03 (/35, 61.6%), indicating poor knowledge, positive attitudes, and moderate practice, respectively. SEM analysis indicated knowledge directly influenced attitudes (β = 0.511,P< 0.001) and practices (β = 0.571,P< 0.001) and indirectly influenced practice (β = 0.093,P< 0.001), while attitudes directly influenced practice (β = 0.181,P< 0.001). Similar relationships were observed in physicians and nurses. Healthcare professionals exhibit poor knowledge, positive attitudes, and moderate practice regarding SCI-NP. Educational initiatives are needed to enhance their KAP, translating improved knowledge and attitudes into better practices.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-16252-6.

Spinal cord injury (SCI) is damage to the spinal cord, most often due to physical trauma, and leading to transient or permanent loss of motor, sensory, and autonomic functions1. The common causes include motor vehicle accidents, falls, gunshot wounds and other forms of violence, and sports and recreational activities2. The annual incidence of SCI varies from 15 to 52.5 cases per million persons3. Beyond the important neurological deficit, persons with SCI may develop numerous multisystem complications during the acute phase, including brain neurodegeneration4and cognitive impairment5.

Chronic pain (including visceral, musculoskeletal, and neuropathic) is reported in up to 94% of persons with SCI6. Neuropathic pain (NP) is due to damage to the somatosensory nervous system itself, causing pain signals, as opposed to communicating damage from non-neural tissue7. The patient-reported descriptions of SCI-related NP (SCI-NP) include burning, tingling, pricking, pins and needles, sharp, electric, stinging, pressing, shooting, squeezing, stabbing, painful cold, and electric-shock-like. There may be sensory dysfunctions such as hypoesthesia, allodynia, and hyperalgesia. NP within 1 year of the injury is reported in 40%−50% of patients; pain developing > 1 year after injury can be due to other causes8. SCI-NP can have profound impacts on functions, activity, sleep, mood, and the use of medications such as opioids or substances9. Therefore, it is recommended to regularly evaluate the patient with SCI for pain, including NP, based on complete patient history and physical examination because the prognosis of NP is better if it is managed early since NP can progress to chronic, refractory pain, which is often more difficult to manage10,11. The optimal management strategy is based on identifying the underlying conditions that cause the pain, aggravate the pain, and mimic NP characteristics. The strategy also include managing the psychosocial factors that may contribute to distress and disability related to the pain, and addressing pain-related issues with activity, sleep, mood, and medications9. The management of NP includes patient education, cognitive behavioral therapy, self-management, group discussions, exercise, and medication9.

Proper knowledge and attitudes are required to identify, assess, and manage NP in patients with SCI. Identifying the gaps, misunderstandings, and misconceptions could help design and implement educational interventions that could translate into better practice toward SCI-NP. Knowledge, attitude, and practice (KAP) studies allow the identification of such barriers to the optimal performance of a given healthcare concept12,13. Although several studies have examined the KAP of physicians toward chronic pain14–16, to our knowledge none have examined the KAP of healthcare professionals toward SCI-NP.

Therefore, this study aimed to examine the KAP of healthcare professionals toward SCI-NP.

This cross-sectional study was conducted in Hunan Province between August 2024 and September 2024. The study enrolled healthcare professionals. The study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Hunan Provincial People’s Hospital (2024 − 304) and Changsha Central Hospital Medical (2024 − 106). All participants provided informed consent before completing the questionnaire.

The inclusion criteria were (1) board-certified healthcare professionals with full-time employment and (2) voluntary participation. The exclusion criteria were 1) < 1 year of employment or 2) on leave.

The design of the questionnaire was based on guidelines related to SCI-NP: the “Chinese Guidelines for the Assessment and Management of Neuropathic Pain (2024 Edition)” and “The CanPain SCI Clinical Practice Guidelines for Rehabilitation Management of Neuropathic Pain After Spinal Cord Injury: 2021 Update”9. The questionnaire was pre-tested with a small sample (28 individuals), yielding a reliability coefficient of 0.954. During the pilot study, participants were asked whether they found any questions difficult to answer. Since no one reported any difficulties, the questionnaire was used in the subsequent study.

The final questionnaire was in Chinese and included four sections: demographic information, knowledge dimension, attitude dimension, and practice dimension. The knowledge dimension consisted of 14 questions. Questions 1–4, 8, 9, 12, 13, and 14 had four items each; “know” was scored 2 points, “partially know” was 1 point, and “do not know” was 0 points. For questions 5, 6, 7, 10, and 11, the final score was calculated by summing the sub-items and dividing by the number of sub-items, then multiplying by 2. The total knowledge score ranged 0–28. The attitude dimension included eight questions using a five-point Likert scale, from strongly agree (5 points) to strongly disagree (1 point), with a total score range of 8–40. The practice dimension included eight questions; questions 1–7 used a 5-point Likert scale from always (5 points) to never (1 point), and question 8 was analyzed descriptively. The practice score ranged 7–35.

Patients’ overall KAP dimension scores were categorized using a modified Bloom’s criteria cutoff point: respondents who scored between 80% and 100% were considered to have good knowledge, positive attitude, and appropriate practice, respectively, 60%−79% as moderate, and < 60% as poor knowledge, negative attitude, and inappropriate practice, respectively17,18.

Questionnaires were distributed to the participants through quick response (QR) codes distributed to the potential participants by the heads of the human resource departments of the selected hospitals through professional WeChat groups of verified healthcare professionals. Reading the QR code granted access to the online questionnaire. The participants were enrolled through convenience sampling. The first page was the informed consent form. Clicking “I agree to participate in this study” was mandatory to gain access to the questionnaire. Responses to all items were mandatory to submit the questionnaire. A given IP address could be used only once to submit a questionnaire. Questionnaires responded in < 60 s (43 questions at about 1.5 s each) or in > 10 min were considered invalid and were excluded. The lower time limit was set to ensure the participants read the items before answering them. The upper time limit was set to ensure the participants did not take time to look for answers on the Internet or discuss with colleagues. The upper limit also ensured that the participant did not pause answering and answering the two parts in different sets of minds. Questionnaires responded with an obvious pattern (e.g., all first choices) were also considered invalid.

The minimal sample for this study was calculated based on Cochran’s sample size estimation equation (n = z2pq/e2)19. In this formula, n is the number of participants required, z = 1.96 in 95% confidence interval, p = expected proportion, q = 1-p, and e is 5% of the margin of error. Since no previous studies reported the KAP toward SCI-NP in this population, 50% was selected as the expected proportion to maximize the sample size. Applying the values mentioned above in Cochran’s equation, the estimated sample size for the present study was 384.

The continuous data were tested for normality using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Normally distributed data were presented as means ± standard deviations and analyzed using Student’s t-test (two-level comparisons) or ANOVA (multilevel comparisons). Non-normally distributed data were presented as medians (interquartile range (IQR)) and were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney U-test (two-level comparisons) or the Kruskal-Wallis H-test (multilevel comparisons). Categorical data were presented as n (%). Pearson’s correlation analysis was used to correlate dimension scores when normally distributed data. When the data were not normally distributed, Spearman’s correlation analysis was used. SPSS 23.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) was used for analysis. Two-sided P-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Based on the KAP theoretical framework, structural equation modeling (SEM) was used to test three hypotheses: H1) knowledge influences attitudes, H2: attitudes influence practice, and H3) knowledge influences practice). The direct and indirect effects were calculated. Stata 18.0 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA) was used for the SEM analysis.

In this study, 402 valid questionnaires were included for analysis. The characteristics of the participants are shown in Table1. The majority of the participants were 29–35 years old (42.3%), female (75.6%), with a bachelor’s degree (69.9%), nurses (62.7%), with an intermediate professional title (56.2%), with 6–10 years of experience (54.2%), working in the rehabilitation department (28.1%), with experience in treating patients with SCI (62.2%), with experience in treating patients with SCI-NP (59.5%), working in a public tertiary hospital (79.6%), and working at a teaching hospital (85.1%).

The mean knowledge, attitude, and practice scores were 13.02 ± 8.24 (/28, 46.5%), 34.80 ± 5.99 (/40, 87.0%), and 21.56 ± 8.03 (/35, 61.6%), indicating poor knowledge, positive attitudes, and moderate practice. The knowledge scores were associated with the professional title (P= 0.023), department (P< 0.001), experience with treating SCI (P< 0.001), the number of patients with SCI treated per month (P< 0.001), experience with treating SCI-NP (P< 0.001), and the number of patients with SCI-NP treated per month (P< 0.001). The attitude scores were associated with the professional title (P= 0.049), department (P< 0.001), experience with treating SCI (P< 0.001), the number of patients with SCI treated per month (P= 0.026), and experience with treating SCI-NP (P= 0.004). The practice score was associated with education (P= 0.006), profession (P= 0.044), department (P< 0.001), experience with treating SCI (P< 0.001), the number of patients with SCI treated per month (P< 0.001), experience with treating SCI-NP (P< 0.001), and the number of patients with SCI-NP treated per month (P< 0.001) (Table1).

In the knowledge dimension, the items with the poorest knowledge were K5, K14, and K4 (Table2). The lowest proportions of “strongly agree” and “agree” were observed for A1, A5, and A7 (Table3). The lowest proportions of “always” and “often” for the practice items were observed for P2, P1, and P3 (Table4).

Note: The questionnaire was designed and administered in Chinese. The English translation was not validated and is provided for indicative purposes only.

Note: The questionnaire was designed and administered in Chinese. The English translation was not validated and is provided for indicative purposes only.

Note: The questionnaire was designed and administered in Chinese. The English translation was not validated and is provided for indicative purposes only.

In all participants, the knowledge scores were correlated to the attitude (r= 0.477,P< 0.001) and practice (r= 0.646,P< 0.001) scores, while the attitude scores were correlated to the practice scores (r= 0.428,P< 0.001). In physicians, the knowledge scores were correlated to the attitude (r= 0.527,P< 0.001) and practice (r= 0.637,P< 0.001) scores, while the attitude scores were correlated to the practice scores (r= 0.468,P< 0.001). In nurses, the knowledge scores were correlated to the attitude (r= 0.454,P< 0.001) and practice (r= 0.645,P< 0.001) scores, while the attitude scores were correlated to the practice scores (r= 0.413,P< 0.001) (Supplementary TableS1).

In all participants, knowledge directly influenced attitudes (β = 0.511,P< 0.001) and practices (β = 0.571,P< 0.001) and indirectly (through attitude) influenced practice (β = 0.093,P< 0.001), while attitudes directly influenced practice (β = 0.181,P< 0.001). In physicians, knowledge directly influenced attitudes (β = 0.580,P< 0.001) and practices (β = 0.563,P< 0.001) and indirectly (through attitude) influenced practice (β = 0.110,P= 0.025), while attitudes directly influenced practice (β = 0.189,P= 0.022). In nurses, knowledge directly influenced attitudes (β = 0.483,P< 0.001) and practices (β = 0.564,P< 0.001) and indirectly (through attitude) influenced practice (β = 0.085,P= 0.005), while attitudes directly influenced practice (β = 0.175,P= 0.004) (Table5).

This cross-sectional study examined the KAP of healthcare professionals toward SCI-NP in Hunan (China). The results suggest that Hunan (China) healthcare professionals have poor knowledge, positive attitudes, and moderate practice. This study identified specific knowledge and attitude areas requiring improvements, and educational and motivational activities should be designed to improve the KAP of healthcare professionals. Improvements in knowledge and attitudes should translate into improvements in practice.

No previous studies examined the KAP of healthcare professionals toward SCI-NP. Still, some studies examined the KAP toward chronic pain and NP. Rop et al.14reported that clinicians in a tertiary center had poor KAP toward the assessment and management of chronic pain. Karahan et al.15reported that 80% of the nurses in the departments of physical medicine and rehabilitation, neurology, and neurosurgery had a poor knowledge of NP. In a study of urologists managing patients with prostate cancer in South Africa, only 8% were aware of the scales available to assess NP, but 74% were confident about managing NP16. Still, those previous studies performed in various study populations showed that the KAP toward NP is relatively poor, as shown in the present study.

In the present study, a higher job title, working in the rehabilitation department, and having experience with patients with SCI and SCI-NP were associated with higher KAP dimension scores. Those results make sense since professionals with more general experience and more experience with patients with SCI should have higher KAP, as observed regarding various health-related subjects20–22. Physicians and nurses showed similar KAP, but rehabilitation therapists had higher practice scores, consistent with their involvement in managing patients with SCI23.

Besides poor knowledge of SCI-NP in general, the present study showed that specific knowledge items would warrant further education among healthcare professionals. Indeed, knowledge about the cause of NP, the timing of the examinations for NP, the tools and scales used to evaluate NP, the tools used to evaluate anxiety and depression in SCI-NP, the need for multidisciplinary management of SCI-NP, and the non-pharmacological options for the management of NP would warrant specific teaching and training in continuing education activities. All those points are supported by guidelines9. In addition, a future study could examine whether trainees and residents have sufficient training on SCI-NP. Hence, improving knowledge and attitude should translate into improvements in practice. It is, therefore, essential to design interventions to improve the knowledge of healthcare professionals toward SCI-NP. Of note is that this study enrolled many participants already involved in managing SCI and SCI-NP, suggesting that they positively biased the results and hinting that the KAP of healthcare professionals would be even worse. The present study showed positive attitudes for all attitude items. Still, some practice aspects could be improved, especially regarding acquiring knowledge about SCI-NP, following the guidelines for SCI-NP, transferring knowledge to the patients, stating a long-term management plan, and specific treatment modalities for SCI-NP (e.g., respiratory control electrical stimulation, neurolysin, stem cell transplantation, meditation, hypnosis, and osteopathy)9,24,25.

The present study identified specific KAP items requiring education and training improvements. Improving knowledge should translate into more positive attitudes and proactive practices, as suggested by the SEM analysis and according to the KAP theoretical framework12,13,18. Continuing education activities could take the form of formal lectures, journal clubs, webinars, podcasts, and reading materials. Future studies should aim to design such interventions and evaluate their impact on the KAP of healthcare professionals toward SCI-NP. Improving the KAP of healthcare professionals should translate into better patient outcomes and satisfaction, but it will have to be examined in future studies.

This study had limitations. It was performed in a single region of China (Hunan). It resulted in a relatively small sample size and limited generalizability to other regions or countries with different healthcare systems, training programs, and patient populations. The sample included professionals with diverse professions, disciplines, experience, practice in leading/non-leading institutions, educational levels, etc. Although it may introduce variability, it also represents the fact that the management of SCI is multidisciplinary. The questionnaire was designed by the investigators based on local policies, guidelines, and customs, limiting the generalizability and exportability of the questionnaire. The study was cross-sectional, preventing the analysis of causality and longitudinal data. Still, a SEM was performed as a surrogate of causality to determine how the KAP dimensions influenced each other. Still, it is important to remember that such analyses provide statistically inferred causality instead of actual causality26–28. Because of the self-reporting of the data, all KAP studies are at risk of recall bias and social desirability bias29,30. Considering that the knowledge scores were poor, the influence of that bias should be relatively small. The study only examined the KAP of healthcare professionals but did not include perspectives from patients with SCI on their experiences with SCI-NP management.

In conclusion, healthcare professionals in Hunan (China) have poor knowledge, positive attitudes, and moderate practice toward SCI-NP. Specific knowledge and attitude areas requiring improvements could be identified. Hence, educational and motivational activities should be designed to improve the KAP of healthcare professionals toward SCI-NP. Based on the SEM analysis and KAP theoretical framework, improvements in knowledge and attitudes should translate into improvements in practice.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The authors acknowledge the help of technical assistance of Department of Anesthesiology (Changsha Central Hospital, Hunan, China).