To compare the efficacy of real-time continuous glucose monitoring (CGM; intervention) with capillary blood glucose (CBG) monitoring (control) alone to achieve greater percent glucose time in range (%TIR) among pregnant individuals diagnosed gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).

This was an open-label, single-center, randomized controlled trial of pregnant individuals with GDM and ≥20 weeks’ gestation. Subjects were randomly assigned (2:1) to use real-time CGM plus adjunctive CBG versus CBG alone for glucose monitoring. The intervention group was instructed on the continuous use of the Dexcom G6 CGM system from enrollment to admission for delivery. The control group used CBG monitoring four times per day underwent blinded CGM approximately every 20 days throughout the study period. The primary outcome was the CGM %TIR defined as 60–140 mg/dL (3.3–7.8 mmol/L) from study enrollment until hospital admission for delivery.

A total of 111 participants were enrolled between February 2021 and June 2023 (n= 74 in intervention group;n= 37 in control group) with no statistical differences in demographic characteristics between the groups. The CGM group had significantly higher %TIR ±SD (93 ± 6 min vs. 88 ± 14 min at 60–140 mg/dL;P= 0.027). Among key secondary CGM metric outcomes, the intervention group had significantly higher daytime TIR with lower 24-h and daytime mean glucose and percent time >140 mg/dL compared with the control group.

We demonstrated a significantly higher %TIR using real-time CGM compared with CBG glucose monitoring among pregnant people with GDM. Studies are needed to determine if achieving lower CGM glucose levels can improve perinatal and neonatal outcomes.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) complicates more than one in seven pregnancies worldwide (1). Treatment of even mild disease has been shown to reduce adverse perinatal outcomes associated with GDM, including preeclampsia and large-for-gestational-age (LGA) infants (2). Diabetes technology has evolved significantly over the past 20 years and, only recently, continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) devices have been cleared for use in pregnancy by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Although evidence from the Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Pregnant Women With Type 1 Diabetes (CONCEPTT) trial showed that CGM use improves both glycemia and neonatal outcomes among pregnant people with type 1 diabetes (T1D) (3,4), these data are lacking among individuals with GDM. There is a paucity of data to understand the role of CGM in achieving higher glycemic goals compared with current monitoring standards using capillary blood glucose monitoring (CBG) among individuals with GDM nor evidence demonstrating the use of CGM in improving perinatal or neonatal outcomes.

GDM is a different disease compared with T1D in pregnancy; glycemic pregnancy targets in GDM often can be achieved without multidose insulin injections and without significant risks for hypoglycemia. However, despite some improvements in adverse perinatal outcomes with diagnosis and treatment of GDM, rates of pregnancy complications are still above baseline obstetric population levels (5). Prior studies investigating the role of CGM among pregnancies complicated by GDM have been limited by short periods of CGM wear to characterize glycemia, intermittent use of CGM across the study period to augment CBG monitoring, small sample sizes, or have used retrospective analyses of CGM data (6–14). Adverse perinatal outcomes have been associated with hyperglycemia based on CGM metrics (7,15,16), but randomized controlled trials are lacking to determine1) if real-time CGM can achieve better glucose levels compared with conventional CBG monitoring and2) what CGM metrics are important to target to improve adverse perinatal outcomes among people with GDM.

The initial step to understand the role of CGM for management of GDM is to determine if pregnant people with GDM can achieve better glycemic levels using real-time CGM continuously compared with the current practice using CBG alone. We hypothesize that pregnant people with GDM using real-time CGM can achieve higher percent glucose time in range (%TIR; 60–140 mg/dL) compared with using conventional CBG monitoring for diabetes management.

In this open-label, randomized controlled trial, we recruited participants to compare the efficacy of real-time CGM with CBG alone to achieve greater TIR among patients diagnosed with GDM at a single academic-based clinical site (Oregon Health & Science University). The full study protocol is available to review as aSupplementary Protocol. Individuals carrying a singleton fetus, diagnosed with GDM with either the one-step International Association of the Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups (IADPSG) criteria or two-step Carpenter-Coustan diagnostic criteria, and ≥20 weeks’ gestation were eligible for enrollment (17,18). Because glycemic targets in pregnancy are the same regardless of the type of diabetes or gestational age at recognition, higher-risk individuals who were screened earlier in gestation for hyperglycemia and diagnosed with GDM using oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) criteria were eligible to enroll starting at 20 weeks’ gestation (19). Pregnant people with severe adhesive allergies, preexisting diabetes, who required chronic immunosuppressive medications, or were at >35 weeks’ gestation met exclusion criteria for study participation. Participants meeting inclusion criteria without exclusion were randomly assigned to use real-time CGM plus adjunctive CBG (intervention group) versus CBG alone (control group) for glucose monitoring (Supplementary Protocol).

Treatment groups were assigned by means of a secure, web-based software platform (Research Electronic Data Capture [REDCap]) that used a blocked randomization scheme with a block size of six and an intervention to control the allocation ratio of 2:1 that was initiated by the study team upon completion of the informed consent for participation (20).

The study was approved by the Oregon Health & Science University institutional review committee, Portland, OR (approval 21775), received a Federal Drug Administration investigative device exemption (no. G200250), and was registered withClinicalTrials.gov(identifierNCT04605497). Trial funding was provided by Dexcom (Dexcom, Inc.; San Diego, CA). Although representatives from Dexcom received a copy of the manuscript before submission, they were not permitted to contribute any input on the analysis or content.

Participants randomized to the intervention group were instructed on the use of the Dexcom G6 CGM system. Participants who did not have compatible smartphone software systems were given Dexcom receiver devices to see their data in real time. Because the study was started before the FDA clearance of CGM use in pregnancy, study participants received instructions to use CBG monitoring in addition to using their CGM for glucose monitoring. Participants had alerts set at 60 and 140 mg/dL and were instructed to confirm CGM readings <60 or >140 mg/dL with a CBG using the Contour Next glucometer device (Ascensia Diabetes Care; Parsippany, NJ) at enrollment. Participants alternatively could continue monitoring CBG approximately four times per day in the real-time CGM group if they had difficulty adhering to the safety checks. Instructions to change the CGM sensors every 10 days until delivery were given to each participant. The study team sent the CGM and available CBG data to the primary obstetric clinicians weekly for review and management of GDM. The CGM data provided to the managing clinicians included the Dexcom Clarity Ambulatory Glucose Profile (adjusted to the study range 60–140 mg/dL), “Overlay,” and “Daily” reports over the most recent 7 days.

There are no current recommended CGM metrics or CGM-specific targets for GDM. Additionally, current guidelines do not recommend substituting CGM metrics for conventional blood glucose targets to achieve optimal pre- and postprandial glycemic goals (21). Participants were instructed to monitor CBGs as mentioned in the previous paragraph and obstetric clinicians were instructed to use recommended blood glucose targets (i.e., fasting <95 mg/dL and 1-h measurement <140 mg/dL or 2-h measurement <120 mg/dL) to facilitate management decisions (19,22). The study team was readily available to assist obstetric clinicians desiring education on CGM interpretation but was not involved in GDM management decisions.

Participants randomized to the control group were instructed to continue conventional CBG monitoring, using the Contour Next glucometer device, at least four times per day (fasting and 1 h after start of meals) or as instructed by their obstetric clinicians. Participants were instructed to place a blinded Dexcom G6 CGM Pro every 20 days (10 days of sensor wear followed by 10 days of no sensor wear) until delivery. Although CBG data were freely available for clinicians to review with the participants, the CBG data were similarly sent to the primary obstetric clinicians weekly for review and management of GDM. Obstetric clinicians were instructed to use current recommended blood glucose targets (i.e., fasting <95 mg/dL and 1-h measurement <140 mg/dL or 2-h measurement <120 mg/dL) to facilitate management decisions.

Our primary outcome was the percentage of time in the CGM glucose target range defined as 60–140 mg/dL (3.3–7.8 mmol/L) from enrollment to admission for delivery. Key secondary outcomes included other CGM metrics with prespecified glucose outcomes, including daytime and nocturnal %TIR; 24-h %TIR as defined by the International Consensus on CGM (63–140 mg/dL); and daytime, nocturnal, and 24-h total coefficient of variation (CV), mean glucose concentration, and SD, as appropriate. Perinatal and neonatal outcomes of interest included hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (i.e., gestational hypertension, preeclampsia with or without severe features, eclampsia, or HELLP [hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low platelet count] syndrome), birth injuries (shoulder dystocia, brachial plexus injuries, or clavicle or humerus fractures), LGA (≥90th percentile for gestational age), macrosomia (≥4,000 g birth weight), and neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission.

Study data were collected and managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at Oregon Health & Science University (20,23). Data analyses were performed using R Statistical Software (version 4.2.1; R Core Team, 2022). Baseline demographic characteristics and medical history were collected prospectively both through self-reported surveys and directed interviews after enrollment and randomization. Pregnancy events, delivery, and neonatal data were collected through chart abstraction or participant reports. We determined 90 participants were needed to have an 80% power to detect an absolute difference of at least 5 percentage points in the primary outcome with an SD of 15% and a two-sided type 1 error rate of 5%. To account for 20% attrition, the enrollment goal was 110 individuals.

We used an intention-to-treat approach for all statistical analyses. CGM data were filtered to exclude any postadmission delivery data. We grouped data into 24-h periods starting at 06:00. We excluded days with >10% of data missing (i.e., to account for a day with a potential sensor change and potential disruptions in CGM signaling) from the analysis to avoid inconsistency in the glucose sensor readings. Participants with <96 h of CGM glucose data were excluded from the CGM metric analyses.

For each participant, we calculated 24-h, daytime, and nighttime glucose summaries with the available data. We defined nighttime as 23:00–05:59, daytime as 06:00–22:59, and data collection period as fasting as 06:00–06:30. We calculated the 24-h %TIR for glucose ranges of 60–140 mg/dL (primary), 63–140 mg/dL, and 60–120 mg/dL. We used a glucose range of 60–140 mg/dL for daytime %TIR and 60–99 mg/dL for nocturnal TIR. We measured the percentage of time >140 mg/dL and below 60 mg/dL. We computed mean, SD, and CV ([SD/mean] × 100) for 24-h, daytime, and nighttime glucose readings. Individual SD and CV values represent a mean of the average SD and CV across all members of each group. We averaged each participant’s daily TIR to determine an overall average TIR. We took group averages and SDs for the CGM and CBG groups and compared them using Welchttests.

Participants’ CBG data outputs were analyzed and compared between the two groups. CBG frequency varied in the CGM cohort because participants had the option to confirm alerts with CBG or continue four times per day testing. Some participants labeled their CBG readings as fasting or postprandial. For those that were not labeled, we assumed the first reading of the day was a fasting glucose value and the following glucose readings were postprandial measures. “Postprandial measures” <80 mg/dL were excluded in the CBG analysis to remove readings done potentially as additional testing for low alerts or monitoring for hypoglycemia. We calculated individual mean fasting and postprandial glucose values and compared them between groups. The individual median number of CBG readings per day was calculated and we used a cutoff of four to compare CBG use between the two cohorts. We compared perinatal, delivery, and neonatal outcomes between the two groups using the Pearson χ2test (categorical with cell counts >5), Fisher exact test (categorical with cell counts <5), Welchttest (continuous), and Wilcoxon rank-sum test, depending on variable type and distribution.Pvalues <0.05 and 95% CIs without crossing the null were considered statistically significant. Data visualizations were constructed to observe patterns in mean glucose and %TIR across gestational ages and times of day.

Of the 558 eligible patients, 111 were enrolled for study participation between February 2021 and June 2023: 74 in the real-time CGM arm and 37 in the CBG arm (Fig. 1). Study completion for all participants concluded in October 2023. There were no statistical differences in baseline demographic characteristics between the groups (Table 1). The mean gestational age at enrollment was 27.2 ± 4.9 weeks in the CGM and 28.3 ± 4.7 weeks in the CBG groups. Nearly 90% of the cohort were diagnosed with GDM using the one-step IADPSG criteria. There were no statistical differences between groups with regard to participants requiring pharmacotherapy for diabetes management at enrollment (66.2 vs. 48.6%;P= 0.115) or at the time of admission for delivery (84.9 vs. 77.1%;P= 0.469). Total daily doses of insulin and metformin at the time of delivery were not different between treatment groups (75 ± 57 vs. 70 ± 110 units insulin,P= 0.801; 1,000 [1,000–1,375 interquartile range (IQR)] vs. 1,250 [1,125–1,375 IQR] mg metformin,P= 0.817). Of the total cohort, only nine participants (8%) had insufficient CGM glucose data available to include in the primary outcome of the study.

Flow diagram of the screened individuals and enrolled study participants.

Continuous variables are presented as mean ± SD or median [IQR]. Categorical variables are presented asn(%).

*Any tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, or illicit substance use during pregnancy.

†HbA1cmeasures of participants who had drawn first trimester values (missingn= 12).

‡OGTT values of participants who performed the one-step 75 g OGTT (missingn= 8).

Compared with the CBG group, the real-time CGM group had significantly higher percent time in the study-specific glucose range (93 ± 6% vs. 88 ± 14% time in 60–140 mg/dL; 95% CI 0.7, 11.0 for difference;P= 0.027) (Table 2). The mean blood glucose concentration was lower in the real-time CGM group compared with the CBG group (103 ± 8 vs. 109 ± 17 mg/dL;P= 0.047). Additionally, among key secondary CGM metric outcomes, the real-time CGM group had significantly higher daytime %TIR and 24-h %TIR between 63 and 120 mg/dL with lower 24-h and daytime mean glucose and percent time >140 mg/dL compared with the CBG group. Although the nocturnal %TIR was not statistically different, the fasting glucose concentration trended lower in the CGM group (95 ± 9 vs. 100 ± 15 mg/dL;P= 0.069) compared with the CBG group.

When analyzing the percentage of time in study-specific glucose range and mean glucose concentration trends according to the time of day, the CGM group had consistently higher %TIR and lower mean glucose levels throughout the day and night periods (Fig. 2). The higher %TIR was attributable to lower daytime mean glucose levels and percentage of time spent above range (6 ± 6% vs. 12 ± 14%;P= 0.027) and not secondary to increased time spent <60 mg/dL (0.7 ± 0.9% vs. 0.7 ± 1.2%;P= 0.770). The CGM group tended to have a higher %TIR compared with the CBG group across gestational ages, but a significant difference was only observed in the range of 28–31 weeks (Supplementary Fig. 1).

Percent time in glucose range and mean glucose according to time of day.A: An envelope plot of the percent time in the study specific glucose target range (60–140 mg/dL).B: Mean glucose concentration, as measured by CGM for the real-time CGM (blue) and CBG (pink) groups, according to the time of day from enrollment to admission for delivery. The real-time CGM group spent a significantly greater percentage of time in the glucose target range and had lower mean glucose levels throughout the day and night compared with the CBG group. Shaded areas indicate 95% CIs for the mean %TIR and glucose.

There was no significant difference in mean fasting (91 ± 8 vs. 93 ± 10 mg/dL;P= 0.246) or 1-h postprandial (121 ± 10 vs. 122 ± 12 mg/dL;P= 0.860) blood glucose values or between those who achieved CBG fasting targets <95 mg/dL (74% vs. 72%;P> 0.999) and 1-h postprandial <140 mg/dL (96% vs. 94%;P= 0.654) on average between the CGM and CBG groups. The proportion in each group reporting a median of at least four CBG readings per day was 53% in the CGM group and 41% in CBG group (P= 0.350).

There were no significant differences in perinatal, delivery, or neonatal outcomes between the groups (Table 3). There was a 20% difference in the rate of spontaneous vaginal delivery between the groups, which was not statistically significant, with a higher rate in the CBG group. The CGMs were well tolerated overall by the study participants, with no reported significant adverse outcomes. Of the study participants reporting side effects, 18% reported trouble with insertion of the sensors, 28% had skin irritation from the adhesive, 29% experienced itching around the insertion site, 7% had concerns but no evidence of a skin infection, and 17% reported trouble with removal of the sensor-transmitter device.

Continuous variables are presented as mean ± SD or median [IQR]. Categorical variables are presented asn(%). GDMA1, GDM class 1, managed with nutrition and lifestyle changes; GDMA2, GDM class 2, requiring pharmacotherapy.

*Fisher exact test used for variables with cell counts ≤5.

†Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy include gestational hypertension, preeclampsia with or without severe features, HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low platelet count) syndrome, or eclampsia.

‡Birth injury includes shoulder dystocia, brachial plexus injuries, and clavicle or humerus fractures.

§Glucose <40 mg/dL or requiring glucose therapy beyond breastmilk or formula.

This open-label, single-center, randomized controlled trial demonstrated that pregnant people with GDM can achieve significantly higher %TIR (60–140 mg/dL) using real-time CGM compared with the current conventional glucose monitoring approach of measuring CBG up to four times per day. The participants randomized to the real-time CGM group had consistently lower mean glucose concentrations across the day throughout the study period without a significant difference in participants requiring medications to manage their diabetes or gestational weight gain between the two groups.

Our study findings suggest real-time CGM is a tool that may help people with GDM achieve higher %TIR. The mean glucose level in the CBG group in our study was similar to that of the GLAM (Glucose Levels Across Maternity Study) GDM population (109 ± 17 vs. 109 ± 13 mg/dL [GLAM]) (24). However, the data presented in GLAM included glycemic metrics prior to OGTT and do not represent glycemic metrics after the diagnosis of GDM. Yu et al. (6) similarly demonstrated introducing intermittent 72-h CGM system to CBG monitoring achieved significantly lower CGM metrics (mean glucose levels, SDs, and mean amplitude of glycemic excursions) compared with CBG monitoring alone among a Chinese cohort. Lane et al. (13) compared real-time CGM with CBG for 4 weeks and did not find significant differences in glycemic metrics, but their sample size was small (n= 23 for CGM data) and used the earlier models of Medtronic CGM sensors (Enlite sensor). Acknowledging the differences in population demographics and potential glucose metabolism, Wei et al. (14) demonstrated no differences in pregnancy outcomes using real-time CGM, similar to our study, but using CGM immediately after GDM diagnosis showed an improvement in gestational weight gain compared with introducing real-time CGM later in the third trimester.

Prior studies among pregnant women with T1D demonstrated improvement in neonatal outcomes with >5% improvement in %TIR, particularly in the second and third trimesters (25–27). However, our cohort of GDM participants overall achieved high %TIR without increasing the risk for hypoglycemia, providing evidence to support the need for different CGM targets specific to GDM rather than those tailored to pregnant individuals with T1D. This is further supported by capillary and CGM normoglycemic data among pregnant people without GDM found to have stable mean glucose levels across gestation with rare values >140 mg/dL (28,29).

A prospective cohort study of Chinese pregnant women with GDM who wore a CGM for 14 days between 30 and 32 weeks’ gestation demonstrated that for every 1-SD change of time-above-range, area under the curve, and daily, daytime, and nocturnal mean glucose levels, the risk for any adverse perinatal outcomes increased (7). The lowest absolute risk for any adverse outcome was a daily mean glucose of 80–85 mg/dL and highest absolute risk with a daily mean glucose between 104 and 110 mg/dL in this Asian population. Although both groups achieved relatively high TIR in our cohort, the mean glucose levels in the cohorts were 103–109 mg/dL. Law et al. (30) demonstrated higher rates of LGA infants among women with GDM experiencing higher nocturnal mean glucose levels (108.0 ± 18.0 mg/dL vs. 99.0 ± 14.4 mg/dL). Both study cohorts in our trial had mean nocturnal glucose concentrations >99 mg/dL without a difference in LGA outcome, but our study was not powered to associate CGM metrics with perinatal or neonatal outcomes among pregnant people with GDM.

Our study is not without limitations. This was a single-center trial at the only academic center in the state of Oregon, which may not fully represent all populations. The study was not powered to determine differences in perinatal or neonatal outcomes. Additionally, the effect size assumptions were based on data from T1D pregnancies because GDM and recently published normative data were not available at the time of study conception, which limits the interpretation of the current statistical analyses (24,28). Since the study’s inception, the field has grown in the importance of multiple CGM metrics to define glucose targets, and our study is limited by focusing on the primary outcome of TIR. Our CGM findings can contribute to the existing literature to help define glucose targets in future studies that may be meaningful to improve perinatal outcomes.

Because the study was performed before FDA clearance of CGM use in pregnancy, study participants were required to adhere to safety checks or CBG monitoring while using real-time CGM, which may not reflect pragmatic uses of current CGM in practice. However, there is still a role for CBG monitoring among people using CGM for diabetes management, and obstetric clinicians were supported throughout the study period on glucose interpretation using both tools. Additionally, because the FDA has cleared some CGM devices for use in pregnancy, comparing CGM with CBG to determine their abilities to achieve better glucose levels will be feasibly difficult to achieve without significant recruitment and selection bias challenges, supporting the significance of our trial. Our study had well-characterized CGM and CBG data in both groups across gestation with overall low attrition rates, compared with prior published reports only comparing limited gestational periods of CGM data.

Real-time CGM can achieve significantly higher %TIR compared with current conventional CBG monitoring. Although there was a trend toward improvement in nocturnal TIR, there was no difference in nocturnal TIR between the CGM and CBG groups, with a range that was predefined in the study at 60–99 mg/dL. CGM nocturnal glucose ranges have not been defined previously, and our targets may have been too strict given the recent normative data demonstrating mean nighttime glucose (24:00 to 06:00) was 96 ± 8 mg/dL among pregnant people without GDM (28). CBG data between the two groups were similar for fasting and 1-h postprandial levels as well as the percentage meeting societal blood glucose guidelines. Acknowledging that CGM uses algorithms to convert sensor signals that reflect interstitial glucose into estimates of blood glucose levels, we do not expect the CGM and CBG values to be the same, but their trends were in similar directions (i.e., fasting glucose lower in CGM group compared with the CBG group). CGM data also capture glucose levels outside of the CBG testing time points that contribute to glucose metrics (e.g., mean, time above range, time below range) and may be different than calculating those metrics using CBG data alone. Less than 75% of both groups had a mean fasting CBG reading of <95 mg/dL, thus calling into question if improving glycemia to conventional blood glucose targets is superior to CGM %TIR alone to improve outcomes. However, the CBG group overall had a low proportion of participants with four times per day CBG readings, suggesting challenges in adhering to CBG monitoring guidance.

No significant adverse events were reported among the study participants. However, introducing CGM to pregnant individuals with GDM is not without potential challenges, with nearly 30% experiencing device and/or sensor site difficulties. A GDM diagnosis and the learning curve for diabetes management is commonly associated with increased stress and anxiety for pregnant people (31,32). CGM provides 72 times more glucose data than conventional four times per day CBG monitoring. Patients can benefit from real-time CGM data and glycemic trends to inform nutritional choices and effects of lifestyle modifications to better achieve glycemic targets (33). However, the large amount of data from CGM can also come with burdens such as data overload and nuisance alarms, particularly overnight, that can affect sleep (34,35); people with GDM are at high risk for experiencing this given the lower glycemic targets in pregnancy. Incorporating CGM technology, troubleshooting, and device support into diabetes education is imperative to integrating CGM as the primary method for glycemic monitoring among individuals with GDM.

Our data demonstrated using real-time CGM may improve other glucose measures for people with GDM (i.e., % time above range, %TIR in tighter range 63–120 mg/dL, and mean glucose) compared with CGM alone. The international consensus on TIR for CGM clinical targets reports that more data are needed to better inform clinical CGM targets for GDM (3). Therefore, studies that are powered to determine if lowering glucose levels leads to improved perinatal or neonatal outcomes should focus on comprehensive CGM metrics in addition to %TIR to define CGM glycemic targets for pregnant people with GDM. Understanding the impact of common negative reactions (e.g., pain, data overload, alarm fatigue) in addition to psychological effects such as self-efficacy and resilience is important to understand overall efficacy and acceptability of CGM for people with GDM.

This article contains supplementary material online athttps://doi.org/10.2337/figshare.29437502.

Acknowledgments.The authors acknowledge Christie Naze (Oregon Health & Science University) for contributions to recruitment and trial support, Teri Hernandez (University of Colorado) for CGM expertise and trial support, Emily Boniface (Oregon Health & Science University) for contributions regarding statistical support, and Sally Segel (The Vancouver Clinic) for contributions to recruitment.

Prior Presentation. This work was presented in part at the American Diabetes Association 84th Scientific Sessions, Orlando, FL, 21–24 June 2024.

Handling Editors.The journal editors responsible for overseeing the review of the manuscript were Steven E. Kahn and David Simmons.