In this study, we prepared zinc oxide nanoparticles using a quick, safe, and cost-effective method by reducing Zn(NO3)2·6H2O solution with Neem (Azadirachta indica) leaf extract. Qualitative phytochemical screening and FT-IR spectroscopy measurements were employed to validate the presence of active biomolecules such as Flavonoids, phenols, alkaloids, terpenes and tannic compounds. FT-IR, UV–Vis, and XRD spectroscopic techniques were utilized to fully analyze the biosynthesized nanoparticles. The spectrum of UV–Visible spectroscopy indicated UV–Vis spectrum of 321 nm. FTIR spectra showed the absorption peak for the stretching vibration of Zn–O at 544 cm−1. The results obtained supported the formation of ZnO NPs employingA. indicaleaf extract as a reducing and stabilizing agent. X-ray diffraction spectrum analysis was also used to investigate the crystal structure. The particle size of ZnO NPs was calculated using the Scherrer’s equation and the result was found to be 19.16 nm. Furthermore, the antibacterial potential of zinc oxide nanoparticles against two clinical strains ofEscherichia coli(E. coli) andStaphylococcus aureus(S. aureus) bacteria was examined by paper disc diffusion method. The result showed a significant inhibition zone of 18 mm againstE. coliand an inhibition zone of 15 mm againstS. aureus.

The Greek word “dwarf,” which refers to particles with sizes between one and one hundred nanometers, is the source of the term “Nano” [1]. Recent reports show that nanotechnology deals with the distribution and morphology of materials having sizes less than 100 nm, and it depends on the nature of Nanoparticles, which are atomic or molecular aggregates [2]. Nanoparticles exhibit distinct physical, chemical, optical, and biological characteristics due to their quantum size effect and large surface area to volume ratio [3,4]. This feature of nanoparticles enables them to be more reactive than the bulk material as atoms on the surface tend to be more active than those at the center. Changing the size of particles from micrometers to nanometers will bring changes in their properties, such as electrical conductivity, hardness, active surface area, chemical reactivity, and biological activity. This is because a high-surface-area particle has more reaction sites than a low-surface-area particle, which leads to enhanced chemical reactivity [5,6].

Among the various nanomaterials, metal oxide nanoparticles have drawn a lot of interest from the scientific community due to their tunable size and numerous special qualities, including high chemical stability, high electrochemical coupling coefficient, wide range of radiation absorption, high photostability, etc. [7,8]. Within the large family of metal oxide NPs, ZnO NPs have attracted considerable attention due to their unique properties, such as their biocompatibility, wide and direct band gap (3.3 eV), and large excitation binding energy (60 meV) [9]. ZnO NPs are widely used in electrochemical sensors [10], photovoltaics as a transparent conducting oxide electrode [11], wastewater treatment, antibacterial, and drug carriers [12,13], medicine [13], degrading environmental pollutants [14] and photocatalysis [15]. Treatment of rice with Zn based bio fertilizers such as biosynthesized ZnO NPs is also an economical and ecofriendly route for agriculturists to control Zn deficiency in crops to obtain high yield [16–18].

ZnO NPs are synthesized by several physical and chemical methods such as the hydrothermal, solvothermal, microemulsion, microwave, and thermal methods. Although these physical/chemical approaches are efficient in producing nanoparticles of various sizes and morphologies, they employ expensive equipment, toxic chemicals, non-biodegradable stabilizing agents, potentially hazardous organic solvents [23–25]. To minimize these problems, a safe, cost effective, less hazardous and environmentally friendly synthesis procedure has been developed, namely the biological or green method using plant extract with a low concentration of the chemicals.

ZnO NPs synthesis using plant extracts offers significant environmental benefits compared to traditional chemical. This method eliminates the use of harsh chemicals, reduces toxic waste generation, and utilizes renewable plant-based materials, making the process significantly more eco-friendly and sustainable [26]. As a result, the interest in the synthesis of nanoparticles has shifted towards “green chemistry” and bio-processor approaches. Green chemistry is the design of chemical products and processes to minimize or to eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances and was developed in principle to guide chemists in their search towards greenness [27,28]. Green synthetic procedures have gained rising popularity as they can develop clean technology that proactively affects the design of nanomaterials to provide a benign atmosphere for promoting environmental sustainability [9].

Green methodologies facilitate the reduction of dissolved metal ions to zero valence state and eventually lead to the formation of nanoparticles. Components found in plants can function as stabilizing, chelating, reducing, and capping agents when producing nanoparticles [15]. Literature review reports showed that ZnO NPs have been synthesized from various plant extracts such asParthenium Hysterophorus[29],Garcinia Mangostana[30],Aloe vera[31,32],Sarcopoterium Spinosum(L.)Spach[33],Murraya Koenigii[34],Albizia LebbeckStem bark [35], etc.

Although using green chemistry-based synthesis has advantages over traditional methods for the environment, there are still some unanswered questions regarding the consistency of particle size and shape, reproducibility of the synthesis process, and understanding of the mechanisms involved in producing the nanoparticles via green entities [36]. Therefore, more investigation is required to examine and understand the current green synthesis-dependent processes. Thus, this study investigates the use ofAzadirachta indicaleaf extract as a capping and reducing agent in the synthesis of ZnO NPs.

Azadirachta indicaplant is an evergreen tree that belongs to the Meliaceae family and is found commonly in India, Africa and America [37–39].Azadirachta indicaplant is considered to be the richest sources of drugs for traditional medicine, modern medicine, food supplements, folk medicine, pharmaceutical intermediates and chemical entities for synthetic drugs [36,38]. The Chemical components incorporate many biologically energetic compounds that can be extracted fromA. indicalike alkaloids, flavonoids, saponins, Tannins, Catechines, Gallic acid, Limonoids, phenolic compounds, carotenoids, steroids and ketones. [38,40]. Figure1shows some of the chemical components ofA. indicaplant.

All the chemicals used in this study were of analytical reagent grade, commercially available and used without further purification. Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 98.5%) from Loba Chemie Pvt. Ltd, India, sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 98%) from Blulux Laboratories (P) Ltd; Gentamicin from Abcekadtek (P) Ltd, and other chemicals were purchased from different companies. Double distilled water was used throughout the experiment.

Azadirachta indicaleaf extract was used to prepare ZnO NPs on the basis of cost-effectiveness, its medicinal value and ease of availability. Thus, relatively fresh and healthyA. indicaleaves were collected from the local area of Bahir Dar city, Ethiopia. The surface of the leaves were rinsed thoroughly first with running tap water followed by distilled water to remove debris and other contaminated organic contents. Thereafter the leaves were cut into small pieces and then homogenized using mortar and pestle. The aqueous leaves extract was prepared by placing 5 g of washed and fine cut leaves in 250 mL flask along with 50 mL of distilled water. The mixture was then heated at 60 °C for 10 min.

Then, the extract is cooled to room temperature and filtered through Whatman No.1 filter paper to remove particulate matter and to get clear solution. The filtrate was collected and then stored in a refrigerator at 4 °C for further use in the synthesis of ZnO NPs.

Different functional groups fromA. indicaleaf extract were identified using a qualitative phytochemicals test based on standard methods [41–43]. These functional groups are responsible for the reduction of Zn2+to ZnO NPs and capping and stabilization of the synthesized ZnO NPs. Figure3shows the results of qualitative phytochemical screening tests of the leaf extract. As shown in the figure, the phytochemical tests confirm the presence of secondary metabolites such as Alkaloids, Flavonoids, Glycosides, Tannins, Terpenoids and Phenols.

Zinc oxide nanoparticles were synthesized by mixing 2 mL aqueous solution ofA. indicaleaf extract with 25 mL of 4 mM aqueous Zn(NO3)2·6H2O solution according to the method reported by different literatures with some modifications [2,7]. The reaction was conducted for 3 h until a pale yellow color was observed (Fig.2E). The solution heated at 60 °C for 1 h turned from pale yellow to deep yellow colored paste confirming the formation of ZnO NPs [11].

The mixture shown in Fig.2E was placed in a beaker (Fig.2F) and heated (calcinated) in an oven at a temperature of 400 °C for 2 h. This calcination process is in agreement with other research works [2,7]. After subsequent steps of washing, centrifugation, and calcination, white powder of ZnO NPs was obtained (Fig.2G). The powder was used for further characterization, specifically for XRD analysis. Scheme1shows possible reaction mechanism for the formation of white powder ZnO NPs. In the reaction mechanism, aromatic hydroxyl groups present in the phytochemicals are attached to the Zn2+ions from Zn(NO3)2.6H2O to form a stable complex system [11,12].

To characterize the synthesized ZnO NPs, we used visual observation and different analytical instruments such as UV–Vis spectroscopy, XRD analysis, FTIR spectroscopy. An Agilent Cary 60 UV–Vis spectrophotometer was used to perform UV–Visible absorption spectral analysis of the synthesized ZnO NPs. The samples were scanned in UV–Visible spectrum with a wavelength range of 200 to 800 nm. A drop of the plant leaf extract and colloid solution of ZnO NPs was combined with KBr powder to create a paste for FT-IR spectroscopic analysis. The paste was then placed into an 8 nm resolution FT-IR (IRAffinity-1S, Shimadzu, Japan) spectrophotometer and scanned in a wave number range of 400–4000 cm−1. The crystalline nature of the zinc oxide nanoparticle was determined by subjecting ZnO NPs powder to X-ray diffraction (XRD, PANalytical X’Pert PRO) at a voltage of 40 kV and a current of 30 mA with Cu K radiation. Estimation of crystalline size (D) of the prepared ZnO NPs was calculated by Debye–Scherrer formula.

Antibacterial activity of ZnO NP was investigated using the disc-diffusion method against human pathogens such asS. aureusandE. coli. Preparation of the bacteria stock was done by inoculating each inoculation loop with pure culture ofS. aureusandE. colinutrient broth solution. All the equipment and growing media were sterilized by autoclaving at a temperature of 115 °C for 30 min. An overnight culture of inoculum was spread over the Mueller Hinton Agar (MHA) plates by a non-toxic cotton swab on an applicator stick which was dipped into the standardized suspension of bacteria. Subsequently, the filter paper disc of 6 mm in diameter was soaked using sterile forceps in a 30 µl of ZnO NP colloidal solution and in a 30 µl solution of a positive control drug, Gentamicin. Each disc was gently pressed down with sterile forceps to confirm complete contact with the Mueller Hinton Agar (MHA) plate’s surface. The plates were examined for evidence of zones of inhibition, which appear as a clear area around the discs. The maximal zone of inhibition against each species of microbe was measured using a digital electronic caliper and seen after the plates were incubated for 24 h at 37 °C.

Phytochemicals are bioactive substances derived from plants. Because the plants that produce them may not have much need for them, they are thought of as secondary metabolites. All plant parts, including the leaves, stem, roots, flowers, fruits, seeds, etc., naturally synthesize them [44]. In this work, the preliminary qualitative phytochemical examination ofA. indicaleaf extract showed as the presence of alkaloids, flavonoids, glycosides, Tannins, Terpenoids and phenoles. Figure3illustrates the distinctive color changes of phytochemicals during the chemical tests using standard procedures [45,46]. These phytochemicals might help to reduce zinc nitrate and regulate the size of the synthesized ZnO NPs. The bioactive molecules of the plant extracts are essential for capping and stabilizing the synthesized nanoparticles [2,47].

During the green synthesis of ZnO NPs, the colorless Zn (NO3)2∙6H2O solution started changing its color to pall yellow as soon as the leaf extract ofA. indicawas added to it (Fig.2E). This color change to pall yellow is an initial confirmation for the formation of ZnO NPs [7]. The optical characteristics of ZnO NPs revealed a definite maximum absorbance peak at 321 nm (Fig.4). The result agrees with the range of λmaxvalues of ZnO NPs reported by the previous researchers [6]. Therefore, the visual observation and UV–Vis spectrum value are taken as confirmatory for the formation of ZnO NPs.

where α is the absorption coefficient, hυ is the photon energy, A is a constant, and Egis the optical band gap.

The experimental points fit with (αhν)2versus hυ curve only if the direct electronic transitions are responsible for the photon absorption inside the nanoparticles. An intercept of the straight line, as shown in Fig.5, yields an optical energy gap of 3.35 eV. This value is in good agreement with the reported band gap of ZnO [48,49,51].

The size and structure of the nanoparticles can be controlled by varying a number of variables such as the concentration ofA. indicaleaf extract, concentration of precursor solution, reaction time, and pH of the solution. In this study, we tried to check the effect of these variables for the synthesis of ZnO NPs.

Figure6shows the UV–Visible spectrum measured at various Zn(NO3)2·6H2O concentrations with a constant amount ofA. indicaleaf extract. The concentrations of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O solution used for the experiment were 25 mL of 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 6 mM. As the concentration of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O solution increased, the intensity of the spectra was also increased. At higher concentrations of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O solution, such as 6 mM, the spectrum becomes noisy. It is noteworthy that agglomeration happened on the summits at higher concentration. This suggests that bigger ZnO NPs were formed when the concentration of zinc ions in the solution surpassed the optimum quantity. The UV–Vis spectrum of ZnO NPs obtained using 4 mM of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O is sharp, intense, and smooth. Thus, we used 25 mL of 4 mM Zn(NO3)2·6H2O solution as an optimum value for this work.

The effect of pH on the synthesis of ZnO NPs was investigated by adjusting its value using 0.1 M HCl and 0.1 M NaOH. The UV-Visible spectra of ZnO NPs produced at pH values of 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11,and 13 are shown in Figure7. At pH values of 1, 3, 5, and 7, there is no distinct absorbance peak for the ZnO NP. But there is a high intensity absorbance peak at pH 9. This indicates that a large number of ZnO NPs formed with smaller diameters [52]. At pH 11 and 13, the particles become unstable and agglomerated so that the peak intensity decreases and finally disappears [53,54]. This result confirmed the vital role played by pH in controlling the shape and size of the ZnO NPs. The optimum pH value chosen for this work was pH 9.

To assess the stability of the synthesized ZnO nanoparticles, UV–Visible spectroscopic measurements were used at different time intervals. The reaction time intervals used were 2, 24, and 48 h. As shown in Fig.8, the maximum UV–Vis absorbance of ZnO NPs is exactly the same in intensity, broadness, and λmaxvalue for both reaction times. The result confirms the stability of the synthesized ZnO NPs.

where D is the crystallite size, λ = 0.15406 nm, which is the wavelength of the X-ray for Cu target Kα radiation, β is the peak width at half maximum of an XRD, K = 0.89, which is the Scherer’s constant and θ is the Bragg diffraction angle.

Thus, the average crystalline size of the synthesized ZnO NPs calculated using the Debye–Scherrer formula was found to be equal to 19.16 nm.

Based on Eq.4, the % crystallinity of the synthesized ZnO NPs is calculated to be 86.19%. This value indicates a good crystalline level of the synthesized ZnO NPs. A large value of % crystalline indicates a high degree of crystalline order.

The antibacterial activity of ZnO NPs examined againstE. coli (gram −ve) and S.aureus(gram +ve) using the agar well-diffusion method is shown in Figure11. The protection level against the two bacterial strains was determined on the basis of zone of inhibition (mm). The maximum zone of inhibition of ZnO NPs againstE.coli(gram −ve) was 18 mm. The electrostatic interaction between the negatively charged bacterial cell wall and the positively charged Zn2+ions may be the cause of this outcome, which leads to bacterial cell wall rupture and eventual cell death [58].

Possible mechanisms that may be used to explain the antibacterial activity of ZnO NPs are (1) the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which causes oxidative stress and damage to DNA and eventually leads to cell death (2) the dissolution of ZnO NPs into zinc ions (Zn2+), which interact with the cell membrane of bacteria, destroying the cellular integrity and causing bacterial cell death; and (3) direct electrostatic interactions between ZnO NPs and bacterial cell membranes that alters the permeability of the plasma membrane by disrupting its structure [58,59]. According to the different literatures, it can be concluded that the inhibition of bacterial growth demonstrated by ZnO NPs displayed that they possessed strong antibacterial efficiency. This excellent antibacterial effect of biosynthesized ZnO NPs is due to the larger surface area of smaller NPs in size, the excessive production of highly reactive oxygen species, including H2O2, OH radicals, and singlet oxygen, causes a disturbance in the cellular membrane and leads to bacterial death [59,60]. It is inferred that green synthesized ZnO NPs are good antibacterial catalysts against resistant bacterial strains. ZnO NPs synthesized via this route showed better result on both gram positive and gram negative strains, as they were stabilized by different secondary metabolites ofA. indicaleaf extract. Results of the anti-bacterial activity (Fig.12) showed thatE. coliwas more susceptible to ZnO NPs thanS. aureuswhich is supported by the works of different researchers [58,61].

The authors recommend that further research will be done to analyze and comprehend the real biological synthesis-dependent mechanisms and also to explore different indigenous plants in Ethiopia for the synthesis of nanoparticles.

In this work, ZnO NP has been successfully synthesized through a green synthetic pathway with the aid ofA. indicaleaf extract as reducing, stabilizing as well as capping agent. The zinc oxide nanoparticles were characterized using color change of the nanoparticle solution, UV–Vis absorption spectroscopy, XRD, and FT-IR spectroscopy. ZnO NPs have been found to have a maximum absorbance at a wave length of 321 nm. FTIR spectrum elucidated the phytochemicals present inA. indicaleaf extract. The presence of absorption peak at 544 cm−1indicates the formation of ZnO NPs. The synthesized ZnO NPs were found to have a crystalline nature with a hexagonal structure, as confirmed by powder X-ray diffraction analysis. The average crystallite size of the nanoprticle was calculated using the Debye–Scherrer equation and was found to be 19.16 nm. ZnO NPs synthesized through the above green route have better antibacterial activity against bacterial strains. It was found that the ZnO NP has an inhibition zone of 18 mm forE. coliand 15 nm forS.aureus.

The authors would like to thank Bahir Dar University, department of chemistry, for allowing us to use laboratory facilities for this work.