Noninvasive electromechanical assessment of cardiovascular function is emerging as a cost-effective method for diagnosis of heart failure and arterial diseases, and for telemedical monitoring of blood pressure and neural disorders. It encompasses simultaneous acquisition of electrocardiographic, phonocardiographic, arterial-pulse, chest-vibration, bioimpedance and other waveforms. The phases and amplitudes of these waveforms are used for construction of disease biomarkers. The procedure includes corrections of biomarker values to daily variation and excursions of heart rate. However, datasets that enable a systematic study of the effects of heart rate on mechanical waveforms are currently not available. Here, we describe SensSmartTech - the first dataset of multiparametric cardiovascular signals systematically measured in a large span of heart rates from 52 to 182 beats per minute, achieved by running on a treadmill. Besides providing the data for biomarker correction, the dataset enables new insights into the cardio-respiratory and electro-mechanical couplings in the cardiovascular system.

CARDIOVASCULAR diseases (CVDs) are the most common cause of human death worldwide, with an estimated 19 million deaths in 2022 and an increasing trend of approximately 18.7% in the last decade1. Hence, diagnosis, prevention, treatment, and monitoring of CVDs are among the primary societal challenges2. Instrumental to this are the non-invasive sensing technologies and decision support systems with the potential to outsource clinically performed measurements to primary care or home. Notably, mobile electrocardiography has shown good performance in detection of arrhythmias3,4and is on track to detect myocardial infarction5. However, its applications to detection and monitoring of the conditions stemming from mechanical insufficiencies of the CV system, such as heart failure (HF), hypertension or arterial disease, are limited. The gold standard for detection of HF and arterial disease are ultrasound examinations, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasonography, respectively. These tests are performed in succession, leaving a doctor with a nontrivial task of relating the observables from the disparate electrical and mechanical measurements. Such an assessment requires highly trained cardiologists and incurs high costs. Moreover, notwithstanding the expertise of a reader, a number of diagnostically useful features remain hidden in the correlations of electro-mechanical signals.

Modern sensing and digital technologies offer a potential solution to this problem in the form of sensor systems that can synchronously measure the electrical and mechanical parameters of the CV system6–11. While the idea can be found in the experiments conducted a century ago12,13, the required sensing and timing accuracy, as well as the computing power for multiparametric system analysis, have only recently become available.

Data on electro-mechanical physiological processes enable generation of new time- and/or amplitude-based biomarkers inaccessible to solely electrical or mechanical measurements. For example, the systolic time intervals obtained from synchronously recorded electrocardiogram (ECG), arterial pulse waves and heart sounds can indicate the HF with reduced ejection fraction14–17, while the transient time intervals obtained from the photoplethysmography (PPG), ballistocardiography and ECG, have been suggested as indicators of arterial disease and hypertension18,19. Similarly, blood pressure can be estimated from the contrast between the systolic and diastolic maxima or the rising systolic slope of the PPG signal19. The correlations between particular CVDs and electro-mechanical parameters have been discovered using complex signal analysis often assisted by artificial intelligence (AI)6–10. However, the cross-sensitivity to confounding diseases, e.g., respiratory diseases, and the co-dependence of biomarkers on parameters such as heart rate (HR) and heart-rate variability (HRV), have not been studied in sufficient detail.

Individual segments of a cardiac cycle, like systole and diastole, do not proportionally scale with HR. With increasing HR, diastole shortens faster than systole8. Moreover, changes in HR cause changes in the ratio of systolic time intervals left-ventricular ejection time (LVET) and preejection period (PEP)16, thus causing HR-dependence of the HF diagnostic biomarkers. The well-known inverse dependence of the interval between Q point and the end of T wave (QT interval) on HR20,21has been used in clinical evaluation of non-antiarrhythmic drugs (European Medicines Agency ICE E14 guideline). Precise evaluation and correction of biomarkers requires comprehensive recordings of CV signals at different HRs. However, while a number of multisensory databases provide records taken at different HRs during activity22–25, none of them systematically records the electro-mechanical cardiovascular observables during monotonous HR relaxation.

We note that the need for HR monitoring and biomarker HR-correction is in high demand also in neurosciences, particularly in remote monitoring by easy-to-use replacements of the standard ECG26. The HRV describes vagal influences on the sinus node and is used as a biomarker of the integrity of neurovisceral integration in healthy individuals and dysfunction associated with affective disorders27. For example, it has been associated with the regional cerebral blood flow, including the amygdala responsible for threat response and ventromedial prefrontal cortex responsible for emotion regulation28, while particularly relevant to the work presented here is a link of the exercise-induced increase in HRV to the metabolic activity in insula, cingulate and somatomotor regions29.

Here, we report on the SensSmartTech database recorded by a multiparametric sensor system (polycardiograph) at rest and during the relaxation after running. The polycardiograph was configured to synchronously acquire data from the ECG, phonocardiograph (PCG), accelerometer (ACC) and two PPGs placed at the carotid and brachial arteries25,30. To the best of our knowledge, SensSmartTech is the first open polycardiographic database systematically measured at decreasing HRs. As such it provides new information on the cardiovascular relaxation after activity and the data for HR correction of electrical, mechanical and electro-mechanical biomarkers.

The study and publication of open data received approval from the Ethics Committee for Work with Human Material at Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences (registry numbers 116-18-2/2022-000, 24-DMS0-029060).

Data collection was performed using a custom-made multimodal acquisition device - polycardiograph. The device is based on the STM32F4 microcontroller working at 180 MHz and peripheries which are providing signal conditioning and their digitization. Block schematic of the device is shown in Fig.1a.

(a) Polycardigraph with three modules for synchronized acquisition of ECG, PPG, PCG and ACC signals. The abbreviations used are: LA - left arm, RA - right arm, LL - left leg, RL - right leg and V1-V6 precordial ECG leads, WCT - Wilson central terminal, MCU- microcontroller unit, PWR - power regulators, RLD - right leg drive, LPF - low-pass filter, GPIO - general purpose input/output, I2C - inter-integrated circuit, I2S - inter-integrated circuit sound, SPI - serial peripheral interface, OPA - operational amplifier. (b) Schematics of the sensor synchronization and sampling at the following rates: PCG at 1 kHz, ECG and ACC at 500 Hz and PPG at 100 Hz.

An ADS1298, Texas Instruments (Dallas, Texas, US) chip was used for ECG signal acquisition. It comprises a 24-bit A/D converter with programmable gain (set to x2), and amplitude conversion factor of 6990.5 /mV. It offers 8 differential inputs which are DC coupled with the patient. Also, it has embedded amplifier based on Wilson central terminal (WCT) and right leg drive (RLD) output signal required for standard 12-lead ECG. ECG was recorded using 10 electrodes as shown on Fig.1a. Sampling rate of the ECG chip was set to 500 Hz. The ADS1298 samples the input at 512 kHz and uses a decimation filter to decimate the output signal to the desired frequency. According to the specification of ECG chip, its decimation filter has cut-off frequency of 125 Hz for sample rate of 500 Hz. A benefit of this architecture is the easy construction of anti-aliasing filter, which is designed in polycardiograph as a simple 1storder RC low-pass filter with the cut-off frequency of 200 kHz. The patient body was interfaced via commercially attested self-adhesive gel electrodes NM 2844 RFS, Ceracarta (Forlì, Italy).

PCG signal is captured using a microphone ICS-40300, TDK InvenSense (San Jose, California, US) placed in a cardiology stethoscope SPIRIT CK-S474SPF63, Spirit Medical Ltd. (Little Eaton, UK). The microphone signal is differentially distributed to the microcontroller and digitized by differential audio codec AD1974, Analog Devices Inc. (Wilmington, Massachusetts, US). The acquisition sampling rate is set to 1 kHz with 16-bit A/D conversion. Before feeding to the AD1974, the microphone signal is preprocessed with a 1st-order active low pass filter with the cut-off frequency of 250 Hz based on the audio amplifier OPA1632D, Texas Instruments (Dallas, Texas, US), Fig.1a. Microphone ICS-40300 is used due to its low frequency response extended down to 6 Hz which provides access to infrasound diagnostics31. To avoid the interference of the microphone with the stethoscope bell and preserve the acoustic performance of the stethoscope, the microphone was placed in a short piece of rubber pipe 10 cm away from the bell. During the measurement, the stethoscope was positioned at the sternum to the right of V3 ECG electrode and fixed by a bandage.

A micro electro-mechanical sensor accelerometer MPU6050, TDK InvenSense (San Jose, California, US) with acceleration range set to +/- 1g and 16-bit A/D conversion was used to measure the movement of the chest caused by heartbeats. Its sampling rate was set to 500 Hz. ACC sensor was placed in a biocompatible silicon housing and mounted between the V3 and V4 electrodes via the self-adhesive gel electrodes used for ECG. Only the Z axis is measured since this axis is predominantly affected by heartbeats at the measured position. We note that, depending on the mounting and axis used, an ACC can act as a lightweight, flexible and easy-to-mount ballistocardiograph32or seismocardiograph33. Here, it is used as seismocardiograph.

PPG sensors were based on the MAX86150EFF+T chip produced by Maxim Integrated, now part of Analog Devices (Wilmington, Massachusetts, US). This chip has all necessary components required for reflective photoplethysmography measurement including ambient light rejection, LED diode intensity control and photodiode amplifier gain control. It integrates a red and a near-infrared LED diode, centered at 660 nm and 880 nm, respectively. Sampling rate of PPG sensors is 100 Hz with 16-bit A/D conversion. PPG sensors were mounted using non-elastic Velcro tapes suitable for the position and pressure control.

PPG and ACC sensors are digital and communicate with the microcontroller via Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C) protocol, Fig.1a, which supports communication between multiple digital peripheries and the controller. Signal synchronization is performed with crystal oscillators operating at 8 MHz with 20 ppm accuracy, which renders the cumulative synchronization error of 1.5μs per signal of 30 s. Therefore, the accuracy of the polycardiograph is limited by sampling rates of the sensors as illustrated in Fig.1b. Polycardiograph sends the synchronously collected data to a PC over Ethernet. A PC acquisition software with appropriate graphical user interface (written in Visual C#) takes the data and displays them graphically in real time.

All elements of the multimodal acquisition system comply with the standard EN ISO 1415. The sensors are electrically and radiation safe.

2 PPGs attached with inelastic Velcro tapes, one placed around the neck with the sensor PPG1 over the left carotid, the other around the upper left arm just above the elbow with the sensor PPG2 over the brachial artery.

SensSmartTech sensor positions. (a) An example measurement on a treadmill. (b) Polycardiograph device with ECG, PPG, PCG and ACC sensors and laptop. (c) Schematics of the sensor positions on the body.

To prevent noises in an unterminated ECG circuit, the redundant precordial electrodes (V1, V2, V5 and V6) were attached to the upper right arm as shown in Fig.2a. This electrode position provided enough separation from the sensors placed on the torso and their cables to enable convenient handling at rest and during activity, while introducing negligible electromyographic noise.

To facilitate identification of the optimal carotid pulse signal while avoiding cumbersome sensor repositioning around the neck, the sensor PPG1 was composed of three PPG chips arranged in a line and switched on one at a time, Fig.2b.

Upon assuring the signal quality by online inspection, 3 recordings are made, each lasting 30 seconds. After each recording, the researcher determines the subject’s HR at rest.

Phase 2: The leg ECG electrodes and the stethoscope are detached. Other sensors remain as set in phase 1. Then, the researcher instructs the subject on how to control the treadmill velocity and inclination and turns the treadmill on. All subjects are asked to run at a moderate pace until they reach the threshold of tiredness, while not surpassing the threshold of comfort. Duration and intensity of effort depended heavily on the subject’s fitness level and overall health condition.

Phase 3: Upon receiving the agreed-upon sign from the subject, the researcher switches off the treadmill. The subject returns to a resting standing position and the researcher promptly returns the leg ECG electrodes and PCG to their initial position. With all sensors positioned like in phase 1, several recordings are taken in succession. Upon each recording, the researcher calculates the HR. Recordings are repeated until the HR drops to 10-20 bpm above the HR measured in phase 1. At the end of the procedure, all sensors are detached from the subject and the Velcro tapes are cleaned and disinfected.

The ECG signals were filtered by a low pass filter with 150 Hz cut-off. The line interference of 50 Hz and its 2nd and 3rd harmonics were removed by notch filters. All filters were zero-phase. The data from other sensors were not processed and are presented as originally recorded. The baseline wander (BLW) of all signals contains information on respiration and cardio-respiratory coupling and was thus not removed. Consequently, signals in the database comprise motion artifacts and electromyographic noise, particularly evident after activity.

In table Demographics.xlsx uploaded with the database, we give the median HR of each recording. The QRS detection was performed upon aggressive filtering with a low-pass Butterworth filter with a 23 Hz frequency cut-off and a high-pass Butterworth filter with 8 Hz frequency cut-off. R-points were detected using the Elgendi method34on leads I, II, and V3 and applying a majority vote. The median HR was calculated for each recording as the inverse of the median RR interval on that recording. Instantaneous HR was estimated as the inverse of RR interval. We note that neither the QRS positions nor the instantaneous HR are provided with the database.

SensSmartTech database is stored and published on PhysioNet under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Public License25,30. It contains 338 30-s long polycardiographic signals with 10 channels each: 4 ECG, 4 PPG, 1 PCG and 1 ACC channel. They are generated from 32 subjects, 18 females and 14 males, with an average age of 34.6  ± 9.1 years and average body-mass index (BMI) of 25.2  ± 4.3 kg/m2. The total of 96 recordings were taken before running and 242 after running. The database contains 17816 heartbeats. The study was performed at the Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences in Belgrade, Serbia, in the period March - April, 2023.

The database is distributed in two formats: CSV (comma-separated-value) and an annotation-friendly WFDB (WaveForm DataBase) format proposed by PhysioNet25,35, and stored in folders with the corresponding names. Separate files are provided for each sensor type. The files are identified by the subject number (##) and the start time of recording in the format hh-mm-ss.

The first column provides the information on the real acquisition time of the sensor. Each sensor acquires the data at its own sampling rate; moreover, the sensors may not start acquisition at the same time. This results in different acquisition time series of different sensors. However, the acquisition is synchronized so that these series can be extended to a common zero time.

WFDB files are named and structured in columns in the same way as CSV, except for the first column which is omitted. They contain signals resampled to 1 kHz and share a common sample axis. The axis is an integer sequence, in which one sample corresponds to a time increment of 1 ms. The resampling was not trivial because of the different sensor acquisition starting times and sampling rates. First, all signals were linearly interpolated to a common time axis defined by the fastest acquisition sampling rate, specifically, 1:30000 array corresponding to a 30 s signal recorded at 1 kHz (PCG sampling rate). Then the time and data series were cut on both ends to retain only the interval during which all sensors were recording. Finally, the sample axis was reannotated to count from zero.

SensSmartTech database comprises a reference table Demographics.csv25,30. Each row in the table is dedicated to one polycardiograph recording and consists of 14 columns with a number of recording, subject number, name of the recording, subject’s gender, age, height, weight and body-mass index, names of the files with recordings from all sensors, activity status and median HR. The activity status ‘B’ denotes measurement before activity and the status ‘A’ measurement after activity. The median HR calculation is described in section Methods.

The database content with regard to the median HR is depicted by a distribution of the median HRs on the whole set in Fig.3a. The measurement dynamics can be appreciated from an example of the median HR relaxation shown in Fig.3b.

(a) Distribution of median HRs on the whole set. (b) A depiction of the HR relaxation during a typical measurement sequence on one subject. Shown is the instantaneous HR obtained as the inverse of RR interval.

To obtain signal amplitudes in physical units, ECG, PCG and ACC signals in both formats should be scaled by the gain factors 96990.5 adu/mV, 36.4 adu/mV and 327.68 adu/g, respectively, where adu stands for analog-to-digital units and g for the gravitational acceleration constant. PPG is given in arbitrary units (au). On PhysioNet, we recommend the gain the factor 100 adu/au to facilitate viewing.

The published data were de-identified by removing all names and dates from the recordings. They do not contain any information that identifies or provides a reasonable basis to identify an individual. As such, the data comply with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act requirements for sharing personal health information.

Given the increasing interest in data processing methods based on AI, we briefly discuss the dataset size. Our collection of 17816 beats from 32 subjects might be more suitable to statistical and machine learning based approaches than to the data-hungry deep learning methods. However, through careful training, regularization, model size reduction, and pre-training on other publicly available datasets followed by transfer learning, even deep learning models should not be excluded beforehand. While our collection is not comparable to large ECG-only PTB-XL25,36,37and arrhythmia38,39databases and PPG-only BUT PPG database40,41, collected from hundreds and thousands of subjects, it is on par with the well-known ECG MIT-BIH arrhythmia database25,42which has a total of 47 subjects and the PPG-only databases from43with 33 subjects and from44with 30 subjects. The MIT-BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm25,45and the TROIKA PPG46databases, with 18 and 12 subjects, respectively, are smaller than our dataset. Some of the above mentioned databases consist of long records of up to a few hours, which is significantly longer than our 30-second-long recordings and are thus more suitable for tracking of the complex heart dynamics and transitions. Finally, the openly accessible multimodal databases were recorded from less subjects than SensSmartTech, specifically, the dataset reported in23from 17, in22from 8 and in24from 22 subjects.

Prior to the SensSmartTech study, the polycardiograph signal quality was inspected by cardiologists. The reasons for low-quality signals were traced down to the inappropriate sensor mounting and motion artifacts. Good-quality signals clearly displayed all diagnostically relevant features. The researchers performing the study were made aware of the possible sources of errors and were given instructions to inspect the signals and repeat the measurement when necessary, as detailed below.

Validation of the SensSmartTech data was performed in two stages including the measurement validation during data recording and the dataset validation. The data considered invalid during the measurement were not saved and did not enter the database. The CONSORT-style diagram in Fig.4shows the study flow and rejection rates by criterion and recording phase.

The study flow showing the number of recruited and rejected subjects, measurement protocol and the number of signals rejected based on different criteria.

During the measurements at rest, signals from all sensors were examined in real time to verify the presence of their main features: distinct QRS complex, P and T waves in ECG, S1 and S2 in PCG, periodic ACC waveforms synchronized with ECG, a clear systolic peak in the PPG signal and a PPG signal incisure in subjects below 50 years of age. If some features were not observed, positions of the corresponding sensors were corrected. Typically, adjustments were made in positions of the PPG sensors, including switching within the PPG1 sensor array. After running, a large BLW caused by increased breathing intensity and occasional motion artifacts hid the signal features, thus disabling the real-time signal quality check. Instead, each signal was plotted and briefly observed during the recording of the subsequent signal to check if all signals were present and to estimate HR. Several PCG signals were interrupted due to the misplacement of the stethoscope bell due to sweating. The interrupted signals were not saved. No problems were encountered with the ACC, proving the snap mount robust.

The dataset was validated by checking the completeness of all signals and performing heartbeat detection.

The following completeness criteria were applied: ECG signal was considered complete if it contained at least 3 readily readable channels. No signals were rejected based on this criterion. Due to the presence of motion artifacts in a number of post-exercise PPG recordings, a PPG recording at one site (carotid or brachial artery) was considered valid if at least one of the two signals (recorded at 660 nm or 880 nm) contained at least 20 detectable heartbeats. This led to rejection of 31 recordings, out of which 20 were from two subjects. For one subject, majority of post-exercise PPG recordings did not pass the check. For another subject, the arm tremor caused large noise at rest. All recordings from both subjects were rejected. In 5 cases, the multimodal recordings were interrupted, possibly due to an acquisition error. These recordings were also rejected, making the total of 36 rejected recordings.

Heartbeat detection was performed on the ECG signal and is described at the end of section Methods. It was successful on all ECG recordings, hence no signals were discarded based on this criterion.

Finally, the signal quality was validated by the signal-to-noise (SNR) analysis. Absence of clear baseline segments from PPG and ACC signals, even upon the BLW elimination by filtering, makes it difficult to define a unique signal-quality measure that applies to all sensing modalities. For example, typical ECG signal-quality indices representing the power of the QRS complex relative to the near-zero baseline are not applicable. Hence, the median heartbeat was adopted as a noise-free signal approximation.

whereiis the counter of samples in a heartbeat andNhbthe number of heartbeats in the signal. TheSNRrecare used to obtain the mean SNR and its standard deviation on the whole set and its subsets selected according to the median HR.

The results reported in Table1show that the SNR > 1 for all the subsets and the whole database, meaning that the signal can be extracted from noise. For ECG leads II, V3 and V4 SNR > 10 dB. It is slightly lower for lead I, which can be explained by the stronger electromyographic noise and movement of hands. PPG signals recorded with 660 nm light have high SNR > 10 dB. This is not the case for the PPG signals recorded with 880 nm light, clearly showing the advantage of the red over the near-infrared light in this setting. As expected, fast ACC waveforms have lower SNR of 4.6 dB. However, this signal quality is sufficient to discern mechanical oscillations caused by opening and closing of heart valves in individual heartbeats, see, e.g., signatures of aortic and mitral valves in a typical beat of an ACC signal in Fig.2in47. While the PCG waveforms have the lowest mean SNR of 3.1 dB, the 1stand the 2ndheart sound are fully recognizable at rest,5a, while the 1stsound is dominant after activity, Fig.5b. In addition, simple signal processing provides a median beat with clear representation of all features, as shown in Fig.5c.

The mean and the standard deviation (in brackets) of the SNR per sensor channel on the whole database and on the subsets of recordings grouped by HR.

Example polycardiographic recordings. (a), (b) 10-sec snapshots of the polycardiographic recordings taken before running at the median HR of 92 bpm and after running at the median HR of 141 bpm, respectively. (c) Median heartbeats obtained from the whole 30-sec recordings corresponding to (a). Characteristic signal features are shown by black dots. In particular, ECG features - Q, R and S waves of the QRS complex,Tmaxand Tendpoints of the T-wave. PPG features: pulse onset (ON), systolic peak (SP), dicrotic notch (DN) and diastolic peak (DP). PCG features: first (S1) and second (S2) heart sounds. ACC features: mitral valve closure (MVC), aortic valve opening (AVO), aortic valve closure (AVC). (d) Median heartbeats obtained from the whole 30-sec recordings corresponding to (a) and (b). Signal amplitudes are given in arbitrary units (au).

The error introduced by resampling required for conversion to WFDB format could not be estimated by direct comparison of the original and resampled signals due to the different sampling times. To enable the comparison, all signals were linearly interpolated to a new time axis with 2 kHz sampling rate, which is chosen to be at least two times higher than the sampling rate of the all signals in accordance with the Nyquist criterion. The crosscorrelation (XCORR) and the symmetric mean absolute percentage error (SMAPE) of the two signals were used as measures of the resampling quality. The latter is defined as SMAPE =1n∑i∣X1(i)−X2(i)∣(∣X1(i)∣+∣X2∣(i))/2, whereX1is the resampled signal interpolated to 2 kHz,X2original signal interpolated at 2 kHz,ithe sample counter andnthe number of samples. Given that the signals reported here exhibit zero-crossings, this approach is preferred over the more common relative absolute error. Both measures were evaluated for each sensing channel and averaged on the set. The results presented in Table2showed excellent resampling quality with the mean XCORR=1 for all sensors and recordings except for the PCG. Its mean(XCORR) was 0.9995, while XCORR was below 0.99 for only one recording (XCORR=0.988). The mean SMAPE was of the order of  ~ 10−9or smaller for all sensors, except for the PCG for which it was  ~ 10−7. The error in the resampled PCG recordings comes from the fact that this signal was resampled from one 1 kHz axis to another 1 kHz axis with different sampling points, which resulted in reduction of some sharp peaks. This was confirmed by the visual inspection. The above errors are negligible and multiple orders of magnitude smaller than the errors coming from the noise or patient-to-patient variability. However, may a user decide that these errors are not acceptable for their application, they can use the CSV data which are not resampled.

Evaluation of the resampling quality expressed by the mean and standard deviation (std) of XCORR and SMAPE.

Signals recorded after activity contain a significant BLW yielded by intensified breathing and various motion artifacts resulting from the spontaneous body movements, swallowing, coughing, etc. For example, the ECG and ACC signals in Fig.5bcontain a clear respiratory component with the period of roughly 2.5 s. Considering the valuable information contained in the BLW, such as that about the respiration patterns and cardio-respiratory coupling, we provide the unfiltered signals. Cardio and respiratory signal components can be separated in frequency domain by application of a filter with 1 Hz cut-off frequency. For the use of cardiac signals, we recommend high-pass filtering of all signals and, where necessary, BLW approximation and removal by a cubic spline. The former is particularly important when morphology preservation of slower pulses, such as PPG pulses, is mandatory. Moreover, due to the increased muscle contractions during exercise and subsequent relaxation, the electromyographic noise may be present in ECG signals. As its spectrum overlaps with the spectrum of QRS complex, for applications requiring preservation of the signal morphology, we recommend the use of iterative regeneration method48or wavelet filters49. Finally, motion artifacts may screen the whole PPG pulses. As the artifacts typically last from a few to several seconds, a large part of 30-sec signal remains unaffected. Hence, we recommend removal of the affected parts of the signal.

Due to the signal rejection during validation, recordings of several subjects contain less than 3 reference measurements. A few subjects were measured more than 3 times at rest to ascertain the signal quality. Therefore, we recommend determining the activity status using the flags ‘B’ and ‘A’ given in the table Demographics. Finally, we note that Subject 2 ran, stopped and ran again, corresponding to two HR maxima.

The relaxation dynamics can be deduced from the start time of recordings given in the file names and table Demographics.xlsx.

We envisage the use of the SensSmartTech database25,30in several research disciplines and medical practice, including the evaluation of HR dependence of biomarkers of HF, biomarkers used in cuff-less monitoring of blood pressure and arterial stiffness and biomarkers of neural diseases; investigations of the cardio-respiratory relaxation after activity; fitness evaluation in sport science; testing the algorithms for HR extraction from mechanical sensors in biomedical engineering; and the studies of the complex nonlinear dynamics of the cardiovascular system in biophysics. The SNR values given in the previous section can serve as guidance for the suitability of the database for a particular application.

This research is supported by the Science Fund of the Republic of Serbia, Grant No. 7754338, Multi-SENSor SysteM and ARTificial intelligence in service of heart failure diagnosis - SensSmart. We acknowledge the support from the Ministry of Science, Technological Development and Innovation of the Republic of Serbia, Grant No. 451-03-136/2025-03/200017 and 451-03-65/2024-03/200103. The authors thank the volunteers who supported the study, and A. Maluckov, M. Miletić, and U. Ralević for their valuable advice and technical support.