Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) pseudotyped with the glycoprotein (GP) of the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (VSV-GP) represents a potent oncolytic virus (OV). Oncolytic virotherapy is an emerging anticancer approach that uses viruses to eliminate cancer cells by direct cell lysis and induction of an antitumor immune response. Immunomodulatory cargos expressed by OVs hold the potential to further enhance this antitumor immune response.

To evaluate interleukin-12 (IL-12) as an immunomodulatory cargo encoded by VSV-GP, we used a subcutaneous tumor model by mixing type I interferon (IFN) competent murine lung epithelial cells (TC-1), which are largely resistant to VSV-GP in vivo, with VSV-GP permissive IFN-α receptor knockout TC-1 cells (TC-1ifnar1−/−).

This mixed model supports prolonged viral replication and subsequent IL-12 production. Oncolytic virotherapy with VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 of parental TC-1 tumors did not lead to tumor control, whereas virus treatment in the TC-1/TC-1ifnar1−/−mixed tumors showed prolonged survival. Furthermore, VSV-GP-IL12 was even more effective than VSV-GP treatment. Analysis of CD8+ T cell responses revealed phenotypic differences of activated CD8+ T cells between VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL-12 treatment, whereby VSV-GP-IL12-induced CD8+T cells displayed a phenotype described for long-lived effector cells (LLEC). Depletion experiments indicated that CD8+ T cells, and not NK cells, were responsible for the improved efficacy observed with VSV-GP-IL12 treatment.

Taken together, we have demonstrated that oncolytic virotherapy using VSV-GP encoding IL-12 induces CD8+ T cell responses characterized by an LLEC phenotype, a cell population that is likely a crucial component of antitumor immunity.

Oncolytic virotherapy is an emerging anticancer strategy that uses viruses like vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)-glycoprotein (GP) to kill cancer cells and stimulate antitumor immune responses. Arming such oncolytic viruses with immunomodulatory agents like interleukin (IL)-12 may enhance their therapeutic efficacy, but the immune mechanism involved is not fully understood.

Our study reveals that VSV-GP encoding IL-12 (VSV-GP-IL12) improves the efficacy of oncolytic virotherapy in a mixed tumor model where IL-12 production is sustained. It demonstrates that VSV-GP-IL12 treatment promotes the induction of CD8+ T cells characterized by a long-lived effector cell (LLEC) phenotype.

Our findings have significant implications for understanding how IL-12 improves cancer immunotherapies. The insight into how IL-12 drives the generation of CD8+ T cell with an LLEC phenotype holds promise for the development of strategies that harness robust antitumor immune responses.

The field of oncolytic virotherapy has gained substantial momentum in recent years with the clinical approval of the first oncolytic virus (OV), based on a herpes simplex virus (HSV-1) (Talimogene laherparepvec; Imlygic) and its augmented therapeutic potential when combined with other immunotherapies.1OVs use a combination of direct and indirect mechanisms to combat malignancies. In addition to tumor-selective viral replication and tumor elimination, OVs activate both innate and adaptive immunity.

Despite its potential in cancer immunotherapy, the systemic clinical application of IL-12 is limited by immunotoxicity.18 19Therefore, intratumoral delivery of recombinant IL-12 has been examined, but rapid clearance led to insufficient dwell time at the injection site, resulting in suboptimal antitumor response.20Thus, strategies to optimize safe IL-12 delivery by incorporating the cytokine as transgene into viral vectors or using controlled release hold significant promise to reduce systemic toxicities while enhancing local antitumor immune response and therapeutic outcome.

Therefore, VSV-GP encoding IL-12 was tested in a subcutaneous TC-1 tumor model. To overcome the limitation of in vivo permissiveness of VSV-GP in TC-1 cells,3 4we used a mixed tumor setting whereby TC-1 cells, which are IFN competent and relatively resistant to VSV-GP in the mouse, were combined with VSV-GP-permissive IFN-α receptor knockout TC-1 cells (TC-1ifnar1−/−). Using this mixed tumor model, we found improved therapeutic efficacy of VSV-GP-IL12 compared with VSV-GP treatment. The enhanced tumor control observed with VSV-GP-IL12 was associated with a phenotype of CD8+ T cells similar to that previously described for long-lived effector cells (LLECs)21 22or terminally differentiated effector memory cells (terminal-TEM)23induced during lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection.

TC-1 cells (kindly provided by Dr T C Wu, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA) were cultured in complete Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) supplemented with 0.4 mg/mL G418, 10% FCS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1% sodium pyruvate, and 1% MEM NEAA. TC-1ifnar1−/−cells were generated by CRISPR/Cas9 vectors using plasmid transfection with pSpCas9(BB)−2A-GFP (PX458) (Addgene plasmid #48138; Watertown, USA) targeting three IFNAR1 regions from exon 2 and 3 as described before.24Single-cell clones were collected after sorting (FACS Aria; BD Biosciences, Schwechat, Austria) for IFNAR negative clones using anti-IFNAR1 mouse (1:250, MAR1–5A3, BioLegend, San Diego, California, USA) and APC-conjugated goat anti-mouse-IgG1 (1:100, Jackson ImmunoResearch, Suffolk, UK) antibodies. Expanded clones were further characterized functionally for limited IFN sensitivity by incubation with universal IFN-α A/D (PBL, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA) overnight followed by MTT viability assay and fluorescence microscopy after VSV-GP-Green-Fluorescent Protein (GFP) infection as described previously.3Four clones were selected and tumorigenicity was confirmed compared with the parental TC-1 cells.

Replication-competent recombinant viruses VSV-GP, VSV-GP encoding HPV E7 as vaccine (Vacc), VSV-GP-GFP, and VSV-GP-Luciferase (VSV-GP-Luc) as well as VSV-ΔG-GFP have been described elsewhere.5 8 25For the generation of VSV-GP-IL12, the coding sequence of a (G4S)3 linked mouse p40-p35 IL-12 heterodimer was de novo synthesized at Geneart/Thermo Fisher (Regensburg, Germany) as codon-optimized linear DNA fragment already flanked by VSV-specific sequences. The IL-12 DNA string was introduced into an NheI:XhoI linearized VSV-GP complementary DNA vector backbone using the NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Cloning Kit (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts, USA) according to manufacturers’ recommendations. Vector identity was confirmed by Sanger sequencing before virus recovery.

For virus amplification, HEK293-F cells were cultured in BalanCD medium (Irvine Scientific) supplemented with 4 mM GlutaMax (Gibco) in Erlenmeyer shake flasks (Corning). Cells were seeded at 4×105cells/mL, incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2on a shaker set to 120 rpm for 48 hours prior to infection. The cell culture was infected with the stock virus at multiplicity of infection (MOI) 0.0005 and then returned to the shaking incubator for 32 hours until harvest. To harvest the virus particles in the supernatant, 0.2 M NaCl was supplemented into the culture and returned to the shaking incubator for 10 min. Then the suspension culture was clarified by centrifugation (2,000 g for 5 min), and then filtered through a 0.2 µm PES membrane. The clarified supernatant was then underlaid with a 20% sucrose solution in 50 mM Tris/HCl with 50 mM NaCl and centrifuged in cooled conditions (4–8°C) at 4,700–5,000 rpm, without brakes for 15–16 hours. The supernatant was discarded, and the virus-containing pellets were resuspended in a formulation buffer (50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl, 150 mM arginine, pH 7.5).

6–8 weeks old female C57BL/6JRj (Janvier, France) were housed in individually ventilated cages in a conventional, BSL2 infectious agent facility at the animal facilities of the Medical University of Innsbruck. Animal experiments were performed in accordance with the approval of the ethics committees of the Medical University of Innsbruck and the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science and Research under the licenses BMBWF-66.011/0156-V/3b/2019 and 2022–0.292.703. The experiment shown in theonline supplemental figure S1Awas approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Oncodesign (Oncomet) and by the French authorities (CNREEA agreement N°91).

For tumor implantation, mice were injected subcutaneously in the right flank with 1×105TC-1 cells alone or a mix of TC-1 and TC-1ifnar1−/−cells at ratios of 80:20 or 20:80 percent. In the bilateral tumor model, mice were subcutaneously implanted in the left flank with 1×105TC-1 cells alone and in the right flank with a mix of TC-1 and TC-1ifnar1−/−cells at a ratio of 80:20 percent. Mice were treated intravenously on day 10 or 11 post transplantation at a tumor size of around 0.05 cm3either with 100 µL phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), 1×107TCID50VSV-GP or VSV-GP-IL12. In the bilateral tumor model, mice were treated at 10 days intravenously either with PBS (control), or in combination of E7-encoding VSV-GP-based cancer vaccine (Vacc) with VSV-GP (Vacc/GP) or VSV-GP-IL12 (Vacc/GP-IL12) in a 1:1 ratio with a TCID50of 1×107from each component. Tumor growth was monitored by measuring the tumor diameter three times per week using a caliper and the tumor volume was calculated by the following formula: 0.4×length×width2. Animals were euthanized by CO2asphyxiation followed by cervical dislocation. Detailed additional information is provided in compliance with ARRIVE guidelines in supplemental methods (online supplemental methods S1).

For natural killer (NK) or CD8+ T cell depletion, mice were intraperitoneally injected either with anti-NK1.1 (clone PK136, 250 µg/treatment; Bio X Cell, West Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA) or anti-CD8 (clone YTS 169.4, 100 µg/treatment, Bio X Cell) or the combination of both antibodies in 100 µL PBS at day 8, 10, 14, 17 and 21 post tumor implantation. Isotype controls IgG2a (clone C1.18.4, 100 µg/treatment Bio X Cell) and IgG2b (clone LTF-2, 100 µg/treatment Bio X Cell) were also used. Depletion was confirmed via flow cytometry by gating either on the CD3posCD8posT cell or CD3negNK1.1posNKp46posNK cell population.

Single cell suspensions were generated from spleen and tumor-draining lymph nodes by mechanical dissociation using a 100 µm cell strainer. Tumor samples were minced in a digestion enzyme mix (RPMI-1640 supplemented with 0.4 mg/mL collagenase P (Roche) and 0.1 mg/mL DNase I (Roche)). After incubation for 30 min at 37°C, the tumor cell suspension was filtered through a 70 µm cell strainer and washed two times with PBS supplemented with 2% FCS and 5 mM EDTA. For whole blood, erythrocyte lysis was carried out after surface staining by using Pharm Lyse Lysing buffer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, California, USA).

For the detection of HPV E7 (E7)-specific or VSV-GP nucleoprotein (N)-specific CD8+ T cells, samples were stained with fluorescently labeled peptide-MHC tetramers (H-2Db RAHYNIVTF HPV16 E7-APC, MBL) or multimers (H-2Kb RGYVYQGL VSV-NP-PE-tetramer and VSV-NP-APC-dextramer, Immudex) for 20 min at 37°C. Subsequently, surface staining was carried out for 20 min at 4°C with the following antibodies: CD43-FITC (clone 1B11, BD Biosciences), CD3e-PE (clone 145–2 C11, BD Biosciences), CD3-BUV395 (clone 145–2 C11, BD Bioscience), CD127-BV711 (clone SB/199, BD Bioscience), CD62L-APC-Cy7 (clone MEL-14, BD Bioscience), CD45-PerCP (clone 30-F11, Miltenyi), CD27-PerCP-Cy5.5 (clone LG.3A10, BD Biosciences), KLRG1-PE-Cy7 (clone 2F1, BioLegend), CD8-BV421 (clone 53–6.7, BD Biosciences), CX3CR1-BV510 (clone Z8-50, BD Biosciences), CD44-AF700 (clone IM7, BD Bioscience), NK1.1-APC (clone PK136, BD Biosciences) and NKp46-FITC (CD335, clone REA815, Miltenyi Biotec). Dead cells were stained using LIVE/DEAD Fixable Near-IR or Blue Dead Cell Stain Kit (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were fixed in PBS/1% formaldehyde and analyzed using the FACSCanto II (BD Biosciences) conventional or the Sony ID7000 (Sony Biotechnology) spectral flow cytometers. Data analysis was performed using the FlowJo software (FlowJo LLC, Oregon, USA).

Single-cell suspensions from spleen and tumor tissues were generated as described above for immunophenotyping by flow cytometry. 106tumor cells or 2×105spleen cells were seeded into 96-wells U-bottom plates and cultured in the presence or absence of 2 µg/mL viral N-derived (RGYVYQGL) or E7-derived (RAHYNIVTF) peptides for 3.5 hours. After 1 hour of incubation, GolgiStop (BD Bioscience) was added according to the manufacturer’s instruction. During this incubation period BV-786 labeled CD107a was present in order to detect degranulation. Following incubation, surface staining was carried out for 20 min at 4°C with the following antibodies: CD43-FITC (clone 1B11, BD Biosciences), CD3-BUV395 (clone 145–2 C11, BD Bioscience), CD62L-APC-Cy7 (clone MEL-14, BD Bioscience), CD45-RB613 (clone 30-F11, Miltenyi), CD27-PerCP-Cy5.5 (clone LG.3A10, BD Biosciences), KLRG1-PE-Cy7 (clone 2F1, BioLegend), CD8-BV421 (clone 53–6.7, BD Biosciences), and CD44-AF700 (clone IM7, BD Bioscience). Dead cells were stained using LIVE/DEAD Fixable Blue Dead Cell Stain Kit (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After permeabilization, cells were stained with a PE-labeled IFN-γ antibody (clone XMG1.2, BD Bioscience). Samples were analyzed using the Sony ID7000 (Sony Biotechnology) spectral flow cytometer. Data analysis was performed using the FlowJo software (FlowJo, Oregon, USA). In addition, IFN-producing cells were measured using the ELISpot Plus: Mouse IFN-γ (ALP) kit (MabTech, Germany) following ex vivo stimulation of spleen cells. Briefly, 105spleen cells were stimulated with 2 µg/mL N or E7 peptides for 20 hours in 96-well Enzyme-Linked Immunospot (ELISpot) plates, and IFN-γ-producing cells were stained according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Tumors were collected and digested in ProcartaPlex Cell Lysis Buffer (Invitrogen, USA) substituted with 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride protease inhibitor (Boston Bioproducts, USA) using the gentleMACS dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Plasma and tumor lysates were stored at −80°C until use. The protein concentration of tumor lysates was measured using the Bio-Rad DC Protein Assay Kit I (Bio-Rad Laboratories, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions to ensure equal protein concentration across all samples. Cytokines and chemokines were determined using multiplex bead-based immunoassay LEGENDplex Mouse Anti-Virus Response Panel (13-plex) (BioLegend, San Diego, California, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Data were analyzed using LEGENDplex Cloud-based Data Analysis Software (BioLegend).

For monitoring virus replication in tumor tissues in vivo, tumor-bearing mice were treated intravenously with 1×107TCID50VSV-GP-Luc.3For luciferase imaging, mice received intraperitoneal injections of 150 mg/kg D-luciferin (D-luciferin potassium salt, in vivo imaging solution at 15 mg/mL) in D-PBS 15 min prior to measurements using a charge-coupled device camera (PhotonIMAGER Optima, Biospace Lab, France). Exposure times were adapted to the amount of luciferase activity. Images were analyzed using manually defined regions of interest using M3Vision image analysis software (Biospace Lab, France). Bioluminescence was expressed as photon flux (photons s−1sr−1) in the region of interest. Background radiance was defined from a region of interest drawn over background.

Statistics were calculated using GraphPad Prism software (V.10, GraphPad Software, La Jolla, California, USA). Used statistical tests included unpaired two-tailed t-test, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s multiple comparison, two-way ANOVA test with Sidak’s multiple comparison, Kruskal-Wallis test and log-rank test as indicated in the figure legend. Statistically significant differences were encoded as follows: *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001; and ns for not significant.

Transformed murine lung epithelial cells TC-1 expressing HPV-derived oncoproteins are susceptible to VSV-GP infection in vitro; however, subcutaneous TC-1 tumors are weakly susceptible to VSV-GP infection in the mouse.4The absence of bioluminescence signal after treatment of TC-1 tumor-bearing mice with VSV-GP expressing firefly luciferase (VSV-GP-Luc) indicated weak or no VSV-GP replication in the tumors (online supplemental figure S1A). When mixing TC-1 cells used for tumor implantation with IFNαR1-deficient TC-1 cells (TC-1ifnar1–/–) in either 80:20 or 20:80 proportions bioluminescent signal was clearly detectable 24 hours after VSV-GP-Luc infection. Signal intensity increased at least up to day 4 and was still detectable at day 7 post infection indicating a persistent replication of VSV-GP in this mixed tumor setting (online supplemental figure S1A). In vitro infection with VSV-GP-GFP in a 50:50 mixture of TC-1 cells expressing the fluorochrome cerulean and non-labeled TC-1ifnar1−/−cells, with or without preincubation of exogenous IFN-α, revealed that type I IFNs potentially induced in mice on VSV-GP infections can protect TC-1 cells but not TC-1ifnar1−/−cells from infection (online supplemental methodsandonline supplemental figure S1B). This suggests a preferential infection of IFNαR1-deficient TC-1 cells in vitro. Further experiments showed that both TC-1 and TC-1ifnar1−/−cells grew equally after subcutaneous tumor implantation, and VSV-GP treatment specifically reduced the TC-1ifnar1−/−component in the mixed tumor setting, indicating a preferential infection and oncolytic activity of VSV-GP against IFNαR1-deficient cells in vivo (online supplemental figure S1C). These results supported the suitability of the mixed tumor model to achieve prolonged replication and transgene expression of the type I IFN-sensitive oncolytic VSV-GP and therefore provide the possibility to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of the VSV-GP encoding murine IL-12 (VSV-GP-IL12) as an immunomodulatory cargo. Moreover, this mixed model more closely resembles naturally occurring tumors that harbor cells which have lost responsiveness to type I IFNs.28,30In subsequent experiments, TC-1, TC-1:TC-1ifnar1−/−80:20 or 20:80 mixed tumor bearing mice were treated intravenously with 107TCID50of VSV-GP or VSV-GP-IL12. Single systemic VSV-GP or VSV-GP-IL12 injections into the mice with TC-1 tumors showed no effect on tumor growth and survival in comparison to the PBS-treated control mice (figure 1andonline supplemental figure S2). In contrast, treatment with VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 in both 80:20 and 20:80 mixed TC-1 tumor settings delayed tumor growth, whereby VSV-GP-IL12 was more effective than VSV-GP (figure 1andonline supplemental figure S2). This was evident from the non-overlapping 95% CI values of the mean tumor growth curves, indicating a statistically significant difference between the treatments, particularly in the 80:20 setting (figure 1). Median survival of VSV-GP-IL12 treated mice increased to 37.5 days (80:20) and 52.5 days (20:80), in comparison to 22 days (80:20) and 29 days (20:80) for VSV-GP, respectively (online supplemental figure S2). Thus, both 80:20 and 20:80 mixed TC-1 tumor settings were suitable to investigate the mechanisms of improved therapeutic efficacy of VSV-GP-IL12 over VSV-GP. Since the oncolytic component is expected to be less relevant in the 80:20 setting, and differences in the therapeutic efficacy regarding early tumor control between VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 appeared slightly better compared with the 20:80 setting (figure 1), we selected the 80:20 condition for further experiments. Given that the difference in the therapeutic outcome between VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatment is likely due to the immunomodulatory cargo, subsequent experiments focused on immune cell populations relevant to tumor control.

In the next set of experiments, 80:20 mixed TC-1 tumor-bearing mice were treated with VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 to study the activation and phenotype of NK cells and CD8+ T cells. Both cell types are crucial for antitumor immunity. NK cells were determined as CD3/CD19 negative NK1.1 (CD161) and NKp46 (CD335) positive cells and showed a rapid drop in frequencies and numbers in peripheral blood on OV treatment (figure 2A). Whereas NK cell counts normalized after 3 days following VSV-GP injection, VSV-GP-IL12 treatment resulted in a prolonged reduction of NK cells observed until at least 7 days post treatment in the periphery (figure 2A). This decline could result from a strong NK cell activation by VSV-GP-IL12 as we found significantly higher proportion of KLRG1+ activated cells within the NK cell population when compared with VSV-GP treatment (figure 2A). Although VSV-GP-IL12 induced significantly higher proportions of activated KLRG1+ NK cells, total numbers of activated NK cells in blood remained significantly lower compared with VSV-GP treatment (figure 2A). This suggests that VSV-GP-IL12 induces strong activation of NK cells, which in turn most likely leave the blood stream and home to peripheral organs or the tumor.

In contrast to innate NK cells responding rapidly to virus treatment, activation of CD8+ T cell responses could first be detected at day 4–5 following virus treatment (figure 2B). To define the subsets of activated CD8+ T cells, we dissected CD8+ T cells based on the expression of CD27, activation-associated glycoform of early activation marker CD43, and KLRG1. KLRG1 is often used to identify actively responding effector CD8+ T cells, while CD43 plays a role in CD8+ T cell activation, differentiation and function with its activation-associated glycoform serving as marker for effector CD8+ T cells.31 32In contrast, the loss of CD27 is linked to the acquisition of effector functions in CD8+ T cells.33Total CD8+ T cells within live CD45+cells were gated, and fluorescence minus one (FMO) controls were used to set gates for CD27+, CD43+ or KLRG1+ populations (online supplemental figure S3). Frequencies of CD43-expressing CD8+ T cells started to increase from day 3 after both VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 injections indicating an activation of CD8+ T cells. At day 7 post treatment both the frequencies of total and CD43 positive CD8+ T cells were significantly higher after VSV-GP-IL12 in comparison to VSV-GP treatment (figure 2B). Interestingly, VSV-GP-IL12 induced significantly higher frequencies of KLRG1 positive CD8+ T cells compared with VSV-GP treatment (figure 2B). In contrast, CD27 expression on CD8+ T cells started to decline day 5 after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment, resulting in significantly lower proportions of CD8+ T cells expressing CD27 on day 7 post VSV-GP-IL12 treatment when compared with VSV-GP (figure 2B).

We next investigated the co-expression of the above-mentioned CD8+ T cell markers in peripheral blood after 7 and 14 days post VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatment in 80:20 mixed TC-1 tumor-bearing mice. Single-marker positive populations for CD27, CD43 and KLRG1 in CD8+ T cells were defined using FMO controls, and a Boolean gating strategy in FlowJo software was applied to automatically generate all possible marker combinations. The data were then visualized as color-coded stacked bar graphs representing the distribution of different marker co-expressing populations (figure 2C). A detailed statistical analysis of the different populations comparing control, VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatments can be found inonline supplemental table 1 and 2. After both treatment regimens, we found a strong reduction of CD27posnaïve CD8+ T cells expressing neither CD43 nor KLRG1 (CD27posCD43negKLRG1neg), suggesting a potent activation on day 7 and, to a lesser extent, also on day 14 after treatment (figure 2C). Interestingly, VSV-GP induced dominantly CD27posCD43posKLRG1negCD8+ T cells, whereas after VSV-GP-IL12 injection CD27negCD43posKLRG1poscells represented the most prominent population at day 7 post treatment (figure 2Candonline supplemental figure S4A). After 14 days of virus treatment, the activation of CD8+ T cells subsided and started to contract, as indicated by the increasing proportion of CD27posCD43negKLRG1negcells. Importantly, at 14 days following VSV-GP-IL12 treatment, we found higher frequencies of KLRG1posCD8+ T cells expressing neither CD27 nor CD43 (CD27negCD43negKLRG1pos) (figure 2Candonline supplemental figure S4A), a phenotype that was previously described for LLECs induced on LCMV infection.21 22Importantly, the differences in CD8+ T cell phenotype in the blood and spleen were reflected in that found in the tumors on days 10 and 15 after both VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatment (online supplemental figure S4Bandfigure 2C, respectively). Of note, the higher proportion of TC-1ifnar1−/−cells in the mixed TC-1 model, led to higher frequencies of CD8+ T cells displaying the CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotype at day 9 post treatment, which was likely due to higher virus replication and IL-12 production (online supplemental figure S5).

VSV-GP treatment of mice has been shown to induce strong antiviral CD8+ T cells responses,34which on one hand controls viral spread but might also contribute to tumor control by killing virus-infected tumor cells. In addition, oncolytic activity has also been demonstrated to promote tumor-specific CD8+ T cells.1034,36Thus, we next investigated the induction and the phenotype of VSV-GP N-specific as well as tumor-related HPV E7-specific responses 7 and 14 days post VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 injections of 80:20 mixed TC-1 tumor-bearing mice.

As expected, both treatment regimens induced antiviral CD8+ T cell responses as indicated by the presence of N-specific CD8+ T cells in the peripheral blood on day 7 (figure 3A). At day 14 after treatment, N-specific response decreased compared with day 7, but was still detectable (figure 3A). Although the frequencies of N-specific CD8+ T cells were not significantly different between VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treated animals (figure 3A), we found noticeable differences with respect to VSV-N specific CD8+ T cell phenotypes (figure 3B and C). Whereas N-specific CD8+ T cells induced by VSV-GP showed significantly higher frequencies of both CD27posand CD43poscells, VSV-GP-IL12 treatment resulted in a virus-specific response with significantly higher proportion of KLRG1posCD8+ T cells at day 14 post treatment (figure 3Bandonline supplemental figure S3). This resulted predominantly in virus-specific CD8+ T cells characterized by a CD27posCD43posKLRG1negphenotypic signature when mice were treated with VSV-GP only, whereas VSV-GP-IL12 promoted virus-specific CD8+ T cell response with a prominent presence of the CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotype (figure 3C). Detailed statistical analysis of the above populations comparing VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatments can be found inonline supplemental table 3.

We then conducted a deeper analysis of total and N-specific CD8+ T cell subsets using the markers CD44, CD62L, KLRG1, CD43, CD27 and CD127 measured by flow cytometry in blood samples taken 14 days post treatment (figure 4). Of note, there was no significant change in the proportions of naïve CD62LposCD44low, CD62LnegCD44posCD8+ T effector/effector memory (TE/TEM) and CD62LhighCD44posCD8+ T central memory (TCM) populations between VSV-GP-treated and VSV-GP-IL12-treated animals (figure 4A). The induction of N-specific antiviral CD8+ T cells was similar between VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatments (figure 4B). The vast majority of N-specific CD8+ T cells after both VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 injections exhibited a TE/TEM phenotype, whereas a minority of N-specific cells displayed a TCM phenotype (figure 4C). As expected, CD8+ T cells expressing the activation markers CD43 and KLRG1 were mainly found within the TE/TEM CD8+ T cell population. Consistent with our data above concerning the CD43 and KLRG1 expression, in TE/TEM cells VSV-GP induced a heterogeneous expression pattern equally contributed by CD43posKLRG1neg(blue), CD43posKLRG1pos(purple) and CD43negKLRG1pos(red) among both total and N-specific CD8+ T cells (figure 4Dandonline supplemental figure S6A). In contrast, the majority of TE/TEMs displayed a CD43negKLRG1pos(red) phenotype of both total and N-specific CD8+T cells after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment (figure 4Dandonline supplemental figure S6A). Detailed statistical analysis of the above populations comparing VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatments can be found inonline supplemental table 4 and 5. Whereas CD43posKLRG1neg(blue) and CD43negKLRG1neg(black) N-specific TE/TEM cells exhibited higher expression levels of CD27 and CD127 (figure 4E), CD43negKLRG1pos(red) TE/TEMs had the lowest expression of both CD27 and CD127 (figure 4E), corresponding to the phenotype previously described for LLECs21 22or terminally differentiated effector memory cells (terminal-TEM).23Given that both CD43negKLRG1pos(red) and CD43posKLRG1pos(purple) TE/TEMs can traditionally be classified as short-lived effector cells (SLEC) based on the expression of KLRG1 and CD127 (figure 4E), we propose that the absence of CD43 may not only define LLECs but could also be a useful marker to distinguish developing LLECs within the SLEC population.

To study the induction of antitumor responses, we investigated the generation of CD8+ T cells against the HPV16-derived immunodominant epitope of E749–57(RAHYNIVTF).37We found that in 80:20 mixed TC-1 tumor-bearing mice E7-specific response can be generated spontaneously even in PBS-treated control mice. Although we found slightly more mice with detectable frequencies of E7-specific responses after both VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 injections, neither treatment resulted in a significant difference of E7-specific CD8+ T cell frequencies on day 14 post treatment (figure 3D). Nevertheless, E7-specific responses were clearly detectable in all animals with long-term survival at day 60 post treatment suggesting that long-term survival is dependent on the presence of E7-specific CD8+ T cells (online supplemental figure S7). Similar to the antiviral response, if detectable, E7-specific CD8+ T cells from control and VSV-GP-treated animals revealed a predominant CD27posCD43posKLRG1negphenotype, whereas VSV-GP-IL12 promoted E7-specific CD8+T cell response showed a CD27negCD43posKLRG1posor CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotypic signature (figure 3Eandonline supplemental figure S6B). Importantly, the majority of E7-specific CD8+ T cells also displayed a CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotype in long-term surviving animals at 60 days post VSV-GP-IL12 treatment (online supplemental figure S7).

Cytokines and chemokines play a critical role in the regulation of the TME, thus it is also important to understand how cytokines/chemokines are modulated by oncolytic virotherapy especially if OV express immunomodulatory molecules such as IL-12.34 38Therefore, we measured pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines in plasma and tumor lysates at different time points (0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 days) after VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatment. As expected, compared with control and VSV-GP-treated mice, VSV-GP-IL12 treatment resulted in higher plasma levels of IL-12, which already peaked 12 hours post treatment, followed with a secondary peak at day 4. 7 days post VSV-GP-IL12 treatment, plasma levels of IL-12 returned to their normal levels found in control animals. In contrast, VSV-GP treatment did not affect IL-12 levels in plasma compared with the control (online supplemental figure S8A). Importantly, we found significantly higher concentrations of IFN-γ in plasma shortly after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment in comparison to PBS-treated and VSV-GP-treated animals (online supplemental figure S8). Some cytokines/chemokines like IFN-α, CCL2 and CXCL10 were elevated on both virus treatment, whereby CXCL10 levels were slightly higher after VSV-GP-IL12 injection (online supplemental figure S8A).

In the tumor lysates, we detected higher levels of IL-12 already 12 hours after VSV-GP-IL12 in comparison to control and VSV-GP, peaking between 2 and 4 days post injections (online supplemental figure S8B). We also found increased production of IFN-γ within the tumor of VSV-GP-IL12-treated mice compared with control and VSV-GP-treated animals. All the other investigated cytokines/chemokines were only slightly affected by the treatment regimens (online supplemental figure S8B).

As IFN-γ production by CD8+T cells has been associated with the therapeutic efficacy of cancer immunotherapies using IL-12 in previous studies,39 40we next investigated the functionality of CD8+T cells more closely by measuring IFN-γ production and degranulation of CD8+T cells in spleen (online supplemental figures S9 and S10) and tumor tissues (figure 5) at 7 and 14 days post VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatments. Single-cell suspension from both spleen and tumor tissues was generated, and cells were restimulated ex vivo with either viral N-derived (RGYVYQGL) or E7-derived (RAHYNIVTF) peptides for 3 hours.

Surface marker staining of both tumor (figure 5A and B) and spleen (online supplemental figure S9A and B) CD8+ T cells with CD43 and KLRG1 antibodies revealed that, similarly to our data above, at 7 days post treatment (dpt), VSV-GP induced a significantly higher proportion of CD43posKLRG1neg(blue) CD8+ T cells, whereas VSV-GP-IL12 treatments induced more double-positive CD43posKLRG1pos(purple) CD8+ T cells. In the tumor tissues, at 14 days post-VSV-GP treatments, CD43posKLRG1neg(blue) CD8+ T cells remained the predominant population. In contrast, 14 days after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment, CD43posKLRG1pos(purple) CD8+ T cells remained prominent, alongside an accumulation of CD43negKLRG1pos(red) CD8+ T cells.

Importantly, at both 7 and 14 dpt, a significantly higher percentage of CD8+ T cells positive for IFN-γ was observed after N peptide stimulation in the tumor (figure 5C and D) and spleen (online supplemental figure S9C and D). Notably, 7 days after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment, a relatively high percentage of CD8+ T cells were positive for IFN-γ without any stimulation, indicating a generally activated state of CD8+ T cells induced by VSV-GP-IL12. Furthermore, the significantly higher median fluorescence intensities (MFIs) of IFN-γ-positive cells at 7 days post VSV-GP-IL12 treatment suggested elevated levels of IFN-γ production by N peptide-stimulated CD8+ T cells. Of note, we found that VSV-GP-IL12 treatments also led to increased IFN-γ production by CD3+CD8+ cells in both the spleen and tumor at 7 dpt, which was not further enhanced by specific peptide stimulation (online supplemental figure S10).

An increased number of IFN-γ-producing cells in the spleen after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment compared with VSV-GP was confirmed by IFN-γ ELISpot assay after 20 hours of incubation of spleen cells in the presence of N peptides (online supplemental figure S11). A higher background production of IFN-γ without any stimulation was also observed in spleen cells 7 days post VSV-GP-IL12 treatments in ELISpot. In line with the higher MFIs found in intracellular IFN-γ staining, significantly higher percent area values suggested increased levels of IFN-γ secretion of IFN-γ-producing spleen cells derived from VSV-GP-IL12 treated animals.

Examining CD43 and KLRG1 expression on IFN-γ-producing CD8+ T cells, we found that the majority of IFN-γ-positive CD8+ T cells in both tumor tissues and spleen displayed a CD43posKLRG1neg(blue) phenotype after VSV-GP treatments at days 7 and 14 (figure 5Eandonline supplemental figure S9E). In contrast, 7 days after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment, IFN-γ producing CD8+ T cells in both tumor and spleen were predominantly CD43posKLRG1pos(purple), whereas at 14 days post treatment, IFN-γ producing CD8+ T cells displayed a more heterogeneous phenotype, primarily CD43posKLRG1pos(purple) and CD43negKLRG1poscells (red) (figure 5Eandonline supplemental figure S9E).

In addition to IFN-γ production, CD8+ T cell degranulation in tumor and spleen was assessed after both VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatments by measuring CD107a surface expression (figure 5F–5Iandonline supplemental figure S9F-I). In tumors, no significant differences were observed between CD107a single-positive and CD107a/IFN-γ double-positive CD8+ T cells after both treatments. However, IFN-γ-positive cells lacking surface degranulation marker CD107a were significantly elevated after VSV-GP-IL12 (figure 5F–5I). A similar pattern was observed in spleen cells (online supplemental figure S9F–I), except for CD107a/IFN-γ double-positive CD8+ T cells, which were significantly more abundant in spleens from VSV-GP-treated mice at 7 dpt.

These results demonstrated higher levels of IFN-γ production in CD8+ T cells following VSV-GP-IL12 treatment and confirmed the functional capacity of both CD43posKLRG1posand CD43negKLRG1posCD8+ T subpopulations to produce IFN-γ.

Since we found differences in activation and phenotype of both NK cell and CD8+ T cell responses after VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatment, we next aimed to dissect the role of both immune cell types in the improved tumor control seen on VSV-GP-IL12. Therefore, we depleted NK or CD8+ T cells or both together. Depletion of NK and CD8+ T cells was confirmed by flow cytometry (online supplemental figure S12A). Similar to the previous experiments, VSV-GP injection of 80:20 mixed TC-1 tumor-bearing mice resulted in a better tumor control and significantly prolonged survival over the PBS-treated control animals. More importantly, VSV-GP-IL12 significantly improved survival over VSV-GP treatment. Isotype antibodies used as negative control for the depletion did not affect the therapeutic effect of either virus treatment (figure 6A and B). While CD8+ T cell depletion did not influence therapeutic efficacy of VSV-GP, it abrogated the improved survival of VSV-GP-IL12 treated animals to a level seen after VSV-GP treatment (figure 6A and B). Despite the strong activation of NK cells after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment, NK cell depletion did not negatively affect the efficacy of either virus injection (figure 6A and B). Depletion of both NK and CD8+ T cells did not influence the efficacy of the VSV-GP treatment group, but it reduced the survival of VSV-GP-IL12 treated mice to the level found after VSV-GP treatment (figure 6A and B). Of note, three out of eight mice from the group being depleted for both NK and CD8+T cells needed to be terminated after VSV-GP-IL12 injection due to weight loss adhering to the humane endpoints defined in our animal experimentation license (online supplemental figure S12B). This indicates that in a situation with a high tumor burden and defective innate immune signaling due to a loss of function in the interferon alpha receptor 1, the depletion of both NK and CD8+ T cells can result in a loss of immune control of the virus, potentially leading to systemic toxicity. This toxicity is possibly due to increased levels of replication and subsequent IL-12 cargo expression. Taken together, these results demonstrated that VSV-GP-IL12 improved tumor control and survival of 80:20 mixed TC-1 tumor-bearing mice in a CD8+-dependent manner. Importantly, all of the long-term surviving mice showed detectable E7-specific response displaying again the CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotype at 60 days post treatment (online supplemental figure S12C). Of note, NK depletion did not impact the LLEC phenotype (online supplemental figure S12C).

All these results suggested that the tumor control in the mixed TC-1: TC-1ifnar1−/−model was the result of oncolytic activity as well as antiviral and potentially E7-specific antitumor CD8+ T cell responses. Importantly, long-term survival achieved by VSV-GP-IL12 was associated with the presence of HPV E7-specific antitumor CD8 T-cell responses displaying in particular a CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotype. Thus, the IL-12-induced LLEC phenotype may play a role in the context of tumor vaccines, driving a potent tumor-specific CD8+ T cell response for effective tumor control. Therefore, we used VSV-GP encoding E7 as a vaccine component (Vacc), along with either VSV-GP or VSV-GP-IL12, to induce E7-specific CD8+ T cells. To dissect the importance of oncolytic activity, antiviral and E7-specific antitumor CD8+ T cell responses, which might be involved in the virus-permissive 80:20 mixed TC-1 tumor model, we implanted, in addition to the 80:20 mixed TC-1 tumors (right flank), contralateral wild-type TC-1 cells (left flank) that are non-permissive and non-responsive to either virus treatment. In this tumor model, we hypothesized that the control of non-permissive wild-type TC-1 tumors on the contralateral side is primarily related to the quantity and quality of VSV-GPVacc-induced tumor-specific E7 CD8+ T cell responses, with oncolytic and antiviral activities playing a comparatively minor role.

By using this tumor model, the permissive mixed TC-1: TC-1ifnar1−/−tumors on the right flank showed a similar tumor control after VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP and VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP-IL12 treatment (figure 7A). In contrast, the growth of non-permissive contralateral TC-1 tumors was slightly delayed on VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP compared with control animals, whereas VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP-IL12 showed a more pronounced effect on the contralateral tumor control, which in turn prolonged the survival of VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP-IL12 treated mice (figure 7A and B). The difference in the therapeutic outcome between VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP and VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP-IL12 was not associated with the level of E7-specific responses as both treatments induced similar frequencies of tumor-specific CD8+T cells (figure 7C). However, a significant difference in the phenotype of E7-specific CD8+ T cells between treatments was found. Whereas E7-specific CD8+ T cells induced by VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP showed significantly higher frequencies of both CD27posand CD43poscells, VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP-IL12 treatment resulted in an E7-specific response with significantly higher proportion of KLRG1posCD8+ T cells at 14 days post treatment (figure 7C). This, in turn, resulted in higher frequencies of the CD27posCD43posKLRG1negsubset of E7-specific CD8+ T cells in response to VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP, whereas VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP-IL12 promoted the generation of E7-specific CD8+ T cells with a CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotype (figure 7Dandonline supplemental figure S13). Detailed statistical analysis of the different populations comparing Vacc/GP and Vacc/GP-IL12 treatments can be found inonline supplemental table 7. Importantly, all long-term surviving mice showed E7-specific CD8+ T cell response 109 days post treatment (online supplemental figure S14B, C). As LLEC are also characterized by the expression of CX3CR1,21 22we measured the expression of this receptor on E7-specific CD8+ T cells in long-term survivors and found a more pronounced expression of CX3CR1 on specific cells after VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP-IL12 immunizations compared with VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP treatment (online supplemental figure S14C). Moreover, E7 response after VSV-GP was associated with an equal proportion of CD27posCD43posKLRG1negand CD27negCD43negKLRG1possubsets of CD8+ T cells (online supplemental figure S14D). In contrast, E7-specific CD8+ T cells showed a predominant CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotype in mice treated with VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP-IL12 (online supplemental figure S14D). CD27negCD43negKLRG1poscells expressed CX3CR1 independent of whether generated on VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP or VSV-GPVacc/VSV-GP-IL12 treatment (online supplemental figure S14D).

In our study, we demonstrated that VSV-GP encoding IL-12 increases the efficacy of oncolytic virotherapy in a subcutaneous TC-1/TC-1ifnar1−/−mixed tumor model. The improved efficacy by VSV-GP-IL12 treatment was accompanied by the generation of CD8+ T cell responses, which were characterized by a predominant CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotype when compared with VSV-GP treatment. As this phenotype correlated with efficacy and was found predominantly also on tumor-specific CD8+ T cells in mice with long-term survival, this CD8+ T subpopulation is likely involved in long-term tumor control.

Several OVs engineered to express IL-12, including herpes simplex virus, adenovirus, measles virus, Maraba virus, Newcastle disease virus, vaccinia virus, Semliki Forest virus, Sindbis virus and also VSV, have been investigated for their potential to enhance antitumor immune responses and have been reviewed in detail recently.41 42In a recent study, intratumoral treatment with a recombinant VSV co-expressing both murine IL-12 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (rVSV-mIL-12-GM-CSF) prolongs survival of mice in a subcutaneous B16-F10 murine melanoma model; however, the underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated.43An earlier study also shows significantly improved therapeutic efficacy with intratumoral rVSV-IL-12 in a subcutaneous murine squamous cell carcinoma (SCC VII) model.44While these studies with VSV have not extensively investigated underlying mechanisms, the improved therapeutic efficacy of IL-12 delivered by other OVs has been primarily involved in Th1 differentiation, promoted IFN-γ production, increased CD8+ T cell tumor infiltration and increased CD8+ T cell and NK cell activation.39 40Our results on IFN-γ production after VSV-GP-IL12 treatments support these observations. Furthermore, the LLEC phenotype, which we found to be stimulated by IL-12 in the context of VSV-GP, provides further insight into mechanisms through which IL-12 supports antitumor immune responses.

VSV-GP represents a potent OV platform and has already been evaluated for its therapeutic potential in preclinical settings.4 6 10 25 34Similar to VSV, VSV-GP is highly sensitive to type I IFN-mediated innate immune responses and therefore viral replication is strongly restricted in healthy cells. In contrast, cancer cells often acquire mutations in genes related to intrinsic type I IFN pathways leading to dysregulated IFN responsiveness and making them susceptible to type I IFN-sensitive OV therapies.8Numerous tumor cell lines have been demonstrated to have high susceptibility to VSV-GP infection in vitro; however, they may still respond to exogenous IFN-α systemically induced by VSV-GP in vivo.8This, in turn, not only reduces VSV-GP infection and subsequent oncolytic activity in vivo but may also limit the production of potential immunomodulatory cargos encoded by the virus. Here, we used a mixed TC-1:TC-1ifnar1−/−model, allowing effective VSV-GP replication within the tumor. This resulted in a sustained presence of measurable IL-12 levels after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment in the peripheral blood and within the tumor over several days. In addition to allowing the evaluation of immunomodulatory cargos encoded by type I IFN-sensitive OVs like VSV-GP, this mixed model might also better reflect the intratumoral heterogeneity observed in different cancer types.45Although the mixed TC-1 model might recapitulate some degree of intratumor heterogeneity of type I IFN responsiveness, it does not fully reflect the native TME. Therefore, further studies will be necessary on other syngeneic tumor models as well as orthotopic models to evaluate the potential of VSV-GP-IL12 in more representative TME. Furthermore, our results underscore the importance of carefully screening and selection of patients for therapies involving VSV-GP or other type I IFN-sensitive OVs, particularly considering the type I IFN responsiveness in tumor cells. This is especially critical in the context of immunomodulatory cargos encoded by such viruses to achieve an optimal therapeutic outcome while minimizing the risk of adverse events. The observed weight loss in certain mice following the simultaneous depletion of both NK cells and CD8+ T cells indicates that the status of both innate and adaptive immune system is a key consideration for the safe use of VSV-GP-IL12.

Permissiveness of tumor cells to VSV-GP infection in the mixed TC-1:TC-1ifnar1−/−model is likely a key factor contributing to significant oncolytic activity, which is considered an important component for the overall therapeutic efficacy of OVs.6 8Previous investigations in a type I IFN receptor-deficient Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC) mouse lung cancer model highlighted the predominance of lytic activity for the therapeutic effectiveness following VSV-GP treatment.3Consistent with our present study, CD8+ T cell depletion did not adversely impact the efficacy of VSV-GP treatment in type I IFN receptor-deficient LLC model3suggesting a limited contribution of the antiviral/antitumor adaptive immunity by VSV-GP treatment. Similarly, the relatively strong antiviral CD8+ T cell activation and sporadically induced antitumor E7-specific CD8+ T cells in response to VSV-GP therapy do not significantly contribute to therapeutic efficacy. However, CD8+ T cell depletion clearly reduced the efficacy of VSV-GP-IL12 to a level comparable to that observed after VSV-GP treatment. Notably, the frequencies of both antiviral and E7-specific antitumor CD8+ T cells responses did not significantly differ between VSV-GP and VSV-GP-IL12 treatment. This suggested not the magnitude of CD8+ T cell response, but phenotypical and functional differences in CD8+ T cells might be critically involved in the enhanced therapeutic outcome observed after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment.

Despite its potential for systemic toxicity, IL-12 represents a potent immune modulatory molecule in the realm of cancer immunotherapies exerting antitumor activity in a wide range of preclinical tumor models. IL-12 supports antitumor immunity by boosting CD8+ T cell and NK cell responses particularly through the induction of IFN-γ production.46Efforts are underway to develop strategies for safe IL-12 delivery, with a primary focus on targeted delivery specifically to the tumor site aiming to enhance therapeutic outcomes, widen the therapeutic window, and minimize adverse effects.47,50In our study, VSV-GP-IL12 treatment was associated with CD8+ T cell activation characterized by a predominant presence of cells exhibiting a CD27negCD43negKLRG1posphenotype compared with VSV-GP. Specific CD8+ T cells with a similar phenotype have been described in response to LCMV infection in mice and termed as LLEC21 22or terminally differentiated effector memory cells (terminal-TEM).23According to the phenotype described for both LLEC and terminal-TEM, CD8+ T cells induced after VSV-GP-IL12 treatment were mainly CD44posCD62LnegTE/TEM cells and expressed the fractalkine-receptor CX3CR1 on their surface.21,23CX3CR1 is thought to be present on antigen-experienced CD8+ T cells and expression is accompanied by cytotoxic effector functions of CD8+ T cells at both effector and memory phase after adenovirus, LCMV orListeria monocytogenesinfection.51Whereas these phenotypes have been described in the context of T cell-mediated pathogen control, little is known about a potential role of these cells in antitumor immunity. During the induction of a CD8+ T cell response, the expansion of specific CD8+ T cells results in the formation of SLEC and the development of memory cells, including both TEM and TCM populations. Whereas SLECs display significant cytotoxic capacity, TEM and TCM play essential roles in providing long-lasting immunity and facilitating recall responses.52The activation and memory development of CD8+ T cells is accompanied with the expression of surface and intracellular markers defining heterogeneous populations at different activation and differentiation stages. Both LLEC and terminal-TEM have been shown to differ from classical TEM and TCM cells as well as from SLECs, whereby they represent a long-lived effector-like cell type in the memory population possessing characteristic of memory T cells with potent cytotoxic capacity.21 23Our study demonstrates that CD27negCD43negKLRG1posLLECs are as potent as other activated CD8+ T cell populations (CD43posKLRG1negand CD43posKLRG1pos) in IFN-γ production and degranulation following peptide stimulation. Given their long-lived nature and potent cytotoxic capacity, LLECs might be beneficial for long-term tumor control. Notably, not all mice treated with VSV-GP-IL12 generate an E7-specific antitumor CD8+ T cell response. However, all long-term survivors investigated exhibit E7-specific CD8+ T cells along with an accumulation of LLECs, suggesting a critical role for these cells in sustained tumor control. Interestingly, early induction of E7-specific CD8+T cells does not always correlate with long-term survival, indicating that additional factors within the TME likely influence therapeutic success.

The factors governing the development of LLEC or terminal-TEM are not fully understood, but KLRG1+ effector CD8+ T cells, present as early as 12 days post infection, appear to be the major source of LLECs following LCMV infection.21KLRG1 is often referred to as a marker for SLEC.53Inflammatory signals like IL-12 during the priming have been shown to regulate the development of KLRG1+IL-7RlowSLEC.54This suggests that the sustained IL-12 production in the mixed TC-1 model after VSV-GP-IL12 is likely involved in the increase of KLRG1+CD8+ T cell frequencies, thereby giving the source of LLECs or terminal-TEM. Furthermore, VSV-GP-IL12 treatment induced a rapid downregulation of CD27 on activated CD8+ T cells already seen after 7 days post treatment. CD27 on CD8+T cells has been shown to be downregulated after repeated antigen stimulation.32In line with this observation, antigen boost increased the frequency of CD27lowCD43lowKLRG1highCD8+ T cells.22The lack of CD27 on murine CD8+ T cells has been proposed to identify CD8+ memory T-cell population with expression of cytotoxic molecules like granzyme B and perforin.32Therefore, we propose that sustained IL-12 production in mixed TC-1:TC-1ifnar1−/−model following VSV-GP-IL12 treatment induces a molecular reprogramming of activated CD8+ T cells and drives the generation of long-lived CD8+ T likely LLECs or terminal-TEM cells that are highly effective in controlling tumor growth. We propose that the lack of CD43 expression on KLRG1posCD127negCD8+ T cells, traditionally classified as SLECs, might help distinguish developing LLECs within the SLEC population in early time points. How IL-12 promotes the development of long-lived CD8+ T cells is not clear and needs to be further investigated. Notably, VSV-GP treatment of TC-1/TC-1ifnar1−/−tumors mixed at a 20:80 ratio also leads to an increase in CD27negCD43posKLRG1pospopulation, along with a slight increase in LLECs, suggesting that IL-12 may not be the only factor driving this effect. While our findings strongly support a role for IL-12 encoded by VSV-GP in promoting LLEC phenotype, further investigations are needed to determine the extent of IL-12’s involvement and to identify additional contributing factors. Understanding the underlying mechanisms by which IL-12 influences the development of LLEC phenotype of CD8+ T cells holds promise for the development of safer therapeutic strategies that harness robust antitumor immune responses.

Taken together, we demonstrated for the first time that IL-12 production by VSV-GP treatment in a mouse tumor model is therapeutically effective and preferentially induced a CD8+ T cell response characterized by CD27negCD43negKLRG1poslong-lived, likely LLEC or terminal-TEM cell phenotype. This study strongly supports the hypothesis that this CD8+ T cell population is crucial for tumor control.

We thank Nita Venkatesh, and Jaqueline Schörgenhuber for excellent technical assistance.