Antibiotic resistance in Gram-positive priority pathogens is mediated by a diverse set of mechanisms such as target protection, antibiotic inactivation, decreased uptake, antibiotic efflux,etc.InStaphylococcus aureus, efflux pumps of the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) expel various antibiotics and multiple efflux pumps are activated upon antibiotic exposure. Efflux pump inhibitors (EPIs) that can act as antibiotic adjuvants are proposed to be promising solutions to tackle antibiotic resistance. In this study,in silicoscreening of 17 967 phytochemical compounds from Indian medicinal plants (IMPPAT 2.0) against four key MFS efflux pumps activated by fluoroquinolone exposure (NorA, NorB, NorC, and SdrM) followed byin vitrovalidation identified a tannin derivative, pentagalloyl glucose (PGG), as a potential efflux pump inhibitor (EPI) with high binding affinity. Molecular docking scores (≤−16.383 kcal mol−1) and MM/GBSA binding affinities (≤−100.62 kcal mol−1) indicate a strong interaction between PGG and its targeted efflux pumps. PGG forms stable interactionsviahydrogen bonding with key residues of NorA, including GLU222 and ASP307, which are crucial for proton-coupled transport. Likewise, it interacts with essential residues in NorB (SER147, ASN280), NorC (ASN276, LYS398), and SdrM (SER143, GLN283), forming strong hydrogen bonds that contribute to its inhibitory potential. The stability of PGG-bound complexes was confirmed through molecular dynamics simulations over 100 ns in triplicates, along with free energy landscape (FEL) and principal component analysis (PCA). Furthermore, PGG's synergistic action with ciprofloxacin, and effects onS. aureusgrowth dynamics were validated using the checkerboard assay, and time-kill kinetic studies, respectively. Following further structural optimization andin vivostudies, PGG can be considered a promising therapeutic candidate against multidrug-resistantS. aureusstrains.

Pentagalloyl glucose (PGG) was identified as a potential inhibitor of NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM efflux pumps inS. aureus. PGG was further validated as a ciprofloxacin-adjuvant which declined the growth of ciprofloxacin-resistantS. aureusstrain.

InS. aureus, the chromosome-encoded efflux pumps NorA, NorB, NorC, and SdrM exhibit broad substrate specificity compared to plasmid-encoded efflux pumps.6,10The wide substrate ranges of these pumps, combined with the extensive distribution of MFS efflux pumps, plays a pivotal role in conferring multidrug resistance inS. aureus.11Notably, fluoroquinolones, which were one of the traditional therapeutic agents forS. aureusinfections12are a common substrate for NorA, NorB, NorC, and SdrM.4Further, it has been reported that in addition to the DHA1 efflux pump NorA, the DHA2 efflux pumps NorB, NorC and SdrM ofS. aureusare overexpressed upon exposure to fluoroquinolones.13–15SinceS. aureusis acquiring resistance to fluoroquinolones, identifying a fluoroquinolone adjuvant which acts as efflux pump inhibitor (EPI) could reduce the active efflux of these antibiotics leading to bacterial growth inhibition.

Several studies reported the potential of antibiotic adjuvant as EPIs. EPIs can be derived from approved drugs, synthetic and semi-synthetic chemicals, microbial compounds and phytochemicals.16,17Felicettiet al.designed and synthesized six novel series of quinoline derivatives.18Among these, one derivative, namely 2-(3,4-dimethoxyphenyl)quinoline, was found to reduce the ciprofloxacin MIC levels in norA-overexpressing strains ofS. aureus(SA-K2378 and SA-1199B). Additionally, the compound demonstrated EPI activity at a concentration 50-fold lower than its CC50.18Felicettiet al.in their study using the SA-1199B strain ofS. aureus, which overexpresses the norA efflux pump and has a mutation in DNA topoisomerase IV (a fluoroquinolone target), investigated the activity of two methoxy-2-phenylquinoline derivatives.19These compounds were tested against several strains, including SA-K2378 (a norA-overexpressing strain), SA-K1902 (a norA-deleted strain), and the wild-type strains ATCC 25923 and SA-1199. Notably, the compounds reduced the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of ciprofloxacin against SA-1199B and revealed an eight-fold difference in ciprofloxacin MIC in the norA-overexpressing strain (SA-K2378) ofS. aureus. Thus, the study demonstrated that synthetic derivatives act as promising EPIs and potential adjuvants for ciprofloxacin.

Most studies on EPIs have focused on identifying and validating synthetic and phytochemical-based EPIs targeting the NorA efflux pump, a core gene inS. aureus.23These studies primarily highlight the potential of such molecules as adjuvants when combined with fluoroquinolone antibiotics. However, current research provides limited insight into the role of these molecules as EPIs for other chromosomally and plasmid-encoded MFS efflux pumps inS. aureus. Moreover, an EPI capable of simultaneously targeting multiple MFS efflux pumps associated with fluoroquinolone resistance remains unidentified.

The present study aims to identify phytochemical EPIs that can target multiple MFS efflux pumps inS. aureus, including NorA, NorB, NorC, and SdrM which are overexpressed upon fluoroquinolone exposure. Here we performed structure-based virtual screening of 17 967 phytochemicals derived from Indian medicinal plants24against NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM and identified a tannin derivative, pentagalloyl glucose (PGG) as a potential inhibitor. The synergistic activity of PGG is evaluated through checkerboard assays, and its negative impact onS. aureusgrowth is assessed using time-kill kinetics studies. Furtherin vivovalidation of PGG could represent a promising therapeutic strategy against multidrug-resistantS. aureusstrains.

TheS. aureusreference genome (RefSeq ID: GCF_000013425.1) was downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) RefSeq database.25The protein sequences of NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM were then retrieved from this reference genome. Further, a multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was performedviaMultiple Alignment using Fast Fourier Transform (MAFFT)26with thousand iterations using global optimisation for identifying the sequence conservation among NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM. EMBOSS Water27was used to identify pairwise sequence identities across the above proteins.

Among the five potential binding sites determined for each efflux pump, NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM, the one with the highest SiteScore was chosen. Each binding site requires at least 15 site points per reported site and is defined with a cut-off of 4 Å radius from the closest site point.30The Receptor Grid Generation panel in the Glide module32,33of the Schrödinger Maestro Version 2024-2 was used to create the grid file corresponding to the selected binding pockets of each efflux pump. This grid file was used in the subsequent molecular docking analysis.

A collection of 17 967 phytochemicals was obtained in SMILE format from the IMPPAT 2.0 database (Indian Medicinal Plants, Phytochemistry and Therapeutics).24The LigPrep module in the Schrödinger Maestro 2024-2 (ref.34) was used to prepare the ligands. To account for the flexibility and possible binding modes of the ligands, ring conformations and stereoisomers were created, and the tautomeric and ionisation states of the compounds were broadened to reflect any possible alterations that may occur under physiological settings.

Broth microdilution method was used to determine the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the compounds. Serial dilution of ciprofloxacin, PGG, and piperine were performed in 96-well plates. Standardized suspensions of overnight-grown culture ofS. aureus(ATCC 700698) in TSB (adjusted to OD600 nm of 0.08–0.13) were then added to the plates and incubated at 37 °C for 18 hours. Post 18 hours, MICs were determined by checking the absorbance values (OD600) and confirmedviaresazurin detection method.41MIC assays were performed in triplicates.

The FICI values of ≤0.5, 0.5–1, 1–4, and >4 indicate the effect to be synergistic, additive, indifferent, and antagonistic, respectively.

To understand the impact of PGG on the growth rates of fluoroquinolone resistantS. aureus(ATCC 700698), time-kill kinetics studies were performed by following the protocol from Aduseiet al.with modifications.43S. aureus(ATCC 700698) culture was incubated overnight and was diluted to 0.5 McFarland standard. Different concentrations of ciprofloxacin, PGG, and piperine were administered independently and in combinations. All solutions withS. aureusculture were prepared in 15 ml tubes. Post this, 200 μL aliquots includingS. aureusculture (ATCC 700698) were transferred to 96-well plates for measuring OD600. OD600 readings were obtained from Varioskan Lux multimode microplate reader over a time period of 18 hours.

A total of 57, 59, 55 and 45 binding sites residues (SI Table 1) were predicted for the efflux pumps NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM (Fig. 1B to E) respectively. A pairwise sequence comparison revealed that the similarities between these pumps and binding pockets vary significantly (SI Table 2). MSA of these proteins revealed the binding site residue MET109 (highlighted in yellow) which is conserved across all four efflux pumps, while the remaining residues were not conserved. Between NorB and NorC, 46 identical binding site residues were identified (Fig. 1A). Recently, Liet al.44showed that, in NorA, the amino acid residues GLU222 in TM7 and ASP307 in TM10 were critical for proton-coupled transport, while Brawleyet al.45demonstrated that the residues PHE16 in TM1 and PHE303 in TM10 were critical for substrate binding. Interestingly, these residues were identified in the predicted binding sites of NorA. Similarly, polar amino acids SER147, ASN217, ASN280 and LYS402 capable of strong interactions were present in the binding sites of NorB. Kumaret al.46showed that GLY148 in TM5 and LYS398 in TM13 is important for substrate binding and transport in NorC, which is present in the predicted binding site of NorC. Likewise, polar amino acids SER143 and GLN283 were present in the binding sites of SdrM. Thus, a compound that can form stable interactions with the functionally important residues of NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM in their respective binding sites can potentially disrupt their mechanism.

Structure-based virtual screening of 17 967 phytochemicals from the Indian medicinal plants revealed three potential lead compounds that bound simultaneously to the binding pockets of NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM with high affinities. These three compounds include a tannin derivative, pentagalloyl glucose (PGG) (docking scores ≤−16.383 kcal mol−1& ΔG≤ −100.62 kcal mol−1) and two flavonoid derivatives, namely, delphinidin-3,5,3′-triglucoside (docking scores ≤−15.480 kcal mol−1& ΔG≤ −70.35 kcal mol−1) & caffeylmalonylcyanin (docking scores ≤−14.601 kcal mol−1& ΔG≤ −78.04 kcal mol−1). Among these compounds (SI Table 3), PGG showed the highest binding affinities to NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM (Table 1).

Piperine is the known efflux pump inhibitor used as positive control for the study.

Molecular dynamics simulations done for 100 ns in triplicates revealed the structural stability of native proteins (NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM) and protein-PGG complexes. The RMSD plot of the native protein (SI Fig. 1A, C, E and G) was used to understand the structural stability of the native proteins. It was observed that the native proteins were stable and attained equilibrium after 15 ns, 6 ns, 9 ns and 3 ns at RMSDs ranging between 4 to 4.8 Å, 3.7 to 4.1 Å, 4.3 to 5.0 Å and 3.4 to 4.2 Å respectively. Similarly, the RMSD plot for the NorA-PGG, NorB-PGG, NorC-PGG and SdrM-PGG demonstrate a stable interaction pattern between the protein and the ligand. From the RMSD of the NorA-PGG complex (Fig. 3A) it was observed that the complex is attaining equilibrium after 20 ns, with an RMSD ranging between 2.7 and 4.0 Å for both NorA and PGG.

Additionally, the NorA-PGG complex (Fig. 3B) shows a lower RMSF value for the interacting amino acid residues, indicating high rigidity, whereas structurally flexible loop regions exhibited higher RMSF values. A similar pattern is observed in the loop regions of the native NorA with a high RMSF value whereas the interacting residues show a low RMSF profile (SI Fig. 1B). Moreover, the interaction plot for the NorA-PGG complex highlighted the presence of hydrogen bonds, water bridges, and hydrophobic interactions. The majority of interactions were contributedviaH-bond and water bridges involving GLN51, SER133, ASN137, THR223, ASP307, THR336, and ASN340. Interestingly, residues ASN137, PHE140, GLU222, and ASP307 were previously identified as key residues for substrate binding and proton-coupled substrate transport in NorA. It has been highlighted by Liet al.that protonation–deprotonation of both GLU222, ASP307 are crucial for conformational changes of NorA during substrate transport inS. aureus.44By binding to these residues, PGG can interfere with this protonation–deprotonation ensuring that the outward-open conformation of NorA does not interchange between occluded or inward-open states.

Furthermore, the protein RMSD plots for NorB-PGG (Fig. 3D), NorC-PGG (Fig. 3G) and SdrM-PGG (Fig. 3J) complex demonstrate a stable interaction pattern. In all three cases, the ligand RMSD remains lower than the protein RMSD throughout the simulation, indicating that the ligand undergoes minimal conformational changes and remains stably positioned within the binding site. Additionally, the RMSF plots for the NorB-PGG (Fig. 3E), NorC-PGG (Fig. 3H), and SdrM-PGG (Fig. 3K) complexes exhibit a similar trend to that observed for the NorA-PGG complex, reinforcing the structural stability of these systems. Interestingly, these observations were also in line with the RMSD (SI Fig. 1C, E and G) and the RMSF (SI Fig. 1D, F and H) values of the native proteins NorB, NorC and SdrM respectively.

Moreover, the major fraction of the stability of these protein-PGG complexes is contributedviathe hydrogen bonds and water bridges. GLN31, ALA59, SER147, ASN217, TYR311 and LYS402 were the key residues contributing to these interactions in NorB-PGG complex while TRP23, GLN27, VAL51, SER143, SER147, ASN276, ASN286, THR287, SER304, TYR307, TYR363, LYS398 and SER401 contributes to the stability of NorC-PGG complex. PGG can potentially affect the protonation of LYS398 in NorC, which has been indicated by Kumaret al.to be involved in substrate recognition, disrupting its transport.46Similarly, the residues GLN22, SER27, PHE47, GLN216, GLN283, GLU283, SER395 and THR399 majorly contribute to the stability of the SdrM-PGG complex.

To gain further insights into the conformational stability of protein-PGG complexes when embedded into a biological membrane, POPC (1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylphosphatidylcholine) membrane-model simulations were performed. The RMSD profiles (SI Fig. 2) revealed high stability for protein-PGG complexes indicating that PGG can act as a potential inhibitor of NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM inS. aureus.

The free energy landscape (FEL) of NorA-PGG, NorB-PGG, NorC-PGG and SdrM-PGG complex (Fig. 4A–D) were compared with the native proteins (SI Fig. 3) to obtain key insights into the conformational states and stability of the PGG bound state of the proteins. The native NorA exhibits a stable conformation, characterized by local minima for RMSD and radius of gyration (RG) in the ranges of 0.4–0.5 nm and 2.02–2.04 nm, respectively. This is represented by the blue region (indicating minimum Gibbs free energy) in the contour plot of the FEL, mapped onto the RMSDversusRG plane (SI Fig. 3A). In comparison, the FEL for NorA-PGG complex (Fig. 4A) shows two local minima in a range between 0.25–0.4 nm and 2.10–2.14 nm for RMSD and RG respectively. This indicates the possibility of two stable conformations. However, the local minima for Gibbs free energy, RMSD, and RG suggest that both these conformations were thermodynamically stable in comparison to the local minima of the native NorA.

Similarly, the FEL of the NorB-PGG complex also exhibits two thermodynamically stable conformations within the minimal Gibbs free energy region on the contour plot (Fig. 4B), with RMSD values ranging from 0.4 to 0.5 nm and RG values ranging from 2.11 to 2.17 nm. These local minima were comparatively lower than those observed in the FEL of the NorB protein (SI Fig. 3B), suggesting the structural stability of the NorB-PGG complex. Furthermore, the FELs of the NorC-PGG (Fig. 4C) and SdrM-PGG (Fig. 4D) complexes each exhibit a single local minimum in the RMSDversusRG plane. The local minimum for NorC-PGG is observed at RMSD values between 0.5 and 0.55 nm and RG values between 2.14 and 2.16 nm, while the local minimum for SdrM-PGG is found at RMSD values between 0.4 and 0.45 nm and RG values between 2.10 and 2.13 nm. These observations align with the local minima observed in the FELs of NorC (SI Fig. 3C) and SdrM (SI Fig. 3D), further validating the stable conformations of both the NorC-PGG and SdrM-PGG complexes.

Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to understand the conformational changes exhibited by the native proteins and protein-PGG complexes during the simulation period (Fig. 5). The first two principal components (PCs) accounted for ≥41.1% variation across native proteins and ≥38.6% motion across the protein-PGG complexes. In comparison to the native proteins, the protein-PGG complexes showed minimal conformational changes (Fig. 5). However, for NorB (Fig. 5C and D), a significant conformational difference was observed between native and PGG-bound states. In the native state of NorB, an aggregate motion of 41.1% was explained by the first two PCs which increased to 67.05% when bound to PGG. NorA, NorC and SdrM when bound to PGG had 46%, 53% and 38.6% of aggregate motion explained by the first two PCs while their native states had 53.5%, 52.5% and 48.3% motion explained by the same PCs (Fig. 5). Thus, the conformational stability of NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM during the MD simulation was outlined by PCA, further indicating that PGG can potentially inhibit these four efflux pumps.

The individual MICs of ciprofloxacin, piperine, PGG, and the combinations of piperine and PGG with ciprofloxacin was determined using theS. aureusATCC 700698 strain, which is resistant to ciprofloxacin (Table 2). Piperine, being a known NorA inhibitor52was used as a positive control for the study. The independent MIC values for ciprofloxacin (125 μg ml−1), piperine (250 μg ml−1) and PGG (250 μg ml−1) were determined. However, when piperine and PGG were tested in combination with ciprofloxacin, they demonstrated additive and synergistic effects, with FICI values of 0.7 and 0.45, respectively. An FICI value less than 0.5 indicates synergy, meaning the combination of drugs works better together than each drug alone, enhancing each other's effectiveness. An FICI between 0.5 and 1.0 indicates an additive effect, where the combination of drugs works similarly to the sum of the individual effects. In the case of synergy, an MIC of 25 μg ml−1for ciprofloxacin and 62.5 μg ml−1for PGG was identified, which represents a four-fold reduction in concentration compared to the independent MIC of PGG. Additionally, the MIC of PGG in combination with ciprofloxacin was lower than the MIC of piperine (125 μg ml−1) in combination with ciprofloxacin, although the ciprofloxacin concentration remained similar (25 μg ml−1) in both cases. Thus, a lower concentration of PGG in combination with ciprofloxacin was more effective in inhibiting bacterial growth than piperine in combination with ciprofloxacin (Table 2).

Time-kill kinetics assay was performed to determine the growth inhibitory effect of PGG againstS. aureus(ATCC 700698) (Fig. 6). PGG (62.5 μg ml−1) in combination with ciprofloxacin (25 μg ml−1) inhibited theS. aureusgrowth in a similar manner as observed for ciprofloxacin MIC (125 μg ml−1). In contrast, PGG (62.5 μg ml−1) and ciprofloxacin (25 μg ml−1) when administered independently resulted in bacterial growth, confirming the synergistic effect of PGG-ciprofloxacin combination againstS. aureus(ATCC 700698). Additionally, PGG showed betterS. aureusgrowth inhibition when compared to piperine (a known NorA inhibitor). Piperine is reported to have OD600values >0.1 (ref.53) which contribute to the increased OD at zeroth and second hour, where bacterial growth is not noticeable (Fig. 6). This was verified by recording the OD600values of piperine and piperine–ciprofloxacin combination in the absence ofS. aureuscultures (SI Table 5). Piperine inhibitedS. aureusgrowth at a high concentration (125 μg ml−1) when combined with ciprofloxacin (25 μg ml−1) and did not exhibit considerable effect when administered independently. A steady increase inS. aureusgrowth was observed when exposed to 25 μg ml−1of ciprofloxacin with notable growth occurring after eight hours. This suggests the initial activity of ciprofloxacin againstS. aureuswhich gradually decreases over time leading to bacterial growth (Fig. 6).

Ourin silicoandin vitrostudy identified PGG as a potential inhibitor of the MFS efflux pumps NorA, NorB, NorC and SdrM in multi-drug resistantS. aureus. PGG's influence on theS. aureusgrowth dynamics were revealed by time-kill kinetics assay. Checkerboard assays revealed that PGG exhibited phytochemical synergy in combination with ciprofloxacin and restored the ciprofloxacin activity inS. aureus. Therefore, our study reveals PGG as a promising candidate for combating clinically relevantS. aureusstrains. Further, the work underlines the importance of exploring plant-derived compounds as an avenue for overcoming antibiotic resistance caused by bacterial pathogens.