Honey bees are affected by several pathogens, including different RNA viruses such as Acute Bee Paralysis Virus (ABPV), Chronic Bee Paralysis Virus (CBPV) and Deformed Wing Virus (DWV). Real‐time PCR (RT‐PCR) is a standard method to detect these viruses, but it requires the sacrifice of bees. In this study, we tested an RT‐PCR method, routinely used to detect ABPV, CBPV and DWV in bees, using hive debris as an alternative non‐invasive matrix to adult bees. We analysed results both at apiary and colony levels. The performances of hive debris as an alternative matrix to bees were tested by calculating sensitivity, specificity and the Kappa index using RT‐PCR results on bees as reference. At apiary level, specificity was high for ABPV and DWV, whereas sensitivity was high only for DWV. At colony level, specificity was over 75% for all the three viruses, whereas test sensitivity was poor. Hive debris has the potential to be an effective alternative matrix to detect viruses on honey bees at apiary level; therefore, new research studies focused on standardization of the sampling and RNA extraction procedure are needed to develop a reliable diagnostic tool for a field application.

Detection of ABPV, CBPV and DWV viruses in honey bees and hive debris: a performance analysis of the two matrices in order to identify an innovative and non‐invasive approach.

Viruses are one of the main threats for honey bees, particularly RNA viruses, including Acute Bee Paralysis Virus (ABPV), Chronic Bee Paralysis Virus (CBPV) and Deformed Wing Virus (DWV). Although these viruses can be asymptomatic when present alone (Beaurepaire et al.2020), the coexistence of multiple viruses and other pathogens along with other stressors, such as chemicals or nutritional deficiencies, has been linked to colony loss episodes worldwide (Evans and Schwarz2011). Comprehensive assessment of honey bee colony health needs effective and efficient methods for virus identification.

Real‐time PCR (RT‐PCR) on adult or juvenile honey bees is now acknowledged as a standard method for virus detection because of its high sensitivity and sensibility (Chen et al.2005; Chen and Siede2007; Cuc et al.2021; Iredale et al.2024; Ribière et al.2002). This method requires sampling live honey bees, which are then sacrificed to perform the RT‐PCR analysis. However, recent studies have suggested that insects, including Hymenoptera, can experience pain, leading to discussions about the common practice of sacrificing bees (Gibbons et al.2022). Following the experience of animal testing on mammals, some researchers have suggested that studies on insects should also adopt the ‘3Rs framework’: replace live animals with other experimental models, reduce the number of insects used and refine techniques to minimize harm to insects (Crump et al.2023).

Assessing hive matrices can be an effective, non‐invasive alternative to replace bees sacrificed for research purposes, thus achieving higher animal welfare standards. Hive matrices, such as pollen, wax and beebread, have been used by a number of different studies as alternatives to honey bees for pathogen detection (Biová et al.2021; Bzdil2007; Cersini et al.2021; Čukanová et al.2023; Ebeling et al.2023; Forsgren and Laugen 2014; Papić et al.2024; Pietropaoli et al.2022; Rossi et al.2018,2024; Ryba et al.2009,2012; Tlak Gajger et al.2024; Ward et al.2007). In particular, hive debris appears as a promising alternative matrix as its sampling does not require opening the bee colony, making its collection faster than other matrices and completely non‐invasive. However, at best of our knowledge, no studies have formally assessed the performance of virus identification in hive debris as compared to honey bees (Čukanová et al.2023; Tlak Gajger et al.2024).

In this study, we aim to test hive debris as an alternative matrix to honey bee for the RT‐PCR detection of three bee viruses: ABPV, CBPV and DWV.

Sampling was carried out during the spring and summer of 2021, 2022 and 2023, in five apiaries in Piedmont region, Province of Asti (Northwest Italy), and at the beginning of October 2023 in one apiary in Bologna (Northeast Italy) (sampling details in Table1). The beekeepers were interviewed concerning the technical and sanitary management of the apiaries in order to fill a checklist. Beekeepers reported also some observations: In apiari B, some sudden deaths occurred in 14 colonies (about one third of the available colonies); in apiary C (70 colonies in total), a colony was orphaned, and in apiary E (half of apiary), two colonies swarmed in May. Within the apiaries, we sampled only colonies in good conditions.

Number of sampling sessions with sampling date, number of colonies sampled for each matrix (honey bee and hive debris) and apiary localization.

During each sampling session, we collected between 2 and 10 pools of around 30 bees from each colony. In the same colonies, we collected about 5 g of hive debris, for a total of 57 bee and 53 debris samples (Table1). The amount of debris collected was higher or equal to that of other studies using debris for pathogen detection (Cersini et al.2021; Forsgren and Laugen 2014).

Hive debris, which included wax, pollen and colony wastes, was preferably collected from the bottom of the hive (diagnostic box). Debris was collected by removing the diagnostic box and allowing debris to fall into a 50 mL test tube by gravity. Samples were immediately refrigerated, transported to the laboratory and stored at −80°C until use.

In each sampling session, for every sampled colony, five bees were homogenized individually with 700 µL ultrapure water in a 2 mL microtube (one bee for each tube), using a VWR cordless pestle motor with disposable pestles.

Each homogenate was centrifuged at 17,000 ×gat 4°C for 5 min, and 400 µL of supernatants were collected for each tube. The five supernatants from the same colony sample were pooled in a single microtube, vortexed, and then 350 µL were collected and added with 1 mL of TRI reagent (Sigma‐Aldrich). After a 5 min incubation at room temperature (RT), 280 µL of chloroform were added, and samples were incubated for 15 min at RT after being shaken for 15 s. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 ×gat 4°C for 15 min, then the supernatants were collected and added with 700 µL of isopropanol. After a 10 min incubation at RT, samples were centrifuged at 12,000 ×gat 4°C for 10 min, the supernatants were discharged, and 1 mL of ethanol (75%) was added to the pellets. Samples were vortexed in order to resuspend the pellets and centrifuged at 7500 ×gat 4°C for 5 min. After the ethanol discharging, pellets were dried for 10 min, resuspended in 50 µL of ultrapure water and eventually incubated at 56°C for about 10 min. RNA samples were stored at −80°C until use.

We performed RNA extraction from hive debris, splitting 500 mg of materials into two microtubes (about 250 mg of materials for each microtube). A volume of 700 µL ultrapure water was added to each microtube, and samples were shaken for 20 s in order to resuspend the debris, and then we followed the same procedure described above for honey bees using TRI reagent (Sigma‐Aldrich) to extract RNA.

RNA samples concentration was quantified at 260 nm using a GeneQuant Pro (Amersham Biosciences) with single‐use microcuvettes.

Honey bee and hive debris samples were analysed for three honey bee viruses: ABPV, CBPV and DWV. These viruses were chosen because previous studies highlighted their high prevalence or pathogenic relevance in the Italian context (Porrini et al.2016). RT‐PCR reactions were run with Super Script III Platinum One Step qRT‐PCR system provided by Invitrogen. The reactions were performed with primer concentration of 0.8 µM, fluorescent probe concentration of 0.2 µM and 5 µL of RNA sample in a final volume of 25 µL.

Specific primers and probes for ABPV and DWV were designed using Primer Express software and based on complete viral sequences present in the GenBank database (Martinello et al.2017). Primers and probes for CBPV were developed by Blanchard et al. (2007) and are shown in Table2.

Primer and probe sequences of the three target viruses: Acute Bee Paralysis Virus (ABPV), Chronic Bee Paralysis Virus (CBPV) and Deformed Wing Virus (DWV).

CFX Biorad instrument was used for the amplification. The thermal cycling conditions consisted of 30 min at 50°C (reverse transcription), 15 min at 95°C (Taq DNA polymerase activation), followed by 45 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 15 s and annealing/extension at 60°C for 1 min (Martinello et al.2017). Positive and negative controls were included in each RT‐PCR: Positive controls were RNAs previously extracted from positive honey bees of each investigated virus, and negative controls were deionized water.

We calculated ABPV, CBPV and DWV prevalence across bees and hive debris sampled. Confidence intervals (95%) for virus prevalence were calculated using the Clopper–Pearson exact CI (Clopper and Pearson1934). We tested the performance of RT‐PCR test on hive debris for the screening of ABPV, CBPV and DWV as an alternative to RT‐PCR test on honey bee at both apiary and colony levels. Epidemiological studies on honey bee virus have presented results both at apiary and colony level (Porrini et al.2016; Tentcheva et al.2004). Reporting results at both scales ensures consistency with previous research studies. At apiary level, we considered an apiary as positive to virus presence when at least one of the sampled colonies within the apiary resulted positive in a single sampling session. At colony level, we tested whether marginal probabilities for RT‐PCR outcomes (positive/negative) were significantly different between hive debris and bees for each virus using a McNemar's chi‐squared test. Given the limited number of observations, marginal probabilities were not calculated at apiary level. The performances of hive debris as an alternative matrix to bees were tested by calculating sensitivity, specificity and the Kappa index using RT‐PCR results on bees as reference. Kappa indexes close to 1 indicate perfect agreement, whereas a Kappa index of 0 indicates that all agreement is due to chance (Landis and Koch1977).

These analyses were conducted in the samples available for both matrices: 53 samples each for a total of 106 samples. At apiary level, comparisons were made across apiaries and sampling sessions for a total of 10 observations per matrix. All the statistical analysis was performed using R (version 4.3.1) and its packages ‘tidyverse’, ‘PropCLs’ and ‘fmsb’.

Overall, 110 samples of honey bees (n= 57) and hive debris (n= 53) were collected from 57 colonies belonging to 6 apiaries and RT‐PCR tested for ABPV, CBPV and DWV. At apiary level, positive bees were found in 80% (CI95%: 44.4; 97.5), 90% (CI95%: 55.5; 99.7) and 40% (CI95%: 12.2; 73.8) of the sampling sessions (n= 10, same apiary and date) for ABPV, CBPV and DWV, respectively. Hive debris resulted positive to ABPV in 30% (CI95%: 6.7; 65.2) of the sampling sessions, CBPV‐positive in 70% (CI95%: 34.7; 93.3) of the sampling sessions and DWV‐positive in 40% (CI95%: 12.2; 73.8) of the sampling sessions.

At colony level, virus prevalence across bee samples (n= 53) was 62.3% (CI95%: 47.9; 75.2), 66% (CI95%: 51.7; 78.5) and 17% (CI95%: 8.1; 29.8) for ABPV, CBPV and DWV, respectively, whereas the prevalence across debris samples was 7.5% (CI95%: 2.3; 18.2) for ABPV, 24.5% (CI95%: 13.8; 38.3) for CBPV and 11.3% (CI95%: 4.3; 23) for DWV.

Percentages of positive colonies for each apiary and for each sampling session are shown in Supporting Information files1and2, respectively.

At apiary level, virus detection in debris was equal to that in honey bees for 50% of sampling sessions (false positives: 0%, false negatives: 50%) for ABPV, 60% of sessions (false positives: 10%, false negatives: 30%) for CBPV and 100% of sessions for DWV (Table3). At colony level, the agreement between honey bee and debris was for 45% of samples for ABPV, 51% for CBPV and 83% for DWV (Table3).

Contingency table of real‐time PCR (RT‐PCR) results on hive debris and honey bee for the detection of Acute Bee Paralysis Virus (ABPV), Chronic Bee Paralysis Virus (CBPV) and Deformed Wing Virus (DWV) at apiary and colony levels.

Note: At apiary level, the apiary was considered positive when at least one of the samples taken during the sampling session resulted positive.

At colony level, marginal probabilities for RT‐PCR outcomes (positive/negative) were significantly different between debris and bees for ABPV (McNemar's chi‐squared = 27, df = 1,pvalue < 0.001) and CBPV (McNemar's chi‐squared = 11.1, df = 1,pvalue < 0.001), but not for DWV (McNemar's chi‐squared = 0.4, df = 1,pvalue = 0.505) (Table3).

At apiary level, specificity was high for ABPV and DWV, whereas sensitivity was high only for DWV. At colony level, specificity was over 75% for all the three viruses, whereas test sensitivity was poor (Figure1). At apiary level, the two matrices have a slight agreement for ABPV (Kappa = 0.2: CI95%: −0.3; 0.7), a disagreement for CBPV (Kappa = −0.2: CI95%: −1; 0.7) and a perfect agreement for DWV (Kappa = 1: CI95%: 1; 1). At colony level, Kappa index suggests a slight agreement for ABPV and CBPV between matrices (for both Kappa = 0.1: CI95%: −0.1;0.3) and fair agreement for DWV (Kappa = 0.3: CI95%: 0.1; 0.7).

Sensitivity and specificity of RT‐PCR test on hive debris for the detection of acute bee paralysis virus (ABPV), chronic bee paralysis virus (CBPV) and deformed wing virus (DWV) at apiary and colony level. The calculations were performed considering the RT‐PCR test on honey bees as reference. Specificity for CBPV at apiary level was not possible to calculate given that all the apiaries resulted CBPV‐positive at RT‐PCR test on honey bees.

In this study, we compared the presence of ABPV, CBPV and DWV through an RT‐PCR test on hive debris and honey bee, with the latter serving as virus presence reference. Our results indicate that hive debris could be used as an alternative, non‐invasive matrix for screening the presence of DWV at apiary level, but it is not effective as a screening method at colony level for DWV or at any level for ABPV and CBPV. RT‐PCR test on hive debris for DWV showed good sensitivity and sensibility performance and demonstrated high concordance with honey bee at apiary level and moderate performance at colony level. In contrast, the concordance for ABPV and CBPV was very low at any investigated level. The low performance for ABPV and CBPV led to an underestimation of their prevalence.

Although debris analysis does not seem to fit for epidemiological studies at colony level, it appears useful when focused on apiary level. It should be noted that most epidemiological studies use the apiaries as sampling units, as they are more suitable for wide‐scale epidemiological studies (Porrini et al.2016; Tentcheva et al.2004).

A possible explanation of the better performance of hive debris on DWV could lie on the presence of the parasitic miteVarroa destructoras one of the components of the hive debris and its strong association with DWV. DWV has been assumed to have a mutualistic symbiosis with this mite:V. destructoracts as DWV vector, whereas the virus has an immunosuppressive effect on the bee, which, in turn, enhances mite reproduction (Di Prisco et al.2016). Due to this strong association, DWV has been found on mites by previous studies (Chen et al.2005; Gauthier et al.2007; Gisder et al.2009; Tentcheva et al.2004; Yue and Genersch2005). Although the presence ofV. destructorwas not assessed in this study, in Italy, this mite is now almost ubiquitous in apiaries, and it is commonly found in the diagnostic box of the hive mixed with all other hive debris components.

The results of virus prevalence on honey bees confirmed the presence of ABPV, CBPV and DWV in the investigated area. In particular, CBPV appeared to be the most prevalent among the three viruses analysed, in agreement with data obtained in 2020–2021 in Veneto, a Northeast Italian region (Bordin et al.2022). Even according to Cilia et al. (2022), CBPV was one of the most prevalent pathogens detected in bees and, in that study, also the most abundant virus in Northern Italy.

On the other hand, DWV was the least prevalent in our study, despite being the most prevalent virus inApis melliferaworldwide, as well as the most promiscuous, due to its presence in other pollinators (Gisder and Genersch2017).

Although, in our knowledge, this is the first study formally comparing bees and hive debris matrices, other studies have used hive debris to detect viruses (Čukanová et al.2023; Rossi et al.2024; Tlak Gajger et al.2024). In these studies, DWV appeared to be more prevalent (Tlak Gajger et al.2024) or moderately detectable (Čukanová et al.2023) than other viruses in hive debris.

From a practical perspective, the use of hive debris presents two main advantages. The first one is the easier sampling procedure compared to honey bees because the collection is faster without disturbing the colony, and it is very suitable to be done by beekeepers during their apiary inspections. The second advantage is that the matrix handling and the RNA extraction are more straightforward than that of bees. This is because the homogenization of a hard material, such as bee cuticle, makes the process more difficult.

The use of hive debris presents disadvantages as well. The main issue is the heterogeneity of matrix composition. In this study, we did not account for the composition of the samples, which sometimes consisted mainly of wax and other times of death bees or larvae. The heterogeneity could be the cause of the low performance of this matrix on ABPV and CBPV RT‐PCR results, and it could also affect the RNA extraction phase, making it more challenging. In addition, the presence of wax makes the extraction more laborious, due to its solidity. Consequentially, hive debris matrix homogenization is not always faster than that of bee samples.

The effect of debris composition on RT‐PCR test performance for virus detection remains unknown. Furthermore, no extraction methods specifically tailored to the debris matrix are currently available. Addressing these research gaps through new studies could help standardize debris sampling and RNA extraction procedures, ultimately validating the use of this non‐invasive matrix in the diagnostic field.

the improvement of sampling procedure, with a faster and easier sample collection.

Our results have shown a good matrix performance only for one target (DWV), underlining the drawbacks of its use. It is therefore necessary to standardize hive debris analysis procedure and, additionally, to perform a chemical characterization of this matrix. Such improvements could lead to a better understanding of the debris reliability compared to the standard (bees). Thus, further investigations about debris potential use in the diagnostic field are essential to validate this non‐invasive matrix as a good replacement to living bees.