A deuterium‐NMR‐based approach for glucose metabolism monitoring was used to study the metabolic consequences of ischemia and reperfusion in the rat brain ex vivo. Deuterated lactate was immediately formed in the brain upon administration of deuterated glucose. Upon perfusion arrest, deuterated lactate built up in the slices, and its level decreased to baseline upon reperfusion. This was reproducibly observed in response to one‐to‐three perfusion arrest conditions and matched the level of deuterated glucose taken up from the perfusion medium.

Acute ischemic stroke (AIS) is a significant cause of death and morbidity worldwide [1]. Ischemic brain tissue during a stroke is tissue at risk, which may be salvageable upon reperfusion. In addition to the temporary arrest of flow and the supply of oxygen and glucose (Glc), damage to the ischemic brain is also associated with reperfusion. Metabolically, the brain is the most energy‐consuming organ and has a critical dependence on blood flow for its immediate supply of oxygen and Glc [2]. Interruption of flow and supply of oxygen or Glc due to compromised pulmonary or cardiovascular function results in encephalopathy and, ultimately, cell death. Although Glc is the primary energy substrate for the brain, alternative substrates, such as lactate and ketone bodies, may be used under certain circumstances, such as starvation [3,4]. Therefore, an investigation into the metabolic consequences of ischemia is warranted.

Deuterium metabolic imaging (DMI) is a novel, noninvasive MRSI approach that combines deuterium magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging with oral intake or intravenous infusion of non‐radioactive deuterium‐labeled Glc to generate three‐dimensional metabolic maps of the brain [11,12]. DMI with the administration of [6,6‐2H2]Glc, (2H2‐Glc) shows signals in the brain that are due to2H2‐Glc, [3,3‐2H2]lactate (2H2‐Lac), and deuterium‐labeled‐glutamate and ‐glutamine (2Hx‐Glx) [11,12]. Figure1shows the flow of labels from2H2‐Glc to2H2‐Lac.2Hx‐Glx production results from incorporating [3,3‐2H2]pyruvate (Figure1) into the citric acid cycle.

The glycolysis pathway, followed by the lactate dehydrogenase reaction, shows the fate of the two‐deuteron label of2H2‐Glc. This scheme provides the basis for quantifying the deuterated‐lactate signal relative to the signals of the natural abundance of deuterium in water and the deuterated glucose in the2H NMR spectra.D(red) in the compound's name marks the label with two deuterons (2H2, in a single molecule, not to be confused with dextrorotatory). This scheme illustrates that each2H2‐Glc (D‐Glc) molecule yields one2H2‐Lac (D‐Lac) molecule and one unlabeled lactate molecule. The red arrow on2H2‐fructose‐6‐phosphate (D‐fructose‐6‐phosphate) marks the cleavage sites of phosphofructokinase. Encircled “P” marks a PO3moiety. Abbreviations: Glc, glucose; Lac, lactate;D‐Glc, [6,6‐2H2]D‐glucose;D‐Glc‐6‐phosphate, [6,6‐2H2]D‐glucose‐6‐phosphate;D‐fructose‐6‐phosphate, [6,6‐2H2]fructose‐6‐phosphate;D‐fructose‐1,6‐bisphosphate, [6,6‐2H2]fructose‐1,6‐bisphosphate;D‐glyceraldehyde‐3‐phosphate, [3,3‐2H2]glyceraldehyde‐3‐phosphate, the numbers on the left mark the original carbon position inD‐Glc, which are also marked onD‐fructose‐1,6‐bisphosphate;D‐1,3‐biphosphoglycerate, [3,3‐2H2]1,3‐biphosphoglycerate;D‐3‐phosphoglycerate, [3,3‐2H2]3‐phosphoglycerate;D‐2‐phosphoglycerate, [3,3‐2H2]2‐phosphoglycerate;D‐phosphoenol pyruvate, [3,3‐2H2]phosphoenol pyruvate;D‐pyruvate, [3,3‐2H2]pyruvate;D‐Lac, [3,3‐2H2]lactate.

Pharmaceutical interventions for the treatment of stroke are scarce. Preclinical models of ischemic stroke are a limiting factor in the development of new therapies, as in vivo models of stroke in rodents suffer from a small and heterogeneous ischemic penumbra, and studies in large animals bear surgical complications and high costs [13]. These properties limit research into the metabolic consequences of this fragile tissue state and the development of corresponding therapeutics for this condition.

Here, we have used a perfused rat brain slice model, which may provide an alternative, ex vivo model for ischemic stroke research. This model enables the generation of a homogeneous ischemic brain tissue and monitoring of the metabolic response to an ischemic insult and reperfusion. In this model, environmental conditions can be regulated and monitored. For example, as previously described, perfusion can be controlled (to simulate stroke and reperfusion) [9,10].

The current study aimed to investigate the metabolism of2H2‐Glc in the perfused rat brain slice model and characterize this tissue metabolism in the non‐perturbed brain slices and brain slices under conditions of ischemia and reperfusion. We hypothesized that under ischemia,2H2‐Lac would increase (reflecting oxygen deprivation stress) and that following reperfusion, this level should decrease (reflecting recovery). This study was driven by the hope that these metabolic flux characteristics, if indeed validated, could potentially serve as markers of salvageable brain tissue under stroke.

[6,6‐2H2]D‐glucose was obtained from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Tewksbury, MA, USA). NaCl, KCl, D‐glucose, NaHCO3, MgSO4, NaH2PO4,N‐methyl‐D‐glucamine (NMDG), HEPES, pyruvic acid, ascorbic acid, thiourea, and CaCl2were purchased from Sigma‐Aldrich (Rehovot, Israel). Isoflurane was obtained from the Institutional Authority for Biological and Biomedical Models of the Hebrew University (Jerusalem, Israel).

Male Sprague–Dawley rats (n= 4, 70–100 g) were obtained from the Hebrew University Authority of Biological and Biomedical Models. The joint ethics committee (IACUC) of the Hebrew University and Hadassah Medical Center approved the study protocol for animal welfare. The Hebrew University is an AAALAC internationally accredited institute. Care was taken to minimize the animals' pain and discomfort. Animals were housed in the animal facilities 3–5 days after delivery for acclimatization and fedad libitum. On the experimental day, animals were transferred to the laboratory and anesthetized within 1 h of arrival.

Brain slices were extracted and maintained using the solutions described below, as previously described [9,10]. Briefly, the rats were anesthetized using a gas anesthesia system (Somnosuite, Kent Scientific, Torrington, CT, USA). Induction was performed in a chamber with 3.5% isoflurane in room air with a flow rate of 440 mL/min. Following 4–7 min of induction, anesthesia was maintained with 3.1%–3.2% isoflurane at the same flow rate. Upon obtaining a negative pedal pain reflex, surgery was initiated. First, the diaphragm was exposed and cut, and the rat was transcardially perfused with 30 mL of ice‐cold NMDG‐aCSF (Solution 1, below). The animals were then sacrificed by decapitation, and the brain was rapidly removed and placed in ice‐cold NMDG‐aCSF (Solution 1, below). The cerebrum was then cut into four parts (first, a sagittal cut along the hemispheric cleft and then a sagittal cut in the middle of each hemisphere). From each part, 350‐μm slices were prepared using a McIlwain tissue chopper (The Mickle Laboratory Engineering Company Ltd., Surrey, UK). The process of brain extraction, from decapitation until the brain was in ice‐cold NMDG‐aCSF, took under 2 min, and the slicing procedure was done in less than 10 min. After cutting, the slices were transferred to warm, 32°C–34°C, NMDG‐aCSF (Solution 1, below) for 12 min for protective recovery. Then, the slices were transferred to HEPES‐holding aCSF (Solution 2, below) at ~32°C for 15–40 min incubation before transfer to the NMR spectrometer, where the slices were perfused with the Perfusion aCSF (Solution 3, below).

To improve the health of acute brain slices obtained from mature adult rats, we modified a slice preparation technique optimized for in vitro electrophysiology in mature adult rat brain slices [14]. In brief, slice health is improved by a so‐called “protective recovery” method. NMDG is an extracellular replacer of sodium ions that prevents sodium ions and water influx into cells, the primary insult causing cell death following brain slicing. Ting et al. showed that the presence of NMDG during a 12‐min recovery phase after slicing dramatically improved the health of acute slices from mature adult rats in electrophysiological recordings [14]. Furthermore, incubation in HEPES‐buffered artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) improved slice health [14]. The following solutions were prepared in the current study, and their use is described in the following sections.

NMDG‐aCSF was used for transcardial perfusion, tissue slicing, and slice recovery. This medium contained 93‐mM NMDG, 2.5‐mM KCl, 1.2‐mM NaH2PO4, 26‐mM NaHCO3, 20‐mM HEPES, 25‐mM D‐glucose, 10‐mM MgSO4, 0.5‐mM CaCl2, 5‐mM ascorbic acid, 2‐mM thiourea, and 3‐mM pyruvic acid in double‐distilled water.

HEPES‐holding aCSF was used to incubate slices following the surgical procedure. This medium contained 84‐mM NaCl, 2.5‐mM KCl, 1.2‐mM NaH2PO4, 30‐mM NaHCO3, 20‐mM HEPES, 25‐mM Glc (D‐glucose, non‐labeled), 2‐mM MgSO4, 2‐mM CaCl2, 5‐mM ascorbic acid, 2‐mM thiourea, and 3‐mM pyruvic acid in double‐distilled water.

Perfusion aCSF was used for perfusion in the NMR spectrometer. This medium contained 115‐mM NaCl, 2.5‐mM KCl, 1.2‐mM NaH2PO4, 24‐mM NaHCO3, 5‐mM HEPES, 10‐mM Glc (to be replaced with 10‐mM2H2‐Glc), 2‐mM MgSO4, and 2‐mM CaCl2in double‐distilled water.

All three solutions (1–3) were bubbled with 95%/5% O2/CO2for at least 1 h before use and titrated to a pH of 7.35–7.45 using HCl or NaOH. All concentrations were optimized for a calculated osmolarity of 310 ± 15 mOsm.

The air pressure in our laboratory (located in Ein‐Kerem, Jerusalem, Israel) is about 0.9 atm (900 m above sea level) or 684 mmHg. The partial oxygen pressure in the air, in the NMR tube above the perfused slices, is therefore 143 mmHg. The aCSF solutions engulfing the slices were saturated with oxygen; therefore, the partial pressure of oxygen in them was 143 mmHg as well.

In vivo, the brain tissue oxygen concentration or partial pressure is typically within a range of 25–50 mmHg, which is lower than the partial oxygen pressure in the aCSF solutions. The reason for this difference and for the choice to work with oxygen‐saturated media is that in perfused brain slices, in the absence of transport by the vasculature, oxygen arrives at the brain cells by diffusion from the slice surface to its inner core, with a maximal diffusion distance that is half of the slice thickness (350 μm), that is, 175 μm. The high partial oxygen pressure in the aCSF solutions provides an oxygen concentration gradient that leads to oxygen flux into the innermost parts of the slices. For this reason, the current study, as well as other studies of brain slices and other perfused tissue slices, is typically carried out using media saturated with oxygen.

31P‐ and2H‐NMR spectroscopy were performed using a 5.8‐T high‐resolution NMR spectrometer (RS2D, Mundolsheim, France) with a 10‐mm broadband NMR probe. The magnetic field lock system was applied during31P‐NMR acquisitions but not during2H‐NMR acquisitions.

31P‐NMR FIDs were acquired with 782 or 1564 averages, a repetition time of 1.15 s (temporal resolution of 15 or 30 min, respectively), a 50° flip angle, and 8192 time points.

2H‐NMR FIDs were acquired with 80 averages, a repetition time of 1.5 s (2 min temporal resolution), a 90° flip angle, and 1024 time points. The deuterium lock system was used for this acquisition, using a modification to the channel routing system in the spectrometer made specifically for this type of acquisition by the manufacturer (RS2D, Mundolsheim, France).

An inversion‐recovery acquisition carried out in physiological saline at 20°C, in the same spectrometer and NMR tube, showed that the T1of2H2‐Glc deuterons was 53 ms and the T1of H2HO was 420 ms. Therefore, the2H‐NMR data acquired here were acquired under near fully relaxed conditions and do not necessitate any adjustments for quantification related to T1differences.

where SH2HOis the individual H2HO signal in each spectrum, [H2HO] is the concentration equivalent of each SH2HO,and SAV_H2HOis the averaged H2HO signal from the 10 spectra at the beginning of the experiment (during perfusion with2H2‐Glc). As the natural abundance of deuterium is 0.0156% and the concentration of protons in water is 110 M, the theoretical concentration of H2HO is 17.16 mM (0.0156%*110 M).

Note that the total concentration of lactate (deuterium‐labeled lactate and non‐labeled lactate combined) produced from2H2‐Glc is twice that of2H2‐Lac (Figure1).

We note that the scheme in Figure1considers only the glycolysis pathway and does not include the possible shunting of the deuterium‐labeled glucose‐6‐phosphate to the pentose phosphate pathway, which may result in the loss of some of the deuterium‐labeled lactate and an increase in the H2HO signal. The latter was observed by Ben Yosef et al. in 1994 [16], in cultured rat 9 L glioma cells. However, because we did not detect any significant increase in the H2HO signal in our experiments, we could not justify the inclusion of this consideration in the calculation of concentrations in the current study. Shunting glucose‐6‐phosphate to glycolysis or the pentose phosphate pathway is cell‐ and condition‐dependent, as are all metabolic fluxes. It appears that in the current rat brain slice preparation, the effects of the shunting to the pentose phosphate pathway were not significant. We also note that this scheme does not support the possible production of a lactate molecule that is labeled with only one deuteron, which was suggested by de Graaf et al. in 2021 [17].

The perfusion system was operated as described previously at 4 mL/min [9,18].2H2‐Glc was introduced to the slices by adding it to the external aCSF reservoir. To allow the utilization of a minimal amount of the labeled compound, 70 mL of aCSF was used for the perfusion of the slices with2H2‐Glc.

Spectral processing and intensity integrals were calculated using MNova (Mestrelab Research, Santiago de Compostela, Spain).

Statistical analysis was performed in Excel (Microsoft Office, Rānana, Israel).

A typical time course of2H2‐Glc metabolism in the perfused and ischemic brain is shown in Figure2. Individual and averaged2H2‐Glc and2H2‐Lac levels in each experiment and within the various experimental sections are provided in TableS1and Figure3. Upon administration of2H2‐Glc to the external reservoir of the perfusion medium, its signal (in the NMR tube) reached a plateau within 6 min (8.6 ± 0.7 mM). The2H2‐Lac signal was observed within 8 min of the2H2‐Glc administration; it increased and reached a plateau of 0.9 ± 0.4 mM (n= 3) within 12–14 min.

Stacked deuterium NMR spectra of a typical experiment with two ischemic periods. The H2HO,2H2‐Glc, and2H2‐Lac signals are consistently observed and allow the calculation of the concentration changes during the ischemic conditions. The time scale is in hh:mm (h, hour; m, min). The addition of2H2‐Glc to the external perfusion medium was taken as the starting time (00:00). The durations of continuous perfusion and flow arrest are marked as Perfusion and Ischemia, respectively. H2HO, the natural abundance of deuterium in water;2H2‐Glc, [6,6‐2H2]D‐glucose;2H2‐Lac, [3,3‐2H2]lactate.

Individual time courses of2H2‐Glc and2H2‐Lac in brain slices on three experimental days (A, B, and C). The results show2H2HO (HDO),2H2‐Glc, and2H2‐Lac concentrations in mM. The Y‐axis is the concentration in the NMR tube in mM for the three species. Breaks in2H‐NMR acquisitions were taken to record31P spectra.

The perfusion was arrested for 10 min (first ischemic condition) at 49–76 min (n= 3) from the administration of2H2‐Glc. During this period, the signal of2H2‐Lac increased gradually to a maximal level of 5.1 ± 1.3 mM (n= 3), and the signal of2H2‐Glc decreased gradually to a minimal level of 4.6 ± 1.5 mM (n= 3, two‐tailed, pairedt‐test, before and at the end of the first ischemic condition,p= 0.035). After the first ischemic condition, the perfusion was resumed. Upon reperfusion, within about 8 min, the signal of2H2‐Glc returned to the baseline level of 8.7 ± 0.7 mM (n= 3), and the signal of2H2‐Lac returned to baseline at a level of 1.1 ± 0.3 mM (two‐tailed, pairedt‐test before and after ischemia,p= 0.17, no difference). Continuous perfusion followed the first ischemic condition for 53–70 min, and then the perfusion was again arrested for 10 min (second ischemic condition).

During the second ischemic condition, the2H2‐Lac concentration gradually increased to a similar maximal level of 5.91 ± 0.12 mM (n= 3, two‐tailed, pairedt‐test, first and second ischemic conditions,p= 0.50, no difference). The signal of2H2‐Glc decreased to 4.1 ± 0.5 mM, as in the first ischemic condition (n= 3, two‐tailed, pairedt‐test, first and second ischemic conditions,p= 0.56, no difference, and two‐tailed, pairedt‐test, before and at the second ischemic condition,p= 0.001). After the second ischemic condition, the perfusion was resumed, and again, within about 8 min, the2H2‐Glc signal returned to the baseline level of 9.3 ± 1.1 mM (two‐tailed, pairedt‐tests before the first ischemic condition and after the second ischemic condition,p= 0.2). The2H2‐Lac signal acquired after reperfusion (following the second ischemic condition) was similar to its level before the first ischemic condition and between the two ischemic conditions, indicating that2H2‐Lac did not accumulate within the cells because of the ischemic conditions (p= 0.4, ANOVA with replication).

On both ischemic conditions, the increase in2H2‐Lac concentration was the same as the maximal decrease in the2H2‐Glc concentration (5.5 ± 1.1 mM and 4.3 ± 0.9 mM, respectively,n= 6,p= 0.2, no difference, two‐factor ANOVA with replication). This suggested that the2H2‐Glc available to the brain slices during the ischemic conditions was fully converted to2H2‐Lac (and, by inference, also to the same amount of non‐labeled lactate).

31P NMR spectra of the slices recorded before the first ischemic condition and after the second ischemic condition confirmed the viability of the slices and the consistent presence of ATP and PCr in the slices. The individual spectra are shown in FigureS1. Analysis of ATP content in the slices, comparing the state before the first ischemic condition and after the second ischemic condition, showed that during this time (about 5 h), it decreased by 28 ± 5% (n= 3, average ± standard deviation). This analysis was based on the γ‐ATP signal, as described previously [10].

In one of these experiments, we tested an additional third ischemic condition, which was applied at 87 min after the second ischemic condition for 64 min. In this third ischemic condition, the2H2‐Lac concentration increased to 10.2 mM, and the2H2‐Glc concentration decreased to 1.2 mM. A31P spectrum acquired toward the end of this ischemic condition showed almost no high‐energy phosphate signals (Figure S1G, Supporting Information). However, 30 min further to reperfusion, some recovery was observed (Figure S1H, Supporting Information). Interestingly, in this experiment,2Hx‐Glx was sporadically observed during the first ischemic condition and afterwards. The level of2Hx‐Glx increased toward the end of the long third ischemic condition (Figures4andS2).

Stacked deuterium NMR spectra of an experiment with three ischemic conditions. For clarity, only the third ischemic duration is shown. In addition to the H2HO,2H2‐Glc, and2H2‐Lac signals, which are consistently observed, the signal of2Hx‐Glx can also be observed. The data are shown at 2‐min intervals starting at the beginning of the third ischemic condition and before reperfusion. The top spectrum, marked Spectrum 21, was acquired at the end of the third ischemic condition, 22 min after the spectrum marked 20, and after 62 min of ischemia. H2HO, the natural abundance of deuterium in water;2H2‐Glc, [6,6‐2H2]D‐glucose;2H2‐Lac, [3,3‐2H2]lactate;2Hx‐Glx, deuterium‐labeled glutamine and glutamate.

In a control experiment without perfusion arrests (no ischemic conditions), the level of2H2‐Lac was constant throughout, at a level similar to the three ischemia experiments under continuous flow. In a spectrum acquired without brain slices from the medium used for perfusion of these slices (without perfusion arrest) for 5 h, in the presence of2H2‐Glc (acquired at the same perfusion flow), the2H2‐Lac signal was found to be 2.2% of the level of2H2‐Lac in the NMR tube containing the brain slices.

We have implemented here a metabolic flux approach that utilizes2H2‐Glc as a metabolic substrate for perfused brain cells. The advantage of the isotopic label used here compared to other relevant magnetically active nuclei is briefly described below. Compared to proton spectroscopy, the deuterium label enables the observation of newly formed metabolic pools and differentiates them from the steady‐state levels of these metabolites. Proton spectroscopy (without isotopic labeling) will also show the steady‐state levels of glucose and lactate, which are not expected to change without perturbation. In addition, for proton spectroscopy, water suppression should be applied, and this was not technically possible on our system. Compared to a13C label, which has been utilized in numerous studies of Glc metabolism because of its wide chemical shift spectrum and ability to resolve metabolites, the deuterium label allows higher SNR per acquisition time due to the short T1of the deuterium label, despite the lower gyromagnetic ratio of deuterium compared to13C. This allows studies with higher temporal resolution, even if at lower metabolite resolution. The same rationale led to the original DMI studies in the human brain [11,12]. The use of the deuterium label also enables concentration calculation using the natural abundance of deuterium in water as a stable quantification reference, a property that is unique in NMR and is specifically useful in the current setup.

The results of this study show increased glucose‐to‐lactate conversion directly and in real time, in brain tissue during ischemia. The results also demonstrate that lactate is the predominant product of glucose utilization under continuous flow and during ischemia. This result agrees with previous work by Hage et al. [19], who found that the main products of glucose metabolism in rat brain slices were lactate and CO2(after 60 min of incubation). As CO2does not carry a deuterium label, we could not detect it in the current study. However,2H2‐Lac was identified as the primary metabolic fate.

Previously, using the same perfused brain slices model and with hyperpolarized [1‐13C]pyruvate and13C‐NMR spectroscopy, we have shown that within 1 min of ischemia, [1‐13C]lactate production increased [9,10]. Here, we have confirmed this observation over much longer durations of ischemia (10 min and up to 64 min), which could not be interrogated with hyperpolarized substrates because of the meta‐stable nature of the hyperpolarized state. The observed increase in2H2‐Lac must be supported by a rise in2H2‐Glc uptake, as no other source of the deuterium label is available to the cells to produce2H2‐Lac. Under continuous perfusion, it is impossible to determine2H2‐Glc uptake in the current setup because the perfusion medium contains2H2‐Glc, which is continuously supplied into the NMR tube containing the brain slices (and then washes out). However,2H2‐Glc uptake during ischemia is directly demonstrated here as the depletion of2H2‐Glc in the medium engulfing the brain slices during perfusion arrest.

In the literature, the effects of ischemia on cerebral Glc uptake are varied. In a model of middle cerebral artery occlusion in cats, Welsh et al. have observed a local increase in [14C]deoxyglucose uptake in some ischemic regions, interpreted as activation of Glc metabolism [20]. However, in the most severely ischemic areas with ATP depletion, the [14C]deoxyglucose level decreased, interpreted as limited Glc supply to these regions. Combs et al. induced global ischemia in gerbils and showed that elevated plasma Glc correlated with a linear increase in cerebral lactate [21].

In contrast to in vivo DMI studies, where2H2‐Glc was administered systemically (preclinically and in humans, intravenously andper os, respectively), we did not observe a reproducible production of2Hx‐Glx, and its level appears lower than in the in vivo spectra compared to the2H2−Lac level. This observation may indicate that the turnover, which results in the deuteration of Glx, is enhanced under severe stress conditions, as marked by the ATP depletion observed on31P spectra (Figure S1G, Supporting Information), although this is an anecdotal observation. The notation2Hx‐Glx indicates that this signal originates from deuterated glutamine or glutamate, but that the number of deuterons per molecule is not known to us. This is because the Glx pool becomes labeled through turnover, not because of the net synthesis of Glx. We also note that the signal assigned to Glx may result from a different labeled metabolite altogether, possibly pyruvate. This aspect will be investigated in the future. The current study's lack of reproducible2Hx‐Glx signals may also suggest that2Hx‐Glx signals observed in vivo result from higher2Hx‐Glx turnover in other body organs rather than in situ in the brain. While glutamate uptake from the plasma to the brain is low, glutamine uptake from the blood into the brain is saturated at levels > 1 mM and may comprise a significant part of the brain's glutamine pool [22]. Deuterated glutamine that has been taken up into the brain can then be converted into deuterated glutamate. Observing consistent2Hx‐Glx signals in one of the experiments may suggest that it takes longer to observe in the brain than2H2‐Lac. In this respect, in vivo DMI acquisitions typically occur 1–2 h after2H2‐Glc administration. However, it cannot be ruled out that this observation is related to the insult caused to the brain tissue by the extraction and the slicing procedures. Nevertheless, regardless of the cause, our results align with prior studies in perfused brain slices that showed lactate and CO2to be the main products of glucose metabolism [19].

Previously, we have shown the reversibility of tissue pH characteristics in the same perfused brain slice system as acidification during ischemia and return to neutral pH upon reperfusion, which is one of the hallmarks of the ischemic condition [9]. The reproducibility of the real‐time2H2‐Lac rise during ischemia and return to baseline upon reperfusion, as well as the2H2‐Glc utilization characteristics in both ischemic episodes, further demonstrates that the current brain slice system is a valuable model for investigating the metabolic consequences of brain ischemia and reperfusion. Our findings may warrant utilizing this technology (2H‐NMR of2H2‐Glc metabolism) and setup (perfused rat brain slices) to investigate the effects of neuroprotective agents. It may also suggest that2H‐NMR and DMI could be used to study the ischemic penumbra in vivo.

We note that the calculation of2H2‐Glc and2H2‐Lac concentrations refers to their concentrations in the NMR tube within the volume covered by the NMR probe. However, there are a few limitations to the concentration calculation (Materials and Methods): (1) Although the concentration of2H2‐Glc in the labeled perfusion aCSF was 10 mM, it is possible that the actual concentration in the NMR tube is lower because of incomplete washout of the non‐labeled perfusion aCSF during the transfer to the labeled aCSF; and (2) although H2HO is at the same concentration in all water compartments (perfusion medium, extracellular space, and intracellular space),2H2‐Glc may not occupy these compartments equally; for example, the intracellular compartment is likely to have a lower concentration of2H2‐Glc because of the quick metabolic conversion by glycolysis. Therefore, the overall2H2‐Glc concentration in the perfusion aCSF may be underestimated. In the same way,2H2‐Lac is likely present predominantly in the intracellular compartment (see section below). Hence, its concentration value does not reflect the concentration in this compartment.

In addition, we have not considered the effect of motion on the SNR of these signals. Moving spins contribute less to the SNR than non‐moving spins. However, we did not quantify this effect; because of the T1difference, it likely differs between2H2‐Glc and H2HO, which both predominantly originate from the medium, that is, from moving spins. To omit the influence of motion on the measurement of the2H2‐Lac signal in the medium, we carried out this measurement under the same flow conditions (after removing the brain slices that produced this2H2‐Lac) from the NMR tube (see Results). However, for the measurements in brain slices, as the2H2‐Lac signal originates mainly from within the cells (see below), that is, from non‐moving spins, its concentration in the NMR tube is likely overestimated compared to H2HO.

We consider2H2‐Lac to be predominantly intracellular based on the finding that after 5 h in the presence of2H2‐Glc, the2H2‐Lac signal in the medium was only 2.2% of the level of2H2‐Lac in the NMR tube containing the brain slices. This result was obtained in the same NMR tube containing the same perfusion lines and temperature sensor, and with the same perfusion rate as the perfusion of the slices, after removal of the brain slices from the NMR tube. This was done to avoid flow‐related T1effects or homogeneity differences that may influence the signal intensities of H2HO and2H2‐Lac. The entire volume of the perfusion medium (in the bottle, in the perfusion tubes, and the NMR tube) at any given moment was 70 mL, and the volume of the sensitive area of the probe was 1.375 mL. Therefore, even if all the2H2‐Lac detected in the perfusion medium were concentrated in the sensitive volume of the probe (and the perfusion would be halted), it would make only a 1.12‐fold higher signal of the2H2‐Lac signal during continuous flow (2.2%*70/1.375), which is an insignificant increase. As this is not the case during constant flow, and as the2H2‐Lac signal increased more than fivefold during the perfusion arrest, it suggests that the2H2‐Lac signal of perfused brain slices predominantly arises from within the cells in the brain slices, which were located within the NMR tube in the detection region of the probe throughout experiments. In agreement, our previous studies with the same perfused rat brain slices system and hyperpolarized13C‐labeled pyruvate showed that labeled lactate was constantly produced in the slices during both continuous perfusion and perfusion arrest [9,10]. Nevertheless, we cannot exclude that during perfusion arrest (during the ischemic condition), the2H2‐Lac that accumulates may be partly washed out to the medium inside the NMR tube, because there is no washout from the NMR tube. However, if this is correct, it will likely also occur in vivo, as the washout and wash‐in to the ischemic region are lower. For example, cerebral collateral circulation in humans provides perfusion to the hypoperfused penumbra with a delay of less than 10 s and a reduced relative cerebral blood flow (rCBF ≤ 30%) [23]. This reduction of flow, while detrimental to brain function, is not expected to limit a potential delivery of2H2‐Glc to the region of interest, although it may restrict the washout of the potentially released2H2‐Lac.

In future studies, we intend to investigate the effect of perfusion rate on glucose metabolism in brain slices. We note that oxygen–glucose deprivation, which is a consequence of stroke, has been investigated in the same perfused brain slices setup [24]. However, it appears that a reduction in flow (both wash‐in and washout) will represent AIS better. At any rate, the current study serves as proof of concept for the feasibility of this approach, and we consider it a starting point for a comprehensive study on the effects of flow on glucose metabolism in the brain.

The Glc concentration here reached 4 mM during ischemia, which is not considered a low concentration that would be experienced during stroke. However, this was reduced from a baseline of ~10 mM. High Glc and oxygen conditions are intentionally provided in brain slice preparations. This is because Glc and oxygen reach the depth of the slices by diffusion, which is influenced by the concentration gradient (more information on this aspect is provided in the Materials and Methods in the subsection “Oxygen Concentration in the aCSF Solutions”). To reach physiological levels of Glc and oxygen in the middle of the slice and sustain viability throughout the slice, Glc and oxygen must be provided at higher than physiological concentrations. This differs from the in vivo scenario because nutrients and oxygen are not delivered via the vasculature. Therefore, as the Glc concentration decreases in the buffer, it decreases much more slices' cores. Preserving the viability of brain slices in the same system, without any insults or perturbations, with 5‐mM Glc in the aCSF is not beneficial. The ATP in brain slices perfused with aCSF containing only 5‐mM Glc decreases rapidly (unpublished results).

Although the fundamental biochemical machinery that metabolizes nutrients is relatively conserved among mammalian species brains, the human brain metabolism differs from the rodent brain metabolism in factors that may affect its susceptibility to ischemic stroke. This has been shown by comparing brain metabolism in brain slices from mice and humans by Westi et al. in 2022 [25]. In addition, in recent years, it has become evident that the results of stroke studies in rodents are not fully translatable to humans, and the use of animals with large gyrencephalic human‐like brains as opposed to small lissencephalic brains has been proposed [26,27]. Several recent studies have developed stroke models in the common pig and in miniature pigs [26,27]. These considerations may limit the translation of results from the rodent brain to the human brain. Nevertheless, we note that the porcine models of stroke are technically complex and costly. In the absence of a better option for in vivo and ex vivo studies, to the best of our knowledge, most of the studies on ischemic stroke have been carried out in rodent animal models.

AIS in human adults is typically a localized brain phenomenon with an ischemic core and a threatened penumbra, and otherwise mostly normally functioning brain. In the current model, we sought to model the normally functioning brain versus the threatened penumbra. We did not seek to model the ischemic core, as that would be a tissue without metabolism. The normal functioning brain is modeled by the brain slices before an ischemic insult, and the threatened penumbra is modeled using the same slices during an ischemic insult. While the approach may have cons compared to studies of in vivo imaging, which may show simultaneously all three states (normal functioning brain, ischemic core, and threatened penumbra), it has the advantage of researching a homogeneous state without overlap with other states in the image plane.

There are currently two treatment options for AIS: fibrinolytic agents (such as alteplase or tenecteplase) and mechanical thrombectomy [28]. Hypothermia is often used to reduce neuronal injury, and additional pharmaceutical interventions are a desperate medical need [29]. Although numerous agents showed utility preclinically, most have failed in clinical trials. However, the search for neuroprotective agents continues, with increasing evidence that the irreversible damage to ischemic brain tissue is mainly due to factors after the lack of blood flow and oxygen (i.e.,during reperfusion). Of the promising neuroprotective agents that were studied recently, preclinically and clinically, we note edaravone dexborneol [30], RNS60 [31,32], and tatCN19o [33], which, by distinctly different mechanisms, can reduce the infarct size and improve the recovery from AIS. Our findings suggest that the dynamics of glucose metabolism under normal flow, flow arrest, and reperfusion can be investigated in rat brain slices using2H2‐Glc and2H‐NMR with high fidelity. In addition, our findings further support the ability of the current model to contribute to brain ischemia studies. We hope that this model (perfused rat brain slices, perfusion arrest, and reperfusion) and the current approach (2H‐NMR of2H2‐Glc) will provide a useful system for the development of new therapies for stroke.