The hylid tribe Sphaenorhynchini includes 15 small, greenish treefrog species within the generaSphaenorhynchusandGabohyla.Sphaenorhynchusis divided into three species groups:S. lacteus,S. planicola, andS. platycephalus, withS. carneusandS. prasinusremaining unassigned to any group;Gabohylais monotypic. Larvae of most species have been described, except forS. botocudo,S. cammaeus, andS. mirim. Although larval morphology holds phylogenetic and diagnostic importance in Sphaenorhynchini, internal morphology remains largely unknown, with only the presence of a lingual papilla noted inS. dorisaeandS. lacteus. To fill this gap, we describe the buccopharyngeal cavity ofG. pauloalvini,S. prasinus,S. dorisae,S. lacteus,S. canga, andS. palustris. We provide a detailed description of this system for the tribe and discuss putative new larval synapomorphies. Tadpoles of Sphaenorhynchini show similarities in buccopharyngeal cavity morphology but vary in features such as prenarial arena shape, lateral ridge papillae, median ridge, and postnarial crest development.Gabohyla pauloalvinishows reduced lateral ridge papillae, which is an autapomorphy. Lateral roof papillae and a second pair of lateral ridge papillae are putative synapomorphies of theS. platycephalusgroup or one of its internal clades. The postnarial crest, present in all species, may be a synapomorphy of Sphaenorhynchini. These results enhance understanding of larval morphology and its systematic relevance within the tribe.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00114-025-02009-8.

The hylid tribe Sphaenorhynchini currently comprises 15 species of small greenish treefrogs from the generaSphaenorhynchus(Tschudi1838) andGabohyla(Araujo-Vieira et al.2020).Sphaenorhynchusis divided into three species groups: theS. lacteus,S. planicola, andS. platycephalusgroups, whileS. carneusandS. prasinusremain unassigned to any group (Araujo-Vieira et al.2019). Meanwhile,Gabohylais a monotypic genus, withG. pauloalvinias the only species described (Araujo-Vieira et al.2020).

The larvae of most Sphaenorhynchini species have been described; however, those ofSphaenorhynchus botocudo,S. cammaeus, andS. mirimremain unknown (Caramaschi et al.2009; Roberto et al.2017). External morphological characters of the larvae, such as anteriorly directed nostrils with fleshy rim projections and a medial vent tube with dark pigmentation on its ventral surface, optimized as synapomorphies of Sphaenorhynchini, while the enlarged marginal papillae in the larval oral discs is a synapomorphy ofSphaenorhynchus(Araujo-Vieira et al.2019,2020). In addition to their phylogenetic significance, larval morphological traits are essential diagnostic characteristics for distinguishing species within the tribe. For instance, a short spiracle distinguishes larvae ofS. caramaschiifrom those ofS. palustris(which has an extremely long spiracle),S. bromelicola,S. platycephalus, andS. surdus(which have medium-sized spiracles), among others (Bokermann1973; Cruz and Peixoto1980; Nunes et al.2007; Caramaschi2010; Araujo-Vieira et al.2015a,b).

Despite the significance of larval characters in Sphaenorhynchini, other than external morphology, the only known information regarding their internal morphology is the presence of a lingual papilla inSphaenorhynchus dorisaeandS. lacteus(Dias et al.2023). To fill this gap, we describe here the buccopharyngeal cavity ofGabohyla pauloalvini,S. prasinus(unassigned group),S. dorisae,S. lacteus(theS. lacteusgroup),S. canga, andS. palustris(theS. platycephalusgroup), providing a detailed description of this system for Sphaenorhynchini. Additionally, we discuss possible new larval synapomorphies for the tribe, its genera, and internal clades.

The examined tadpoles are housed in the herpetological collections of the Coleção de Zoologia, Universidade Federal do Sul da Bahia (CZUFSB), Instituto de Ciencias Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá (ICN), Museu de Zoologia, Universidade Estadual de Santa Cruz (MZUESC), and Coleção de Girinos do Centro de Coleções Taxonômicas da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte (UFMG-GIR).Sphaenorhynchus dorisae(ICN 45612) andS. lacteus(ICN 45627) are from Letícia, Amazonas, Colombia.Gabohyla pauloalvini(MZUESC 22093) andS. prasinus(MZUESC 22094, UFMG-GIR 1619) are from the campus of the Universidade Estadual de Santa Cruz (UESC), Ilhéus, Bahia, and Carlos Chagas, Minas Gerais, Brazil, respectively.Sphaenorhynchus canga(UFMG-GIR 665) is from Chapada de Canga, Mariana, Minas Gerais, Brazil (type locality; Araujo et al.2015a), andS. palustris(CZUFSB 528) is from the Reserva Particular do Patrimônio Natural (RPPN) Estação Veracel, Porto Seguro, Bahia, Brazil. Other examined species are listed in the Appendix.

We used the same larvae ofGabohyla pauloalvini,Sphaenorhynchus canga,S. dorisae,S. lacteus, andS. prasinusthat were employed in the original descriptions or redescriptions of tadpoles by Suárez-Mayorga and Lynch (2001), Araujo-Vieira et al. (2015a), and Silva Neto et al. (2022). For larvae ofS. prasinusfrom Carlos Chagas (UFMG-GIR 1619), we compared them with larvae from UESC (MZUESC 22094) redescribed by Silva Neto et al. (2022). ForS. palustris, species assignment was done by comparing the larvae with the original description through diagnostic characters. One key diagnostic character is the presence of an extremely long spiracle, which distinguishes larvae ofS. palustrisfrom all those of Sphaenorhynchini that have been described (which have short and medium-sized spiracles; see Nunes et al.2007; Araujo-Vieira et al.2015b,2019). Additionally, the tadpoles analyzed are from the same locality as those in the original description by Nunes et al. (2007).

At least one tadpole per species was dissected using the guidelines of Wassersug (1976); tadpoles ofSphaenorhynchus dorisaeandS. lacteuswere also submitted to the protocol for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of Dias and Anganoy-Criollo (2024). The terminology of buccopharyngeal morphology is that of Wassersug (1976,1980); the developmental stages are those of Gosner (1960).

We follow the species group delimitation and taxonomy of Sphaenorhynchini proposed by Araujo-Vieira et al. (2019,2020) and considerGabohylathe valid generic name forpauloalvini.

The phylogenetic position of Sphaenorhynchini within Hylinae is controversial, and different authors have recovered it as the sister taxon to Scinaxini (Frost et al.2006; Pyron and Wiens2011; Duellman et al.2016; Faivovich et al.2018; Jetz and Pyron2018; Portik et al.2023), as sister to Dendropsophini (Faivovich et al.2005; Araujo-Vieira et al.2019; Orrico et al.2021), or even as sister to Lophyohylini (Araujo-Vieira et al.2023).

In light of this phylogenetic uncertainty, we conducted a review of the literature on buccopharyngeal morphology within Hylidae to understand how some characters evolved within Sphaenorhynchini, based on the data provided by Dias et al. (2024), and supplemented with recent publications (e.g., Marcondes et al.2025; see TableS1). We proposed four transformation series (Hennig1966; Grant and Kluge2004) to account for the observed variation within Sphaenorhynchini. The phenotypic data matrix includes four characters and 80 terminals (scored based on data available until April 2025; see AppendixS1) edited using Mesquite v.3.70 (Maddison and Maddison2021). We performed parsimony optimizations (Fitch1971) of these characters on the most recent comprehensive phylogenetic hypothesis for Hylidae (Portik et al.2023) using T.N.T. v1.6 (Goloboff and Morales2023). The single multistate character was treated as nonadditive.

Buccal roof (Fig.1a) triangular. Prenarial arena elliptical, with few pustulations. Internal nares elliptical, transversally oriented; anterior margin with two triangular projections; posterior valve free, with a small triangular projection. Vacuities absent. Postnarial arena diamond-shaped, with a small longitudinal dermal crest with three projections (one smaller, and two conical), oriented at an angle of 45°. Lateral ridge papillae present, small, conical, and bifurcated. Median ridge tall, wide, and triangular, with a small central projection. Buccal roof arena delimited by five to six conical papillae on each side; buccal roof papillae absent. Few scattered pustulations on the buccal roof arena. Glandular zone well defined, with marked secretory pits. Dorsal velum V-shaped, medially interrupted, with marginal projections.

Buccal floor (Fig.1b) triangular. Two pairs of infralabial papillae; first pair (medial) short, globose; second pair (lateral) semi-triangular. Tongue anlage well developed, rounded, bearing a single pair of short, conical lingual papillae. Buccal floor arena bell-shaped; four to five conical papillae on each side. Buccal floor arena with a few scattered pustulations. Two conical prepocket papillae. Buccal pockets deep, wide, and oblique slit-shaped. Ventral velum present; spicular support conspicuous; medial notch present; secretory pits well developed; secretory ridges present. Branchial basket triangular, wider than long. Glottis visible, posterior to the medial notch of the velum.

Buccal roof (Fig.1c) triangular. Prenarial arena triangular, with six pustulations transversely oriented. Internal nares elliptical, transversally oriented; anterior margin with three triangular projections; posterior valve with a small triangular projection. Vacuities absent. Postnarial arena diamond-shaped, with a long longitudinal dermal crest with four conical projections, oriented at an angle of 45°. Lateral ridge papillae present, well developed, bifurcated. Median ridge tall, triangular, with small triangular projections. Buccal roof arena delimited by four tall, conical papillae on each side; buccal roof papillae absent. Few scattered pustulations on the buccal roof arena. Glandular zone well defined, with marked secretory pits. Dorsal velum V-shaped, medially interrupted, devoid of papillae or projections.

Buccal floor (Fig.1d) triangular. Two pairs of infralabial papillae; first pair (medial) finger-like, second pair (lateral) hand-like. Tongue anlage well-developed, bearing a single pair of tall, conical lingual papillae. Buccal floor arena bell-shaped; five to six conical papillae on each side. Buccal floor arena with a few scattered pustulations. Four small prepocket papillae present. Buccal pockets deep, wide, and oblique slit-shaped. Ventral velum present; spicular support not visible; small medial notch present; secretory pits well-developed; secretory ridges present. Branchial basket triangular, wider than long. Glottis visible, posterior to the medial notch of the velum.

Buccal roof (Fig.2a) triangular. Prenarial arena triangular, devoid of pustulations or papillae. Internal nares elliptical, transversally oriented; posterior valve free, with a tall, triangular postnarial projection. Vacuities absent. Postnarial arena diamond-shaped, with a long, longitudinal dermal crest, with two or three terminal projections, oriented at an angle of 45°. Lateral ridge papillae present, well-developed, trifurcated. Median ridge low, wide, and trapezoidal, without projections. Buccal roof arena delimited by three conical papillae on each side; buccal roof papillae absent. Few scattered pustulations on the buccal roof arena. Glandular zone well defined, with marked secretory pits. Dorsal velum V-shaped, medially interrupted, devoid of papillae or projections.

Buccal floor (Fig.2b) triangular. Two pairs of globose, infralabial papillae; first pair (medial) short, finger-like, second pair (lateral) semi-triangular. Tongue anlage well-developed, rounded, bearing a single pair of short, conical lingual papillae. Buccal floor arena bell-shaped; five to six finger-like papillae on each side. Buccal floor arena with a few scattered pustulations. Single prepocket papilla present. Buccal pockets deep, wide, and oblique slit-shaped. Ventral velum present; spicular support conspicuous; medial notch present; secretory pits well-developed; secretory ridges present. Branchial basket triangular, wider than long. Glottis visible, posterior to the medial notch of the velum.

Buccal roof (Fig.2c) triangular. Prenarial arena triangular, with four pustulations. Internal nares elliptical, transversally oriented; anterior margin with three triangular projections; posterior marginal valve free. Vacuities absent. Postnarial arena diamond-shaped, with a long, longitudinal dermal crest, with a small central, terminal projection, oriented at an angle of 45°. Lateral ridge papillae present, well-developed, bifurcated. Median ridge tall, triangular, with small triangular projections. Buccal roof arena delimited by four to five tall, conical papillae on each side; 2–3 buccal roof papillae present. A few pustulations scattered on the buccal roof arena. Glandular zone well defined, with marked secretory pits. Dorsal velum V-shaped, medially interrupted, devoid of papillae or projections.

Buccal floor (Fig.2d) triangular. Two pairs of infralabial papillae; first pair (medial) finger-like, second pair (lateral) bilobed. Tongue anlage well developed, bearing a single pair of tall, finger-like lingual papillae. Buccal floor arena bell-shaped; three conical papillae on each side. Buccal floor arena with a few scattered pustulations. Two prepocket papillae present. Buccal pockets deep, wide, oblique slit shaped. Ventral velum present; spicular support conspicuous; medial notch present; secretory pits well developed; secretory ridges present. Branchial basket triangular, wider than long. Glottis visible, posterior to the medial notch of the velum.

Buccal roof (Fig.3a) triangular. Prenarial arena triangular, with two short, rounded, simple papillae. Internal nares elliptical, transversally oriented; anterior margin with 2–4 triangular projections; posterior marginal valve free, with a tall, triangular projection. Vacuities absent. Postnarial arena diamond-shaped, with a long, longitudinal dermal crest, with three or four terminal projections, oriented at an angle of 45°. Postnarial papillae absent. Two pairs of lateral ridge papillae, first pair well developed, bifurcated; second pair tall, conical (Fig.4a). Median ridge low, wide, and trapezoidal, with two small projections. Buccal roof arena delimited by five tall, conical papillae on each side; 2–3 buccal roof papillae present. Few scattered pustulations on the buccal roof arena. Glandular zone well defined, with marked secretory pits. Dorsal velum V-shaped, medially interrupted, devoid of papillae or projections.

Buccal floor (Fig.3b) triangular. Two pairs of infralabial papillae; first pair (medial) tall, conical; second pair (medial) short, globose. Tongue anlage well-developed, rounded, bearing a single pair of tall, conical lingual papillae. Buccal floor arena bell-shaped; five to six conical papillae on each side. Buccal floor arena with a few scattered pustulations. Two or three conical prepocket papillae. Buccal pockets deep, wide, and oblique slit-shaped. Ventral velum present; spicular support conspicuous; medial notch absent; secretory pits well-developed; secretory ridges present. Branchial basket triangular, wider than long. Glottis visible, posterior to the medial notch of the velum.

Buccal roof (Fig.3c) triangular. Prenarial arena triangular, with single rounded, bilobed papillae. Internal nares elliptical, transversally oriented; anterior margin with two triangular projections; posterior marginal valve free, with a tall, medial triangular projection. Vacuities absent. Postnarial arena diamond-shaped, with a long, longitudinal dermal crest, with two terminal projections, oriented at an angle of 45°. Postnarial papillae absent. Two pairs of lateral ridge papillae, first pair well developed, bifurcated; second pair short, bifurcated (Fig.4b). Median ridge low, wide, and triangular, with three small terminal projections. Buccal roof arena delimited by three to four tall, conical papillae on each side; 2–3 buccal roof papillae present. Few scattered pustulations on the buccal roof arena. Glandular zone well defined, with marked secretory pits. Dorsal velum V-shaped, medially interrupted, devoid of papillae or projections.

Buccal floor (Fig.3d) triangular. Two pairs of infralabial papillae; first pair finger-like, second pair cross-shaped. Tongue anlage well developed, rounded, bearing a single pair of tall, conical lingual papillae. Buccal floor arena bell-shaped; five to six tall, conical papillae on each side. Buccal floor arena with a few scattered pustulations. Three to four conical prepocket papillae present. Buccal pockets deep, wide, and oblique slit-shaped. Ventral velum present; spicular support conspicuous; medial notch present. Secretory pits well developed; secretory ridges present. Branchial basket triangular, wider than long. Glottis visible, posterior to the medial notch of the velum.

Sphaenorhynchini tadpoles exhibit a generally similar buccopharyngeal cavity morphology. In the buccal roof, the main differences are in the prenarial arena, postnarial papillae, lateral ridge papillae, and median ridge.Gabohyla pauloalvinihas an elliptical prenarial arena with few pustulations, while allSphaenorhynchusspecies have a triangular prenarial arena, varying in the presence (absent inS. dorisae) and number of pustulations (five inS. lacteusand six inS. prasinus) and papillae (two inS. cangaand one inS. palustris); prenarial papillae are bilobed inS. palustrisand simple inS. canga. AllSphaenorhynchusspecies have well-developed, bi- or trifurcate first pair of lateral ridge papillae, whereas inG. pauloalvini, they are reduced and smaller than the median ridge.

A second pair of lateral ridge papillae is present inSphaenorhynchus canga(tall and conical) andS. palustris(short and bifurcated). The median ridge also varies in shape and projections, withGabohyla pauloalvini,S. lacteus, andS. prasinushaving tall, triangular ridges with small projections;S. cangaandS. dorisaehaving lower, wider, and trapezoidal ridges with small projections (projections absent inS. dorisae); whileS. palustrishas low, wide, and triangular ridges with three terminal projections. Additionally, the buccal roof arena is well-defined inG. pauloalviniandS. cangabut poorly delimited inS. dorisae,S. lacteus, andS. prasinus, differing in the number (two to four papillae inS. dorisae,S. lacteus,S. palustris, andS. prasinus) of buccal roof arena papillae (five to six papillae inG. pauloalviniandS. canga). Buccal roof papillae are present inS. canga,S. lacteus, andS. palustris(absent inG. pauloalvini,S. dorisae, andS. prasinus).

We also observed variations in the development and shape of the postnarial crest in the buccal roof.Gabohyla pauloalvinihas a smaller dermal crest with three projections (one smaller and two conical) than those ofSphaenorhynchusspecies, which show projections varying in both number (one inS. lacteusand two to four in the other species) and shape, with terminal (S. canga,S. dorisae,S. lacteus,S. palustris) and conical (S. prasinus) forms.

The buccal floor also shows distinct variations across species, particularly in the infralabial papillae, prepocket papillae, and the ventral velum.Gabohyla pauloalvini,Sphaenorhynchus canga, andS. dorisaehave globose, semi-triangular, or conical infralabial papillae, whileS. lacteus,S. palustris, andS. prasinuspossess more complex shapes, including bilobed, cross-shaped, or hand-like structures. The number of prepocket papillae is another distinguishing characteristic, withG. pauloalviniandS. lacteushaving two,S. dorisaea single one,S. cangaandS. palustristwo or three, andS. prasinusfour. The ventral velum is present in all species, butS. prasinuslacks visible spicular support, unlike the others. Moreover,S. cangais the only species without a medial notch in the ventral velum.

(0) Free, individual papillae; (1) fused into a dermal crest.

Postnarial papillae are located immediately behind the internal nares and are typically tall, conical structures (Wassersug1976,1980). However, they may alter in shape, as seen in some funnel-mouth tadpoles (e.g., Dias et al.2021a). In all examined Sphaenorhynchini, a dermal crest is found at the same topological location as the postnarial papillae, which we hypothesized has evolved from the fusion of these papillae.

Taxonomic distribution and optimization: the presence of a dermal crest is a putative synapomorphy of Sphaenorhynchini (Fig.5a). We also noted this crest inScinax acuminatusandScinax nasicus, as well as inBoana wavrini, and a few Hylini.

(0) Approximately equal to internal nares width, (1) smaller than internal nares width, (2) larger than internal nares width. Nonadditive.

The lateral ridge papillae can vary in size, shape, and overall morphology. Within our sampled taxa, we observed variation in the size of this feature in relation to the width of the internal nares. To measure the size of the internal nares, we disregarded the area of the narial vacuities present in several hylids, particularly in Cophomantini (e.g., Kolenc et al.2008).

Taxonomic distribution and optimization: a reduced lateral ridge papilla is a putative autapomorphy ofGabohyla pauloalvini(Fig.5b). There are multiple transformations between states within Hylidae. Current distribution of the data also seems to suggest that a reduced lateral ridge would be a synapomorphy for Cophomantini and Pseudini + Dendropsophini, pending further observations.

Taxonomic distribution and optimization: a second pair of lateral ridge papillae was only observed inSphaenorhynchus cangaandS. palustris(the latter was not included in Portik et al.2023; Fig.5c).

Lateral roof papillae are (usually) conical papillae scattered at the lateral portion of the buccal roof, lateral to the buccal roof arena papillae (Wassersug1976,1980).

Taxonomic distribution and optimization: the lateral roof papillae evolved independently in several lineages (Fig.5d). They are present inSphaenorhynchus canga,S. palustris(not included in Portik et al.2023), andS. lacteus, suggesting that further sampling withinSphaenorhynchusis necessary to better test the evolution of this character within the tribe. Regarding other hylids, they are present in many Cophomantini and could be a putative synapomorphy forPithecopus+Phyllomedusa, pending further analysis.

The buccopharyngeal cavity ofGabohylaandSphaenorhynchustadpoles is quite similar to that of many hylid species (e.g., Wassersug1980; Vera Candioti2007; Alcalde et al.2011; Dias2023; Dias et al.2019,2023). The most distinctive feature is the presence of a postnarial crest in the buccal roof of all examined species. This crest is found in the postnarial arena, the same region typically occupied by the postnarial papillae (Wassersug1976,1980). We hypothesize that in Sphaenorhynchini, it evolved through the fusion of the postnarial papillae (Fig.6a–d).

This crest is absent (Fig.6e–h) in the larvae ofDendropsophus(e.g.,D. cerradensis,D. decipiens,D. ebraccatus,D. molitor,D. minutus,D. microcephalus,D. soaresi; Wassersug1980; Echeverría1997; Kaplan and Ruíz1997; Vera Candioti2007; Dias et al.2019; Costa et al.2024; Marcondes et al.2025; Fig.6e),Xenohyla truncata(Dias et al.2023; Fig.4f), and in most Scinaxini (e.g., Conte et al.2007; Vera Candioti2007; Alcalde et al.2011; Dias and Pie2021), although it is present inScinax acuminatusandS. nasicus(Sandoval2000). A similar condition has only been described in the semi-terrestrial tadpoles of Cycloramphidae (Dias et al.2021b; Fig.6h) and in the distantly related hylids, such as the adherent larvae ofBoana semilineata(D’Heursel and de Sá1999),Duellmanohyla schmidtorum,Ptychohyla leonhardschultzei(Wassersug1980), andHyla plicata(Kaplan and Ramírez-Bautista1996). Given the distribution of this character within Hylidae, the presence of the postnarial crest may represent a synapomorphy of Sphaenorhynchini.

Given the presence of the postnarial crest in various ecomorphological types of tadpoles, including semiterrestrial, adherent, and nektonic, speculating about its function is challenging. Few authors have discussed the function of the postnarial papillae. For instance, Kenny (1969a,b) referred to them as “sensitive.” Typically, these papillae are tall, conical, and found in two or three pairs (e.g., Wassersug1980). They are absent in several taxa, particularly in endotrophic (e.g., Dubeux et al.2023) and macrophagous (e.g., Vera Candioti et al.2021) larvae. Some ecomorphs, such as funnel-mouthed tadpoles, exhibit modified forms often characterized by an enlarged, obtuse papilla (e.g., Wassersug1980; Dias et al.2018,2021b). Wassersug (1980) noted that the postnarial arena aligns perfectly with the tongue anlage, which could imply a gustatory function; additionally, these structures may play a mechanical role in sorting particles that enter the buccopharyngeal cavity or in directing the flow of water. Further studies are needed to clarify the function of these and other elements within the buccopharyngeal cavity.

Another interesting characteristic is the reduced lateral ridge papillae inGabohyla. AllSphaenorhynchushave a regular (approximately equal to the internal nares width) or large (larger than the internal nares width), bi- or trifurcate lateral ridge papilla, while inG. pauloalvini, it is reduced and smaller than the internal nares. Wassersug (1980:114) stated that the lateral ridge papillae have a direct relation to the postnarial and roof arenas, but this has never been tested. The reduced lateral ridge inG. pauloalvinicontradicts that hypothesis, as both postnarial and roof arenas are present and not reduced. Similarly, inS. cangaandS. prasinus, there is no evident increase in the size or development of these areas, andS. cangaeven has a poorly delimited buccal roof arena.

The relative size of the lateral ridge papillae within hylids is quite variable, with instances of reduction in all Hylinae tribes. The lateral ridge papillae are reduced in someOlolygon(e.g.,O. v-signata; Dias and Pie2021), in mostTrachycephalus(e.g., Provete et al.2021), in someHyla(Viertel1982), in most Dendrosophini (e.g., Dias et al.2019,2023), and in several Cophomantini (e.g., D’Heursel and Haddad2007). In Sphaenorhynchini, the reduction of the lateral ridge papillae is a putative autapomorphy ofGabohyla.

The presence of a second pair of lateral ridge papillae inSphaenorhynchus cangaandS. palustris—tall and conical in the former, short and bifurcated in the latter—suggests a possible synapomorphy for theS. platycephalusspecies group or for a more restricted internal clade, as these species belong to sister clades within the group (Araujo-Vieira et al.2019). The occurrence of a second or more pairs of lateral ridge papillae is rare in Hylidae; in all species included in our data matrix, it is polymorphic inPseudacris regila, which may present a second pair in some specimens (Wassersug1976). A second pair of lateral ridge papillae was also described forBromeliohyla dendroscartaandDuellmanohyla schmidtorum(Wassersug1980), but these species were not included in the sampling of Portik et al. (2023). Outside of Hylidae, the second pair of lateral ridge papillae has been reported in Alsodidae (two pairs inAlsodessp.) and Leptodactylidae (two pairs inCrossodactylodessp., and two fused pairs inPhysalaemus jordanensis; Wassersug and Heyer1988; Gomes et al.2010).

Similarly, we observed lateral roof papillae in tadpoles ofSphaenorhynchus canga,S. palustris, andS. lacteus, suggesting that the presence of these papillae could be another putative synapomorphy for theS. platycephalusgroup or one of its internal clades, with independent occurrence inS. lacteus. However, to test both hypotheses, it is necessary to verify this condition at least in the larvae ofS. cammaeusandS. caramaschii(Caramaschi2010; Roberto et al.2017), the two earlier divergent taxa of theS. platycephalusgroup (Araujo-Vieira et al.2019). Our observations indicate that the lateral roof papillae evolved independently in several lineages of Hylidae, including two independent evolutions within Scinaxini, inJulianus uruguayusandScinax acuminatus(Alcalde et al.2011). Such papillae are also present in some taxa not included in Portik et al. (2023), such asOlolygon aromothyella(Alcalde et al.2011), suggesting that their presence could be more widely distributed within that tribe.

Our study provides detailed descriptions of the buccopharyngeal cavity ofGabohyla pauloalvini,Sphaenorhynchus prasinus,S. dorisae,S. lacteus,S. canga, andS. palustris, filling a gap in understanding Sphaenorhynchini larval morphology and contributing to a better understanding of their phylogenetic relationships. The presence of a postnarial crest in all examined Sphaenorhynchini species is a putative synapomorphy for the tribe.Gabohyla pauloalvini’s reduced lateral ridge papillae is an autapomorphy, which also distinguishes it fromSphaenorhynchusspecies. The occurrence of a second pair of lateral ridge papillae and lateral roof papillae (with an instance of homoplasy inS. lacteus) inS. cangaandS. palustrissuggests the possibility of two synapomorphies for theS. platycephalusgroup or its internal clades, which need further investigation for corroboration.

Taken together, these findings provide additional morphological evidence for the monophyly of the tribe Sphaenorhynchini and its internal clades, as well as for distinguishingGabohylafromSphaenorhynchus. Additionally, they reveal interesting patterns of larval evolution within Hylidae and pave the way for future research on larval evolution within the family.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We thank John D. Lynch, Ana Telles de Carvalho-e-Silva, Paulo C. A. Garcia, Victor D. Orrico, and Thiago R. Carvalho for granting access to the specimens used in this study. We also thank Julián Faivovich for his valuable comments on the first version of this manuscript. Barbara C. Marcondes acknowledges CAPES for fellowship (88887.892985/2023-00). Caio V. Mira-Mendes acknowledges funding from Universidade Estadual do Maranhão (UEMA) (senior productivity grant 05/2023—PPG/UEMA). Katyuscia Araujo-Vieira thanks Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo, Brazil (FAPESP procs. #2019/24979-2, CEPID 2021/10639-5), Agencia Nacional de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica, Argentina (ANPCyT, PICT 346/2019, 059/2021), and CONICET (PIP 2800).

Institutional Abbreviations follow Sabaj (2022).Dendrosophus molitor. Colombia: Villavicencio, ICN 2007.Xenohyla truncata. Brazil: Rio de Janeiro, Maricá, Restinga de Maricá, MZUESC 224471.Ololygon albicans. Brazil: Teresópolis, UNIRIO 2729.Thoropa megatympanum. Brazil: Santa do Riacho, UFMG 158.

Conceptualization: PHSD and KAV. Formal analysis: PHSD, BCM, YPPC, CVMM, and KAV. Methodology: PHSD, BCM, and CVMM. Project administration: PHSD, CVMM, and KAV. Visualization: PHSD, BCM, and KAV. Writing – original draft: PHSD and KAV. Writing – review & editing: PHSD, BCM, YPPC, LNW, CVMM, and KAV.

Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. This work was supported by the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo, Brazil (FAPESP procs. #2019/24979–2, CEPID 2021/10639–5), Agencia Nacional de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica, Argentina (ANPCyT, PICT 346/2019, 059/2021), CONICET (PIP 2800), CAPES (88887.892985/2023–00), and Universidade Estadual do Maranhão (UEMA) (senior productivity grant 05/2023—PPG/UEMA).