The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-16791-y.

Diabetes is one of the leading causes of death globally1. It is a well-recognized risk factor for cardiovascular diseases (CVD), such as coronary artery disease and stroke2, blindness3, chronic kidney disease (CKD)4, and others. The higher mortality and morbidity outcomes associated with diabetes lead to greater economic burden. The health costs associated with diabetes for individuals in low- and middle-income countries are considerable5in both out-of-pocket and catastrophic medical spending (i.e., healthcare costs that individuals pay directly and exceed a certain percentage of a household’s income) compared to individuals without diabetes6. Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is the most common form of diabetes, accounting for almost 90% of cases, largely as a consequence of insulin resistance and/or insufficient insulin production to regulate blood glucose7. Obesity and excess weight are common risk factors for T2D8,9. Therefore, lifestyle modifications (e.g., diet and physical activity) are crucial to reduce body weight and improve diabetes-related health outcomes10.

Despite multiple systematic reviews demonstrating that diabetes self-management education and support can improve diabetes-related health outcomes by reducing associated complications11–13, significant individual variation persists in patients’ ability to sufficiently control their diabetes. This variation can be partly attributed to patient’s time preference (i.e., the relative weight given to the distant future compared to the near future, encompassing both long-run discounting and time consistency)14and/or risk preference (i.e., the level of risk tolerance versus risk aversion)15. Regarding time preference, two key-dimensions are considered. First, long-run discounting refers to how individuals value the distant future relative to the near future. Second, time consistency refers to whether individuals apply similar weights to future decisions compared to the present, given the same waiting time horizon.

A systematic review of 12 studies explored associations between measures of time preference and adherence to diabetes self-care activities and diabetes outcomes14. The review found that patients with lower discount rates (also termed as ‘less patient’) were less likely to adhere to self-care activities, leading to worse outcomes than those with more patience. Five of the studies included used either ordinary measures of patience17–21, in contrast to five studies that used continuous measures of discount rates22–26. None of the studies measured time-(in)consistency or present-biasedness. Two studies measured patients’ present bias but did not estimate their discount rate27,28. These studies were conducted in the US, France, Germany, and Japan.

A single study based in Israel usedhypotheticalchoice tasks to elicit risk preference from T2D patients, and found that risk-seeking or risk-tolerant patients were less likely to adhere to healthy eating plans, exercise, blood glucose monitoring, foot care15and medication-taking29. Another study from Japan used hypothetical risk questions reporting that risk aversion was inversely associated with the presence of diabetic retinopathy or nephropathy25. One study reported no association between ordinally measured risk attitudes and diabetes self-care17.

T2D patients, treated at the outpatient clinic department (OPD) of the Department of Medicine or Family Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, were invited to participate in the study from November 2022 to January 2023. Patients were eligible if they met the following inclusion criteria: Aged older than 18 years, had fasting blood glucose ≥ 126 mg/dL or hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) ≥ 6.5%, or were using any anti-diabetic medications. Patients with T1D were excluded from the study. The research objectives, procedures, potential risks and benefits were thoroughly explained to all prospective participants, and written informed consent was obtained.

was obtained from the Human Research Ethics Committee of The Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital (COA. MURA2022/485). All methods were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines/regulations.

Participants completed two incentivized tasks with real monetary reward using the multiple price list method. [Data-collection instruments and procedures were pre-tested and revised until October 2022.] Task 1 evaluated individual long-run discounting (i.e., how much weight one puts on the far future compared to the near future) and time consistency (i.e., whether the same weight was put on the later time point for both future and immediate timeframes). Participants were classified as time-consistent, present-biased, or future-biased. Task 2 evaluated risk attitude (i.e., levels of risk tolerance or risk aversion).

Participants were invited to choose between two certain outcomes: a smaller reward at an earlier date or a larger award at a later date based on two time horizons at 1 and 2 months. For example, option A would pay 1000 Thai Baht (THB) in one month, or option B would pay 1050 THB in two months, see Table1. [Given that the purchasing power parity (PPP) conversion factor (GDP) was 10.91 Thai Baht (THB) per 1 USD in 2022, this amount is equivalent to the purchasing power of 91.66 US Dollar–USD PPP.] This approach has been widely used previously30–34. By varying the amount of later options, the discount rate or the level of long-run discounting can be identified given the participant preference for those amounts. The starting date was varied to evaluate time consistency (i.e., either being time-consistent, present-biased, or future-biased): no front-end delay (today) and a 1-month front-end delay were considered. Therefore, there were three timeframes, i.e., today vs. 1 month, 1 month vs. 2 months, and 1 month vs. 3 months. For each timeframe, there were six decisions with 18 in total. Table1describes an example of a set of six decisions for one example timeframe (i.e. 1 month vs. 2 months), and Supplementary Table1provides the full choice lists.

An example of choices in a future timeframe (1 month vs. 2 months) for the time preference elicitation task.

Only one decision for this task was randomly selected to be actually paid out. This payment approach guarantees the importance of every decision and prevents the income effect, which is when later decisions are affected by payoffs from earlier choices35. In addition to making an incentive large enough, only 10% of participants were randomly selected (by rolling a 10-sided die) to actually receive the monetary payoff for that task31,32.

First, long-run discounting refers to how participants valued the far future compared to the near future (from choosing either future time point). Second, time consistency refers to whether participants applied similar weights to future decisions compared to the present, given the same waiting time horizon.

By way of explanation, a participant who cares more about their future health and is time-consistent would be more likely to plan and comply with dietary and exercise advice (the first case). The second case (present-biased) is someone who procrastinates: those who care about their future health but change their mind when it comes to immediate health decisions, so-called time-inconsistent. Participants who lack sufficient care for their future health and behave unhealthily would be considered impatient and time-consistent (the third case). Finally, participants who care more about the near future than the far future or now, could be considered as impatient and future-biased.

By comparing each participant’s selections for choice set 1 (today vs. 1 month) and those in choice set 2 (1 month vs. 2 months), participants can be categorized as time-consistent, present-biased, or future-biased, see Supplementary Table1. Participants were considered time-consistent if they switched to option B (wait) for the same item in choice sets 1 and (2) Participants were considered present-biased if they switched to option B in choice set 1 later than in choice set 2, suggesting they would wait less for a later larger payoff for an immediate payment (today), compared to when the sooner payment would be in the future.

Participants were asked to make ten choices over two uncertainty outcomes, Lottery A and B, commonly referred to as binary lottery choices31,32,36. Participants were asked to choose lottery A or B for each of the ten items. Lottery A provided participants with 1200 THB with probabilityor 1000 THB with probabilitytoday. Lottery B provided 2500 THB with probabilityor 100 THB with probabilitytoday. Lottery B is, therefore, a riskier option than A. This series of ten items offered prize sets with ascending probabilities on the highest prize starting from 0.1, then increasing by 0.1 until a final choice between two certain amounts of money. See Table3regarding all ten items for the risk preference elicitation task.

Complete price list of the risk preference elicitation task (10 items).

After choosing all ten items, only one item was randomly chosen to be paid off by the participant rolling a 10-sided die to determine the chosen Lottery item payoff. Finally, the participant again rolled a 10-sided die to determine the payoff (high or low). Figure2shows an example of the first decision. If the participant chose option A (Lottery A), there was a probability of 0.1 to receive 1200 THB when “1” from a 10-sided die was rolled, while there was a probability of 0.9 to receive 1000 THB if “2” to “10” was rolled. If the participants chose option B, he/she would receive 2500 THB when “1” was rolled, but 100 THB when “2” to “10” was rolled. Again, 10% of participants were randomly selected (by rolling a 10-sided die) to actually receive the monetary payoff from this task31,32.

An example of the decisions in the risk preference task.

For determination of individual risk tolerance levels, we used the number of riskier options (Lottery B) chosen across 10 items by each participant. A score of ten indicated the participant chose the riskier option, Lottery B, in all items, representing an extreme risk tolerance.

A researcher or a trained research assistant clearly described the choice tasks for the time and risk elicitation. Participants were asked control questions to check their understanding of the tasks. Upon completing the elicitation tasks and a questionnaire, participants were compensated based on their performance in the choice tasks. These tasks took on average 33.8 (SD = 12.8) minutes. As a result of random selection (by a 10-sided die), 8.59% and 12.88% of participants received payment from the time and risk preference elicitation tasks, respectively. In addition to the earnings from the elicitation tasks, participants also received 200 THB as a compensation for their time. As a result, the median earning was 200 (IQR: 200, 200) THB.

The primary outcome was fasting serum glycated hemoglobin (% HbA1c), and the secondary outcome was fasting serum glucose (mg/dL), both measured on the day of the interview. These data were retrieved from the hospital information system (HIS). For both tests, venous blood samples were collected after fasting at least 8 h of fasting at the hospital. HbA1c represents a long-term glucose control over approximately 3 months, while fasting serum glucose represents a one-off, immediate blood sugar level.

Several covariates were considered following retrieval from the HIS on the interview date: body mass index (BMI), systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP and DBP), high-density lipoproteins (HDL), low-density lipoproteins (LDL), triglyceride, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), glucose-lowering medications (groups, i.e., Biguanides, Sulfonylureas, Thiazolidinediones, Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4 inhibitors (DPP4i), Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter-2 Inhibitors (SGLT2i), Glucagon-like Peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP1-RA), and insulin). If values were missing on the interview date, corresponding values from the nearest date were taken for which they were available within 1 year before or after the interview date. See Supplementary Table4for participant laboratory, physical examination, and medications data on the survey days and with the carried values.

Participants were interviewed to obtain demographic information, including age, sex, years of education, marital status, occupation, number of children and household members; socio-economic characteristics, including wealth, household expenditure, healthcare coverage scheme, family history of diabetes (T1D and T2D); cognitive function was measured by three Raven’s progressive matrices37,38; and health risk behaviors for alcohol consumption and smoking. Frequent alcohol consumers were defined as those who drank alcohol at least once a week, and current smokers as those who infrequently or frequently smoked cigarettes.

We also recorded diabetes self-care behaviors, i.e., dietary control (regarding amount/times of food consumed), adherence to glucose-lowering medication (regarding amount and time taken), and physical exercise. This information was captured through the following question: “How frequently do you undertake the corresponding behaviors as recommended by your healthcare provider?” on a 5-point Likert scale: never (0%), sometimes (~ 25%), about 50%, mostly (~ 75%), and always (100%). The questions were adapted from the self-care inventory-revised39. For the analysis, we considered averaged proper amount and time of diet (scale 1–5 for each domain). The same procedure was applied for medication adherence. See Supplementary Table2for descriptive statistics of responses to the questions.

In addition, we recorded the quarter of the year (to check seasonal effects) and the type of OPD clinic (at the Department of Medicine vs. Family Medicine), which the participant visited on the interview date as additional covariates.

whereis either HbA1c level, blood glucose level, or diabetes self-care behaviors (with scale 1–5), i.e., proper diet, medication use, and exercise;is participant’s long-run discounting level (0–12),is participant’s time consistency type (either time-consistent, present-biased, or future-biased),is participant’s risk tolerance level (0–10),is a vector of control variables included after the stepwise model selection procedure, andis an error term.

The analysis was conducted using STATA version 18. A P-value less than 5% was considered significant.

For long-run discounting levels, 35.6% of participants did not wait for either future timeframe (1 month vs. 2 months and 1 month vs. 3 months), while 17.2% waited for all 12 items. The median (IQR) long-run discounting level was 6 (0–9). For time-consistency type, 271 (68.4%) were categorized as time-consistent, 73 (18.4%) as present-biased, and 52 (13.1%) as future-biased. In addition, the median (IQR) for risk tolerance levels was 4 (1–6). For more detailed time and risk preference elicitation results, see Supplementary S3.

Participants characteristics are described in Table4and Supplementary Table3. The majority of participants (64.6%) were female, with a mean age (SD) of 61 years (10.1), 73.7% were married, and attended school for an average of 12.2 years (4.6). About one-third (36.9%) of participants were retired, and 37.1% were skilled workers (civil service, company employees, business owners). Almost two-thirds (60.4%) had healthcare coverage from the civil service benefit scheme. For health-related characteristics, 37.9% of participants had a family history of diabetes, and 5.6% and 4.8%, were current smokers and frequent alcohol consumers, respectively.

eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; HbA1c, hemoglobin A1c; HDL, High-density lipoproteins; IQR, Interquartile Range; kg, kilograms; LDL, low density lipoprotein; m, meters; min, minute; ml, milliliter; mmHg, millimeters of mercury; mg/dL, milligrams per deciliter; n, number; SD, Standard Deviation.

Mean (SD) HbA1c and blood glucose were 7.49% (1.56) and 141.32 (44.37) mg/dL, respectively. Mean BMI was 27.41 (5.12) kg/m2with systolic and diastolic blood pressures of 136.16 (19.31) and 77.23 (8.24) mmHg, respectively. Mean HDL and LDL were 51.25 (14.35) and 105.16 (37.53) mg/dL, respectively, with median triglycerides of 112 (82–155) mg/dL. The mean eGFR was 84.09 (22.12) ml/min/1.73 m2. There were 48 (12.1%), 103 (26%), and 245 (61.9%) participants who received none, one, and more than one glucose-lowering medication, respectively. The median scores (IQR) for diet, medication adherence, and exercise were 4.5 (3.5–5), 5 (4.5–5), and 3 (2.5), respectively, see Supplementary Table2.

Multivariate linear regression modelling (Table5) indicated that present-biased compared to time-consistent preference was positively associated with HbA1c levels with a coefficient (95% CI) of 0.41 (0.02, 0.80), while long-run discounting and risk tolerance levels were not significantly associated with HbA1c level with coefficients (95% CI) of − 0.02 (− 0.05, 0.02) and − 0.02 (− 0.08, 0.03), respectively. This suggests present-biased T2D patients had poorer diabetes control compared to time-consistent patients. See univariate analysis in SupplementaryS4.

CI, confidence interval; HbA1c, hemoglobin A1c; LDL, low density lipoprotein; med, medication; mg/dL, milligrams per deciliter; No., Number.

Other covariates associated with HbA1c were age, number of glucose-lowering medication groups (more than one group vs. none), LDL, cognitive ability, number of children, and seasonal quarter (second quarter as a base case versus each of other three) with corresponding coefficients (95% CI) of − 0.03 (− 0.04, − 0.01), 0.69 (0.21, 1.17), 0.01 (< 0.01, 0.01), − 0.24 (− 0.40, − 0.09), 0.14 (0.01, 0.27), 0.48 (0.05, 0.91), 0.61 (0.18, 1.04), 0.52 (0.06, 0.98), respectively. To summarize, these results suggest that T2D patients who are older, have higher cognitive ability, fewer children in the household, and were interviewed in the second quarter of the year (Apr–Jun, which was late summer), had lower HbA1c levels. In contrast, those who took more than one glucose-lowering medication group (vs. none) or had higher LDL levels, were more likely to have elevated HbA1c.

CI, confidence interval; Fam Med, Department of Family Medicine; HDL, high density lipoprotein; LDL, low density lipoprotein; Med, Department of Medicine; mg/dL, milligrams per deciliter; OPD, outpatient department.

Our study adds to the current literature in that we could distinguish long-run discounting and time (in)consistency and show that present bias is associated with HbA1c, a robust diabetes outcome. In contrast, previous studies were unable to distinguish between long-run discounting and time consistency concluding that more patient T2D participants either had better HbA1c levels20,21,24or no significant associations were detected17.

Distinguish between long-run discounting and present bias is crucial when designing appropriate self-care-supporting programs as each requires different intervention strategies. To address present bias, interventions such as commitment devices (e.g., deposit program16, or reminders44could be highly effective. These alternative interventions, which offer reinforcement for improved daily diabetes self-care behaviour, warrant further consideration and rigorous trialling. In contrast, developing clear strategies to improve long-run discounting on health decisions remains a significant challenge requiring more research.

Our findings raise the question of whether the determination of present bias in T2D patients could allow stratification of diabetes interventions and management programs, utilizing targeted tools (e.g., reminders, commitment devices, or incentive programs) to help present-biased patients overcome self-control problems.

Specifically, reminders are effective by bringing the required action “top of mind”44making future health goals more salient in the present. Commitment devices empower present-biased patients to make beneficial decisions when they still value future benefits. For example, registering and paying for the gym membership or placing deposit against achieving a successful health goal leverages their future-oriented self to bind their present self to healthier actions16. Incentives might bring future rewards for healthy behaviors feel nearer or even immediate, thereby increasing their perceived value in the present16.

Conversely, time-consistent patients may not require such intensive complementary programs, which may ultimately provide opportunities for cost-savings, in contrast to a universal “one size fits all” program, particularly in resource-limited settings.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.