Sepsis is a life-threatening syndrome associated with significant health resource utilization. Previous systematic reviews have demonstrated high healthcare costs during hospitalization with sepsis, but post-discharge health costs have not been characterized. Understanding these costs allows health system decision-makers to identify targets for reducing preventable spending and strain on healthcare resources. This systematic review aims to describe the post-hospitalization healthcare costs among adults living in developed nations who survived an episode of sepsis.

We searched MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and Database of Systematic Reviews from the year 2000 to February 4, 2025. The search strategy was developed by combining concepts of sepsis, costs, study types, and developed countries. Two reviewers independently screened titles and abstracts, followed by full-text review and data extraction. Conflicts were resolved by a third reviewer. Study quality was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa scale for non-randomized studies. Narrative synthesis was used to summarize findings.

We identified 23 observational studies that met the inclusion criteria. The methods used to calculate and report healthcare costs varied widely across studies, including the types of costs incurred (readmissions, physician visits, medication costs, and others) and the period over which costs were calculated. Across studies, the median total healthcare cost among sepsis survivors in year one after discharge was $28,719 (IQR $21,715) and the median total healthcare cost in year two after discharge was $22,460 (IQR $14,407). The median cost of a readmission for sepsis survivors was $20,320 (IQR $4,889). Six of seven studies that included a non-sepsis comparator group reported that sepsis survivors accrue higher healthcare costs post-discharge compared to individuals without sepsis.

Our systematic review demonstrates that sepsis survivors incur high healthcare costs that can persist for years after discharge from initial hospitalization. These findings underscore the long-term health economic burden of sepsis, highlighting sepsis as an important target for policy and practice interventions that could improve health outcomes and reduce costs.

The online version contains supplementary material available at10.1186/s13054-025-05600-7.

Sepsis is defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to an infection [1]. This syndrome is associated with high in-hospital mortality and initial healthcare costs [2]. Sepsis survivors are at increased risk of hospital readmission, with recent estimates reporting that 1 in 21 adults who survive a sepsis hospitalization are readmitted to hospital within 30 days of discharge [3]. They are also at higher risk for cardiovascular disease and cognitive impairment [4]. Sepsis survivors experience increased healthcare costs and resource utilization due to the long-term sequelae of sepsis in the months and years following hospital discharge.

Previous systematic reviews have described hospital costs of the initial sepsis hospitalization [5,6], as well as metrics of subsequent healthcare resource utilization after sepsis [7,8]. However, to our knowledge, there are no published systematic reviews that summarize the healthcare costs incurred by sepsis survivors after hospital discharge. Understanding these post-discharge costs is necessary to inform and justify the development of policy interventions that focus on reducing disease burden and subsequent health costs among sepsis survivors. The World Health Organization passed World Health Assembly (WHA) resolution 70.7 in 2017, encouraging member states to take specific actions to reduce the burden of sepsis [9]. Understanding post-sepsis costs is a crucial step in addressing the global impact of sepsis. Thus, our systematic review aims to describe healthcare costs among sepsis survivors after discharge from the initial sepsis hospitalization.

This systematic review was reported according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) 2020 guidelines [10] and prospectively registered in the PROSPERO registry (registration number CRD42023456850).

Study inclusion criteria were determined prior to study screening. We included papers that: [1] studied adults in developed countries who [2] had a sepsis hospitalization [3], reported healthcare costs after index hospitalization, and [4] were published in English in the year 2000 or later. All study designs were eligible, including randomized controlled trials, cohort studies, case-control studies, case series, and other designs. Studies that only reported index hospitalization costs or readmission rates were excluded. Commentaries, letters, conference proceedings, and review articles such as scoping reviews and systematic reviews were excluded. The study setting was limited to developed countries, as defined by the United Nations [11], due to the economic nature of the research question and the differences in health systems between low- and middle-income countries and high-income countries. Search limits were restricted to the year 2000 or later due to changes in critical care clinical practice following the publication of the ARDSNet Trial in 2000 [12] and the release of the Sepsis-2 definition in 2001 [13].

The following databases from the Ovid platform were searched by an information specialist (ME): MEDLINE, MEDLINE ePub Ahead of Print/MEDLINE In-process & Other Non-Indexed Citations, Embase Classic + Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. CINAHL Ultimate (EbscoHost) was also searched. All databases were searched from inception to February 4th, 2025.

The search process followed the Cochrane Handbook [14] and the Cochrane Methodological Expectations of Cochrane Intervention Reviews (MECIR) [15] for conducting the search, and the PRISMA 2020 guidelines [16] for reporting. The Peer Review of Electronic Search Strategies (PRESS) guideline for peer-reviewing the search strategies [17], drawing upon the PRESS 2015 Guideline Evidence-Based Checklist, was used to avoid potential search errors.

The search strategy concept blocks were built on the topics of sepsis AND (economics or costs) AND study types AND developed countries, using both controlled vocabularies and text word searching for each component. The searches were limited to human, adults, English or French language, and publication years 2000 to present. Conference and non-journal materials were removed where possible.

The MEDLINE search strategy is available in eTable 1 in the Supplement.

Records identified from searches were uploaded to Covidence [18]. Titles and abstracts were screened independently by two reviewers (VC, FS, ML) followed by full-text review and data extraction. Any discrepancies were resolved with an independent reviewer (KB). Risk of bias assessment was performed by one reviewer (VC, FS, ML) using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for assessing the risk of bias of non-randomized studies [19].

The primary outcome in this systematic review was healthcare costs after discharge from a sepsis hospitalization. We recorded any post-discharge healthcare costs reported in the studies as well as the currency and year for reported costs. All costs were converted to United States Dollar (USD) 2022 using the average Consumer Price Index and Purchasing Power Parity conversion rates from the International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook Database [20,21]. For original currencies as reported in the included studies, refer to eTable 2 in the Supplement. Costs of the index sepsis hospitalization were not an outcome of interest and were not recorded.

Data collected on study characteristics included study design, sample size, geographic location, sepsis definition used, study population, admission to intensive care unit (ICU) and comparator group (if present). Cost data collected included any post-discharge sepsis costs, the duration of time after discharge over which costs were reported, cost categories, methodology used to measure costs, health cost payer, and any relevant measures of association.

Due to the wide heterogeneity of the types of costs reported by included studies, a meta-analysis was not appropriate [22]. We used narrative synthesis to describe healthcare costs, following the Synthesis Without Meta-analysis (SWiM) guidelines [23]. We calculated medians and interquartile ranges (IQRs) for total healthcare costs at one year after discharge, total healthcare costs in the second year, and costs of a readmission following sepsis. These summary statistics describe the total long-term cost burden of sepsis, as well as costs due to readmission, which among sepsis survivors can be substantial [24]. Only studies that reported either total costs at one year, total costs at two years, or the cost of a single readmission were included in these summary statistics. Other studies included in this review are described narratively and in Table1.

Database searches returned 13,233 results. After deduplication, 10,262 titles and abstracts were screened, and 10,218 articles were excluded at this stage based on clear irrelevance to the review question (e.g. wrong population, exposure, or outcome). The full texts of 44 studies were reviewed, and 23 studies were included in the review [2,24–45]. The most common reason for exclusion was a lack of description of post-discharge costs (n= 15). The study identification, screening, and inclusion process is summarized in a PRISMA flow diagram(Fig.1)[16].

The study design and characteristics of included studies are summarized in Table1. All included studies were cohort studies. The sample sizes of included studies ranged from 35 to 2,566,689 people. The studies represented sepsis costs from the United States (n= 10), Germany (n= 4), Canada (n= 5), Australia (n= 1), Latvia (n= 1) and France (n= 2). The sepsis definition used differed between studies or was not stated. Some studies specified a consensus definition (Sepsis-1, Sepsis-2, or Sepsis-3) [2,27,30,32,33,38], while other studies used a different definition and/or used International Classification of Diseases codes to identify sepsis survivors. Seven studies included a comparator group of individuals without sepsis [2,24,30,32,37,41,44], and sixteen did not include a comparator group [25–29,31,33–36,38–40,42,43,45]. All but one [24] of the studies that had a non-sepsis comparator group matched sepsis patients to non-sepsis patients based on characteristics such as age, sex, admission type, comorbidities, length of stay, mechanical ventilation status, trauma, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II score, and others.

Follow-up time after hospital discharge ranged from 30 days to 5 years, with a median follow-up time of 12 months (IQR 30 months).

Table2summarizes the characteristics of post-sepsis healthcare costs across studies. Costs were identified using claims-based approaches (n= 10) or through health administrative databases (n= 9). All studies used standardized approaches to calculate costs, although the type of health costs varied widely across studies. Six studies only calculated readmission and hospital-based costs [24,28,29,31,32,37], while seventeen studies reported other types of health costs, including outpatient treatment, medication prescriptions, rehabilitation, emergency department visits, long-term care, laboratory and homecare services, same-day surgery visits, primary care and specialist visits, nursing care, or allied health services [2,25–27,30,33–36,38–45]. Health cost payers were public health insurance (n= 14) or a commercial payor (n= 4).

Estimated 1-yr incremental costs of sepsis in Ontario total $1 billion.

1-year overall mean post-sepsis healthcare costs: $26,416 (SD $40,382) in hospital-acquired (HAI) sepsis patients, $21,747 (SD $14,707) in community-acquired (CAI) sepsis patients.

In severe sepsis patients, overall mean healthcare costs at one year were $21,581 (SD $9,395) in CAI, $26,062 (SD $7,393) in HAI patients.

1n=738 refers to the total number of sepsis survivors in the study. The total sample size was 1,068, and 738 individuals survived post-discharge.

Figure2visualizes total costs at one year, total costs in the second year, and costs of a readmission. Healthcare costs among sepsis survivors were highest in the first year after discharge, although they varied across studies due to different calculation methods. Ten studies calculated total mean or median healthcare costs at one year after sepsis discharge [2,26,27,34,35,37,38,40,41,43]. The median one-year total cost across studies was $28,719 (IQR $21,715). Total healthcare costs remained high in the second year after discharge, but declined slightly, with a median year-two cost of $22,460 (IQR $14,407) across studies [2,26,27,33]. Sepsis survivors continued to accrue high costs in the three to five years after discharge, with costs in year three ranging from approximately $9,000 to $27,000 [2,26,27,30].

Four studies calculated readmission cost with the mean or median cost of readmission ranging from approximately $16,700 to $31,500 [24,28,29,31]. The median cost of a readmission across studies was $20,320 (IQR $4,889). Letarte et al. totaled the cost of readmissions for all fifteen readmitted patients in their study up to 14.5 months after discharge, which was $618,107 [36].

Seven studies compared healthcare costs between sepsis survivors and individuals who survived a non-sepsis hospitalization [2,24,30,32,37,41,44]. Healthcare costs after discharge were higher among sepsis survivors. For example, Thompson et al. found the overall cost of hospital treatment at up to two years was higher in sepsis patients (sepsis: $58,759, non-sepsis: $52,168) [32]. Chang et al. reported the total annual cost of 30-day sepsis readmissions in California was higher than that of readmissions for congestive heart failure (CHF) and acute myocardial infarction (AMI) combined (sepsis: $617 million, CHF: $283 million, AMI: $175 million) [24]. Of the seven studies that compared post-discharge healthcare costs between individuals with sepsis and individuals without sepsis, six found that costs were higher among those with sepsis [2,24,30,32,41,44].

One study by Barrett et al. described post-discharge healthcare costs among sepsis survivors compared to survivors of a non-sepsis hospitalization with respect to total population healthcare spending using the concept of high-cost users (HCUs). They defined HCUs as individuals whose total healthcare costs were at or above the 95th percentile of total population healthcare costs (i.e., top 5% HCUs). They found that individuals who survived a sepsis hospitalization were more likely to be a top 5% HCU at any time after discharge compared to those who survived a non-sepsis hospitalization (OR 2.24 (95% CI 2.04–2.46)) and that they spent more time as a HCU after discharge (RR 1.46 (95% CI 1.45–1.48)) [44]. This was the only study that described costs using the HCU concept. Two studies described disproportionate healthcare costs in a small subset of individuals [26,31]. Lee et al. calculated the frequency distribution of healthcare spending among sepsis survivors and found that the total cost of care was positively skewed, suggesting that a minority of patients were responsible for the majority of resource use within the cohort [26]. Goodwin et al. discussed the disproportionate burden of readmission among sepsis survivors, stating that a minority of survivors represented a disproportionate number of readmissions. In their study, individuals with multiple readmissions accounted for 77.3% of all readmissions with a cumulative cost of $1.08 billion [31]. Although HCUs are typically identified by comparing individual spending to the entire population distribution of spending rather than just to the study cohort, the findings of these two studies nevertheless highlight the skewed nature of healthcare spending among sepsis survivors.

The results of risk of bias assessment using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for assessing the risk of bias of non-randomized studies can be found in Table3. Studies were rated on domains of selection of cohorts, comparability of cohorts, and ascertainment of outcome. One study was rated ‘not low risk of bias’ [26], while the remaining were rated ‘low risk of bias’.

Our review highlights the substantial healthcare costs incurred after sepsis, reflecting the long-term impacts of this syndrome. Among the included studies, post-discharge costs were largely driven by rehospitalization and hospital-based costs. We found that costs in the first year exceeded $60,000 per patient in the highest reported estimate, and costs remained elevated at five years post-discharge. In the included studies, healthcare costs were higher in sepsis survivors compared to individuals who survived a non-sepsis hospitalization.

Our findings align with previous research, which shows that sepsis survivors face long-term sequelae, including disability, cognitive impairment, and declines in physical functioning [46], that place them at risk for increased healthcare costs. For sepsis survivors treated in the ICU, the post-sepsis experience overlaps with post-intensive care syndrome, which is characterized by physical, cognitive, and mental health impairments that can persist for years after critical illness [47]. These post-sepsis sequelae contribute to substantial post-discharge healthcare costs, which are largely driven by rehospitalization, as demonstrated by Chang et al. [24]. Additionally, evidence from a population-based matched cohort study of adults without prior cardiovascular disease showed that surviving a first sepsis hospitalization was associated with a 30% increase in the hazard of major cardiovascular events during long-term follow-up compared to survivors of non-sepsis hospitalizations [48]. The studies included in our review noted not only increased costs after discharge, but increased resource utilization, such as readmissions, outpatient visits, and medication use. This underscores that the burden of sepsis extends beyond the first hospitalization, contributing to sustained healthcare utilization and long-term costs due to chronic sequelae.

Sepsis represents significant costs within overall health system spending, with evidence suggesting that sepsis survivors become HCUs and account for a disproportionate share of healthcare expenditures [49]. Identifying these HCUs is important for policymakers and health system decision-makers because it enables the development of targeted interventions that can yield substantial cost savings. Three studies in our review described how certain sepsis survivors incur healthcare costs that place them amongst the highest-cost users [26,31,44]. Sepsis presents a high-cost burden both during the initial hospitalization, with one systematic review estimating the median of the mean hospital-wide cost of sepsis per patient at $32,421 (2014 USD) [5], and after discharge, as supported by the findings of our review. Coordinated policy efforts, such as those described in the Berlin Declaration [50] on sepsis and WHA resolution 70.7, can reduce the burden of sepsis through national action plans and strategic investments in prevention, early recognition, and post-discharge care [9]. By mitigating the in-hospital and long-term consequences of sepsis, these policy efforts can improve health outcomes for sepsis survivors and may help contain healthcare costs to address the larger economic impact of sepsis [51].

Of the 23 studies in this review, only seven included a non-sepsis comparator group, limiting further analyses of the economic burden of sepsis relative to other patient populations. While these studies consistently demonstrated higher healthcare spending among sepsis versus non-sepsis survivors, we identified heterogeneity across studies in terms of the type of costs reported, the time period over which costs were calculated, and the descriptive statistics and measures of association used to quantify costs. This made it difficult to compare post-sepsis costs across studies and precluded a formal meta-analysis [22]. The summary statistics provided for year one costs, year two costs, and readmission costs are offered to provide a general estimate of cost patterns but should be interpreted with caution due to the variability across studies. Although the increased costs associated with sepsis are evident, the heterogeneity in cost calculations and study design limits the overall precision of the findings. Due to this heterogeneity, it was not feasible to conduct comparisons across countries or to summarize the contribution of disaggregated cost components, such as surgical, outpatient, readmission, or medication-related expenses, to overall post-discharge costs. Furthermore, best practices for healthcare costing analyses recommend against direct comparison of costs between different jurisdictions due to the lack of harmonized reporting of costing methodologies [52].

Our review highlights the high post-discharge burden associated with sepsis hospitalizations, emphasizing the need for a policy response and future research. To inform targeted interventions, future research should focus on identifying risk factors that place individuals at greater risk of sepsis and, thus, resource utilization. While measures of health-related quality of life were outside of the scope of this review, future health economic evaluations should consider measures such as health utility values, and metrics of health-related quality of life over time, such as disability life years (DALYs) and quality adjusted life years (QALYs). Lastly, all included studies reported data collected prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. Future research on the pandemic’s impact on sepsis-related healthcare costs could support preparedness efforts, given the changes to critical care delivery and health system pressures seen during this time. In a healthcare system challenged by an aging population and constrained resources, it is increasingly important to identify the populations that accrue high healthcare costs and implement strategies to reduce the burden on the healthcare system.

In this study, we describe the healthcare costs of sepsis survivors after their initial hospitalization. Across all geographic regions represented in the studies, sepsis survivors face high healthcare costs, and these healthcare costs persist for years after discharge. Our results demonstrate the significant health economic burden of sepsis on health payors. Efforts to reduce the burden of sepsis, as outlined in the World Health Assembly resolution 70.7, may help to reduce its economic impact.