Narrowband photodetectors with precise spectral control
offer significant
potential for applications such as color imaging and machine vision.
However, existing demonstrations have encountered challenges due to
restricted absorption, the need for additional filters, or the inclusion
of thick absorbing layers to facilitate charge collection filtering
mechanisms. These constraints have resulted in suboptimal detectivity,
inadequate color control, or slow response. Here, we exploit cavity
resonance enhancement to demonstrate a highly spectral selective and
robust perovskite photodetector, showing 2.4-fold EQE enhancement
at the main narrowband peak with respect to a broadband photodetector
counterpart of the same perovskite thickness. This device architecture
achieves peak external quantum efficiency of 80%, responsivity of
0.41 A W–1, and detectivity of 3.7 × 1011Jones at the main narrowband peak, with a secondary signal
below 450 nm that can be mitigated with advanced photonic crystal
as proposed. Additionally, the resonant cavity-enhanced photodetector
offers a rapid switching of 0.9 μs and low noise of 0.57 pW
Hz–1/2. Our demonstration shows precise tuning of
the main narrowband photodetection characteristics across a 100 nm
spectral range by simply varying the thickness of the perovskite layer,
ensuring device efficiency and stability across the wavelength region
around 560 to 660 nm, where most perovskite devices suffer from degradation
due to halide segregation. This work demonstrates the practical integration
of resonant cavity enhancement in perovskite photodetectors and paves
the way for high-performance optical sensing, multispectral imaging,
and wavelength-selective photonic devices.

Photodetectors serve as components that
transform optical signals
into electrical signals for processing by electronic circuits. They have found widespread implementation across
various domains, including optical communication, autonomous driving,
image sensing, environmental monitoring, and fluorescence imaging,
among others.,Spectral selectivity across the
full color spectrum is essential for color-specific applications such
as machine vision, multispectral sensing, and hazard detection. In numerous applications, it is essential to achieve required signal
detection accuracy by reducing background noise and minimizing cross-talk.,To achieve narrowband and controlled spectral response, conventional
technology uses broadband monocrystalline semiconductors such as silicon
and InGaAs, along with accompanying optics as filters. However, this approach introduces spatial resolution limitations,
color artifacts due to imperfect filtering and intensity loss caused
by the filters partially blocking incoming light of desired wavelength,
which reduces the photodetection quantum efficiency.,Recently, selective types of organic materials with narrow absorption
spectra have enabled inherent narrowband photodetection, but their
spectral control is constrained by the absorption nature of organic
materials which typically have a spectral full width at half-maximum
(FWHM) above 100 nm. Moreover, charge
collection narrowing (CCN) approach has gained popularity among emerging
absorbing materials, including polymers and organics.,In this approach, spectral selectivity is achieved by modulating
the charge collection process, in which the thickness of the absorption
layer is adjusted to match the spectrally dependent penetration depth
of light. However, narrowband photodetection
through CCN suffers from low external quantum efficiency (EQE) and
slow response time due to a very thick absorbing layer.,Alternatively, the implementation of cavity resonance within photodetectors
was first demonstrated in III–V semiconductor photodetectors
and offers numerous benefits. This approach enables the use of thin
active layers, leading to high quantum efficiencies and rapid response
times, as well as allowing for adjustable FWHM, precise narrowband
wavelength selectivity and sensitivity to incident light angles.,However, fabricating III–V semiconductor photodetectors involves
high costs due to intricate manufacturing processes.

Halide
perovskites have arisen as attractive light harvesting materials
due to their facile bandgap tunability across the ultraviolet to the
near-infrared spectral region, as well as solution processability
and large absorption coefficient, charge carrier mobility, and collection
efficiency.,Perovskite devices have shown
great photodetection performance under zero bias that enables self-powered
operation, reaching an EQE of 90%, responsivity of 0.41 A W–1at 630 nm, and response time of 2 μs. This performance rivals that of commercial silicon photodiodes with
a similar active area. However, the broadband
nature of absorption in these perovskites limits their use for narrowband
photodetection applications. To date, narrowband photodetection using
a perovskite as the absorber material has been demonstrated with external
filtering and CCN. Reported performance in perovskite-based narrowband
photodetectors using external filtering shows an EQE of 50%, an FWHM
of 50 nm, and a response time of 200 μs, whereas photodetectors utilizing CCN achieve an EQE of
10%, an FWHM of 30 nm, and a response time of 10 μs through
CCN. More demonstrations of external
filtering and CCN,−in perovskite photodetectors are detailed inTable S2.

Existing methods, including external filtering
and CCN rely heavily
on compositional engineering of halide perovskites for spectral response
tuning. While halide perovskites offer flexibility in bandgap tunability
through composition variation, their device performance across the
entire spectrum is not uniformly high. For example, high bromide-to-iodide
ratios can lead to phase segregation, which adversely affects efficiency
and stability, resulting in a shortage of effective perovskite devices
for the 560 to 660 nm range.,Such gaps in the spectrum
limit their application capabilities and complicate system design.
Therefore, achieving fine-tuning of the narrowband photodetection
spectrum without intricate compositional adjustments, particularly
in the phase-segregation-prone regions, is essential but remains challenging
with currently reported techniques. In contrast, an unexplored alternative
in the perovskite photodetection field is the use of a resonant cavity,
which has shown improved performance and flexibility in III–V
semiconductors, silicon, graphene, organic, and colloidal quantum
dots photodetectors.−This approach enhances efficiency by localizing the electric field
within the absorbing layer within a narrow spectral range of around
an FWHM of 30 nm, thereby allowing a
reduced absorber thickness down to 50 nm thick and shorter charge carrier collection time than comparable
controls without resonance effects. More details can be found inSupporting Note 2.

In this study, we report
high-performance narrowband photodetectors
with an operational window tunable between 560 and 660 nm by using
a stable perovskite composition and adjusting the layer thickness
within the resonant cavity, covering a wavelength range that is inaccessible
through perovskite compositional engineering. Our approach features
a resonant cavity-enhanced perovskite photodetector that incorporates
a combination of metal and dielectric mirrors. This approach demonstrates
a main narrow spectral operation window with an FWHM of 38 nm, where
light confinement boosts absorption and enables the use of perovskite
layers of tens of nanometers. This thin character, in turn, results
in better charge carrier collection for quantum efficiency and responsivity
up to 80% and 0.41 A W–1, respectively, which represents
a 2.4-fold enhancement in performance with respect to a broadband
photodetector counterpart of the same thickness. The photonic character
of the device is confirmed by the electrical signal in the UV-blue
region below 450 nm, which can be mitigated by employing alternative,
advanced configurations as calculated. The incorporation of hybrid
metal-dielectric mirrors into perovskite photodetectors demonstrates
minimal modification to conventional device architecture, offering
flexible and effective spectral tuning across the visible region,
with potential for adaptation to other absorbers, enabling applications
like high-resolution spectral detection, such as high-precision color
imaging, wavelength-selective sensing, and advanced optical communication
systems.

We
employ a standard perovskite solar cell architecture for our photodetector
design, consisting of indium tin oxide (ITO)/[2-(3,6-Dimethoxy-9H-carbazol-9-yl)­ethyl]­phosphonic
acid (MeO-2PACz)/ FA0.8Cs0.2Pb­(I0.6Br0.4)3perovskite/carbon-60 (C60)/bathocuproine (BCP)/silver (Ag), as illustrated inFigurea. The thicknesses of each
layer are subsequently tuned for optimum optical and tunable device
properties. In this configuration, ITO and Ag serve as electrodes,
MeO-2PACz is a self-assembled monolayer functioning as the hole-transport
layer, while C60and BCP are utilized as the electron-transport
layer and interface buffer layer, respectively. Beyond acting as contact
to extract electrons, Ag acts as a mirror for the optical cavity,
which is completed by the multilayer structure beneath the ITO functioning
as a photonic crystal.

Resonant cavity-enhanced
perovskite photodetector. (a) Schematic
of the resonant cavity photodetector. Photonic crystals consist of
three alternating TiO2and SiO2bilayers. (b)
Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM image (left), and energy-dispersive X-ray
(EDX) chemical map (right) of the resonant cavity photodetector. (c)
Simulated spectral absorption across the cross-section of the device
stack. The white line shows simulated reflectance of the structure.
(d) Simulated ratio of integrated absorption within layers of the
structure and the resulting reflection from the whole device stack.
Absorption within TiO2, SiO2, C60, BCP, and Ag is detailed inFigure S6. Dashed line shows the perovskite absorptance in a reference device
structure.

We selected SiO2and TiO2as the building
blocks for the photonic crystal due to their physical and chemical
robustness and suitability to be deposited on glass. These materials are transparent in the optical range and
have refractive indices closely matched to those of ITO and perovskite
(Figure S1). This strategy takes advantage
of the inherent photodetector architecture, adding an additional unit
cell to the photonic crystal. To optimize the photodetector device
structure within the cavity, a transfer matrix model was employed.Figure S1provides
the optical constants of the materials used in the model. The optical
constants of the (FA0.8Cs0.2Pb­(I0.6Br0.4)3) perovskite layer were derived from
fitting its transmittance and reflectance spectra at different angles
(see theMethodssection). Initial simulations
focused on a SiO2/TiO2reflector with quarter-wavelength
thickness and the transport layers, as shown inFigures S2 and S3, respectively, followed by the incorporation
of a conventional broadband photodetector device structure, which
is also the reference photodetector for comparison (see the standalone
device architecture inFigure S4). To assess
the best parameters of the resonant cavity photodetector structure,
we conducted simulations varying parameters such as the number of
photonic crystal SiO2/TiO2bilayers (Figure S5) and perovskite thickness (Figure S6). The findings indicate that a resonant
cavity design with a resonance wavelength above 550 nm, composed of
three photonic crystal bilayers and supporting a single-cavity mode,
already demonstrates strong resonance within the perovskite layer.
The thicknesses of the various layers were then fine-tuned to achieve
a sharp resonance and strong absorption within the perovskite layer.
The ITO thickness was varied between 50 and 160 nm as variations within
this range were found to have no significant impact on device performance.
The perovskite layer was optimized within a range of 30 and 100 nm
to effectively shift the cavity resonance. These optimizations led
to the proposal of a resonant cavity photodetector structure that
not only demonstrates strong resonance but is also simple to fabricate,
requiring minimal photonic crystal bilayers.

The experimental
realization of the designed resonant cavity perovskite
photodetector is displayed inFigureb, where cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field
scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) reveals the
structure consisting of three bilayers of SiO2(96 nm)
and TiO2(56 nm), along with ITO (90 nm), MeO-2PACz (∼1
nm), perovskite (82 nm), C60(40 nm), BCP (8 nm), and Ag
(100 nm). Since the organic components have similar atomic compositions
and densities, the thicknesses of C60and BCP layers were
confirmed by thickness measurement using an atomic force microscope
(AFM). The HAADF-STEM analysis carried out on a 1 × 0.5 μm
section confirms the high uniformity of the e-beam deposited SiO2/TiO2photonic crystal and sputtered ITO layers,
which contribute to the device’s high optical quality. The
homogeneous photonic crystal and ITO layers facilitate the high-quality
growth of perovskite film, akin to its typical growth on an ITO layer
on glass substrates, resulting in a high-performing device as we will
discuss later. The perovskite layer itself is also uniform and smooth,
as evidenced by AFM, which shows an average roughness of 4.44 nm (Figure S7). Elemental mapping by energy-dispersive
X-ray (EDX) further confirms the well-defined material interfaces,
with a pinhole-free perovskite layer that is essential for the photodetector’s
operational capability. This analysis demonstrates that the photodetector,
fabricated on the underlying photonic crystal multilayers, exhibits
no negative impact and features uniformly high-quality layers.

Simulations of the resonant cavity perovskite photodetector, as
shown inFigurec,d,
that closely align with the experimental cross-sectional images, shows
spectrally maximized effective absorption at the resonance centered
at 630 nm, within the typical wavelength range for standard pure red
in commercial LEDs. The narrowband absorption
exhibits an FWHM of 40 nm, with 83.4% of light absorbed by the 82
nm thick perovskite. Simultaneously, as shown inFigure S6, the parasitic absorption is minimized as compared
to the reference structure, which is crucial for optimizing EQE values
in the narrowband photodetector. In contrast, the reference photodetector
without the integrated photonic crystal shows a broadband absorption
profile, with light absorption gradually increasing with increasing
perovskite thickness, achieving around 80% absorption above 280 nm
thick perovskite. The simulation demonstrates that light absorption
in the perovskite layer is enhanced by more than a factor of 2, as
determined by comparing the absorption of the resonant cavity structure
to that of the reference photodetector (seeFigure S6). Therefore, such a design not only narrows the spectral
response but also substantially reduces the perovskite thickness,
which enables more efficient charge extraction, as discussed later.

As shown inFigurea, the reflectance curve of
the resonant cavity perovskite photodetector with an 82 nm thick perovskite
layer exhibits a sharp resonance with an FWHM of 38 nm and a minimum
reflectance of 4.7% at 632 nm, enabling high selectivity at this wavelength.
The reflectance curve is strongly anticorrelated with the EQE curve,
as shown inFigureb, achieving a peak EQE of 79.8% at 632 nm, also with a narrowband
FWHM of 38 nm. The device operates in a self-powered 0 V bias unless
otherwise specified. For comparison, we examined the reference photodetector
without a photonic crystal (seeFigure S4), also featuring an 82 nm thick perovskite absorber. The reference
photodetector shows a broadband EQE curve spanning 310 to 690 nm,
achieving 32.8% at 632 nm. As shown inFigurec, the EQE enhancement, calculated as the
ratio between the EQE of the resonant cavity and that of the reference
photodetector, demonstrates a 2.4-fold enhancement at 632 nm, closely
aligning with the simulation results. The high reflectance of 84.5%
at off-resonance wavelengths suggests strong filtering, leading to
low EQE signals outside the resonance peak. The EQE enhancement outside
the resonance wavelength is nearly zero, confirming strong narrowband
selectivity by the resonant cavity, which is crucial for avoiding
artifacts in practical applications. As our current photonic crystal
does not suppress the photodetection response below 450 nm, as detailed
inSupporting Note 1, more advanced photonic
architectures can be implemented to mitigate this secondary signal,
as shown inFigure S8.

Tunability of cavity
resonance with perovskite thickness. (a) Measured
reflectance and (b) EQE of resonant cavity photodetectors with varying
perovskite thickness from 38 nm (brown) to 82 nm (yellow). (c) EQE
enhancement defined as the ratio of EQE of cavity photodetector to
that of the reference photodetector with the same perovskite thickness
as labeled in the graph. (d) Simulation depicting the shifting of
cavity resonance with varying perovskite thickness. Measured EQE narrowband
peak wavelengths were mapped on the graph.

The photonic character of our resonant cavity photodetector
enables
fine-tuning of the narrowband operational window by simply adjusting
the thickness of the perovskite layer, as illustrated inFigured. To validate the
simulation findings, we fabricated a series of resonant cavity photodetectors
with active perovskite thicknesses of 38, 49, 56, 65, 70, and 82 nm.
The perovskite thickness was achieved by diluting the perovskite precursor
concentration to 0.17, 0.20, 0.22, 0.25, 0.27, and 0.30 M, respectively.
As shown inFigurea,b, decreasing the perovskite thickness from 82 to 38 nm causes
a blue shift in the resonance, from 632 to 562 nm, observed in both
the reflectance and the corresponding narrowband EQE peak, which is
attributed to the reduction in cavity length. Additionally, the intensity
of narrowband EQE peaks gradually decreases as the resonance wavelength
decreases, mirroring the decreasing resonance strength seen in the
reflectance curve. Nevertheless, when evaluating the EQE ratio between
the resonant cavity and reference photodetectors with their corresponding
perovskite thickness, there is significant EQE enhancement in all
cases ranging from 2.4-fold to 1.5-fold as the cavity resonance shifts
from 632 to 562 nm, respectively, with decreasing perovskite thickness
(seeFigurec), which
matches the trend of the calculated resonance strength (Figured). The calculations shown
inFigured demonstrate
the enormous potential of our self-powered, resonant cavity photodetector
to achieve a narrowband response over an operational window from 560
to 660 nm.

Figurea,b demonstrates the angle
dependency observed in the resonant cavity photodetector with an 82
nm thick perovskite absorber. As the specular reflectance is measured
at angles ranging from 8 to 60°, the wavelength of the reflectance
minimum shifts from 630 to 574 nm, while the reflectance minimum value
increases from 5.3 to 38.9%. This indicates the strongest resonance
occurs at normal incidence, the angle for which we optimized the device
through optical design. The narrowband EQE spectra again show an anticorrelation
with the reflectance curve with the EQE peak shifting from 632 nm
at 0° (630 nm at 8°) to 574 nm at 60°. The EQE presented
here is normalized to that at normal incidence. As the angle increases,
both reflectance and narrowband EQE exhibit slight broadening, with
FWHM increasing from 38 nm at 0° to 48 nm at 60°, which
still maintains the narrowband characteristics. Thus, varying the
incidence angle between 0° and 60° results in a parametrizable
resonance shift up to 60 nm in narrowband response, which holds potential
for applications requiring angular optical alignment. Further measurements,
as shown inFigure S9for resonant cavity
photodetectors with 56, 65, and 70 nm thick perovskite absorbers,
reveal a similar trend, confirming the consistency of these angle-dependent
observations. This angle dependency is typical for resonant cavity
structures due to changes in the optical path, the effective refractive
index of the medium, and interference at various angles of incidence.

Angle-dependent cavity resonance. (a) Measured reflectance
(from
8 to 60°) and (b) EQE of resonant cavity photodetectors consisting
of 82 nm thick perovskite layer with increasing incident illumination
angle from 0° (yellow) to 60° (brown). (c) EQE enhancement
defined as the ratio of EQE of the cavity photodetector to that of
the reference photodetector with the same perovskite thickness, which
are both 82 nm. The dashed line shows a linear fitting across the
points. (d) Simulation depicting the shifting of cavity resonance
with illumination angle for a resonant cavity photodetector with 82
nm thick perovskite. Measured EQE narrowband peak wavelengths were
mapped on the graph.

Angle-dependent EQE measurements were also conducted
for the reference
photodetector, allowing for the calculation of the angle-dependent
EQE enhancement shown inFigurec. As the angle increases from 0 to 60°, the EQE
enhancement decreases from 2.3-fold (a slightly different value than
inFiguredue to
batch-to-batch variation) to 1.8-fold, consistent with the reflectance
curve where resonance strength decreases with increasing angle. Angular-dependent
simulations, shown inFigured and overlaid with the experimental EQE peaks, reveal that
the experimental results align with the simulated absorption peaks
within the perovskite layer across the 0 to 60° range. The pronounced
decrease in EQE enhancement with increasing angle, which closely resembles
a linear decline, offers effective control over angular sensitivity
with simple calibration. Additionally, for scenarios where signals
come from a specific direction, such as in optical communications
and time-of-flight sensing, this characteristic helps filter out background
noise from wide angles, thereby enhancing accuracy, reducing cross-talk,
and minimizing artifacts.

As shown inFigurea, the champion resonant
cavity perovskite photodetector with an 82 nm thick perovskite absorber
layer achieves a responsivity of 0.41 A W–1at 632
nm and a specific detectivity of 3.7 × 1011Jones
considering the responsivity at 0 V bias, device area, and estimated
noise current detailed in the following paragraph. We note that both
our ITO and photonic crystal substrates were recycled and reused for
up to five iterations. The devices fabricated from recycled substrates
exhibited negligible performance degradation, as evidenced by consistent
EQE measurements throughout the recycling process, enabling effective
device optimization using a limited number of substrates (Figure S10). The reference perovskite photodetector
with an 82 nm thick perovskite absorber shows responsivity of 0.17
A W–1and specific detectivity of 1.6 × 1011Jones at 632 nm. Noise equivalent power (NEP) of the champion
resonant cavity photodetector with an 82 nm thick perovskite, calculated
from the maximum specific detectivity across the spectra, is 0.57
pW Hz–1/2, while that of the reference photodetector
is 1.32 pW Hz–1/2. The enhancement in responsivity,
specific detectivity, and NEP is 2.4-fold, similar to the observations
in EQE spectra, highlighting the importance of photonics in improving
the photodetector’s metric.

Narrowband perovskite photodetector performance.
(a) Responsivity
and specific detectivity of resonant cavity photodetectors across
increasing perovskite thickness. Responsivity and specific detectivity
of reference photodetector with 82 nm thick perovskite in the dashed
line. All of the following including both reference and resonant cavity
photodetectors have an 82 nm thick perovskite absorber layer. (b)
Current density–voltage curve of reference and resonant cavity
photodetectors. Source meter noise was shown as scattered dots. (c)
Transient response of reference and resonant enhanced cavity perovskite
photodetectors. The rise and fall times were calculated from the time
for the signal to change from 10 to 90% of the peak response. (d)
Frequency response of reference and resonant cavity perovskite photodetectors.
The modulation bandwidth is defined as the frequency range over which
the optical power is reduced to half of its maximum. (e) Linear dynamic
range (LDR) of reference and resonant cavity perovskite photodetectors.
The slope of the log–log curve fitting is α = 0.97, which
is close to unity, showing an accurate linear fitting. Dotted horizontal
lines show maximum and minimum current density points for LDR calculation.
(f) Photocurrent stability of unencapsulated photodetectors measured
in air under 0 V bias. The photodetectors were illuminated with a
lamp emitting at a wavelength of 635 nm and a power intensity of 3
mW cm–2. The small fluctuations in the photocurrent
signals could potentially be due to fluctuations in lamp intensity.
Inset: EQE comparison of fresh device and after 24 h of exposure in
ambient air. The small red shift in the EQE spectra after 24 h of
exposure for both illuminated and dark pixels, likely due to phase
segregation in mixed-halide perovskites photovoltaics.

When the perovskite thickness decreases from 82
to 38 nm, the responsivity
narrowband peak blue shifts from 632 to 562 nm, and the responsivity
decreases from 0.41 to 0.22 A W–1due to the weakening
of resonance strength, showing a similar trend of narrowband response
as observed in the EQE spectra inFigureb. This follows with a decrease in specific
detectivity from 3.7 × 1011Jones to 2.0 × 1011Jones, followed by an increase in NEP from 0.57 to 1.06
pW Hz–1/2. As a result of the effective incorporation
of resonant cavity enhancement into our perovskite device, the EQE,
responsivity, and specific detectivity of our resonant cavity-enhanced
perovskite photodetector, across the tunable operational window of
632 to 562 nm, surpass those of narrowband perovskite detectors realized
through various methods (Figure S11 and Table S1), as well as broadband perovskite photodetectors (Table S2). Additionally, our resonant cavity-enhanced
perovskite photodetector shows competitive specific detectivity and
NEP with reported visible range (300–700 nm) photodetectors
from other absorber materials, as detailed inSupporting Note 2.

We focus now on the reference and
the resonant cavity perovskite
photodetectors, both with a perovskite thickness of 82 nm, to further
examine the effect of the resonant cavity on the photodetector’s
performance. From the current–voltage curve inFigureb, the extracted dark current
density of both photodetectors is around 1.8 × 10–10A cm–2at 0 V and 1.7 × 10–7A cm–2at −0.2 V, which is expected, as
this metric is not affected by the photonic environment. A low dark
current, typically achieved by minimizing leakage current, trap-assisted
tunneling, and thermal generation of electron–hole pairs, is
desirable because it improves the signal-to-noise and sensitivity
of the photodetector. The calculated
shot noise current (see theMethodssection)
extracted from the dark current measured at −0.2 V is estimated
to be around 230 fA Hz–1/2for both photodetectors.
Since the experiments were conducted in ambient air, the calculated
thermal noise current for both photodetectors at room temperature
is 16 fA Hz–1/2(see theMethodssection). Considering the contribution from both the shot and thermal
noise, the estimated total noise current of both photodetectors is
around 250 fA Hz–1/2. As the current–voltage
curves of the reference and the photonic photodetectors are very similar,
the resistance, dark current, and thus the calculated shot noise and
thermal noise are maintained, confirming that these metrics are not
affected by the photonic character of the devices. We note that dark
current values are similar independently of perovskite thickness,
although they increase after three months of storage (Figure S12). A noise comparison with photodetectors
from various absorber materials is included inSupporting Note 2.

The electrical time response and
modulation bandwidth of a photodetector
are crucial metrics that limit the overall speed and bandwidth of
the device, affecting its ability to accurately capture fast-changing
optical signals and determine its suitability for high-speed applications
such as optical communication, time-resolved spectroscopy, and real-time
imaging systems. As shown inFigurec, the rise and fall times of both the reference and
resonant cavity photodetectors are 0.92 and 0.85 μs, respectively,
showing minimal impact of the photonic character on the device’s
electrical performance. The instrument response of the measurement
system is validated with a faster-responding silicon photodetector,
as shown inFigure S13. As shown inFigured, the modulation
bandwidth of both the reference and resonant cavity photodetectors
is 500 kHz, also a minimal effect of the photonic character on the
photodetection speed. A photodetector’s response speed is related
to the charge carrier generation rate and transport speed, which depend
on the photodetector’s material, active layer thickness, device
area (capacitance and resistance), electrode resistance, and device
design. Previous work on perovskite photodetectors
has shown that reducing device area decreases geometric capacitance,
minimizing the resistor-capacitor (RC) time constant and significantly
increasing modulation bandwidth.,High-bandwidth perovskite
devices, up to tens of MHz, can be achieved with device areas around
0.01 mm2(which is 1/100 of our device area). Therefore, when considering photodetectors with
comparable active areas, our resonant cavity-enhanced devices demonstrate
superior response speeds compared to narrowband perovskite photodetectors
using CCN due to minimized thickness which fastens charge carrier
collection (seeFigure S11). Additionally,
they exhibit competitive response rates relative to other narrowband
perovskite photodetectors, broadband perovskite photodetectors (Table S2), and narrowband detectors made from
different materials (Supporting Note 2).

Linear dynamic range (LDR) is a quantity that demonstrates a photodetector’s
ability to maintain linearity across a wide range of light levels
and is crucial for applications needing precise and reliable light
detection. By assessing the photo response
of our photodetectors across varying light intensities, we observe
a wide LDR exceeding 120 dB for both devices, as illustrated inFiguree, indicating minimal
impact on the photonic character. The achieved LDR is competitive
with both high-performing broadband,and narrowband,perovskite photodetectors. Long operational stability is crucial
for practical applications and must be checked to validate the accuracy
of measurements. The photocurrent of both the reference and resonant
cavity photodetectors shows negligible degradation within 24 h of
illumination in ambient air without encapsulation (Figuref), demonstrating encouraging
stability.

As shown inFigure S11, while narrowband
perovskite photodetectors using external filters and CCN often exhibit
lower performance compared to broadband photodetectors due to inherent
losses, our self-powered resonant cavity perovskite photodetectors
show notable improvements in EQE, responsivity, specific detectivity,
and noise equivalent power at the main narrowband peak. Additionally,
they maintain high performance in terms of time response, modulation
bandwidth, noise current, linear dynamic range, and stability when
compared to parent broadband reference photodetectors (Table S2). The enhancements in EQE, responsivity,
and specific detectivity are attributed to the ability of the cavity
to boost the response at the resonance, without compromising noise,
sensitivity, and speed. However, our resonant cavity device displays
inferior spectral purity compared with other approaches in the literature
since the photonic crystal stopband has partial transmission in the
300 to 450 nm range, leading to a secondary spectral response in the
photodetector. Our simulations suggest that optimizing the photonic
crystal thickness could mitigate this effect (seeFigure S8).

One-dimensional photonic crystals offer
exceptional versatility
by adjusting parameters such as layer thickness, number of layers,
and refractive index contrast. Here, we have shown that the main narrowband
peak of a photodetector can be tuned across a 100 nm range from 560
to 660 nm just by finely changing the perovskite thickness without
altering its composition. Our approach contrasts with reported methods
such as external filtering, internal filtering using CCN and tandem
devices (Figure S11), which would rely
on perovskite compositions with high bromide-to-iodide ratios that
are prone to degradation due to unwanted phase formation. The resonant cavity strategy, therefore, opens
new avenues to achieve robust narrowband detection in wavelength ranges
crucial for applications such as medical imaging, environmental monitoring,
or remote sensing.,Indeed, our simulations demonstrate
that similar performance can be achieved with other perovskite compositions,
potentially extending the operational spectral window over the visible
spectrum, including the blue and green regions (Figures S14 and S15). In addition, the flexibility of the
design offers potential for further expansion, such as incorporating
high-quality solution-processed dense photonic crystals,or employing electrically responsive photonic crystals to achieve
in situ tunable photodetectors.

We demonstrate a resonant cavity-enhanced
perovskite photodetector
that features tunable, angle-dependent, and strong narrowband response
capabilities. Through a combination of simulations and experimental
optimizations, we identified the optimal resonant cavity configuration,
utilizing a perovskite absorbing layer as thin as 82 nm. This configuration
achieves a main narrowband photo response with an enhancement factor
up to 2.4-fold, yielding an EQE of 80%, a responsivity of 0.41 A W–1, and an FWHM of 38 nm. By adjusting the perovskite
layer thickness between 82 and 38 nm, the narrowband peak can be tuned
from 632 to 562 nm, with all devices showing enhanced photoresponse.
The resonant cavity-enhanced perovskite photodetector demonstrates
outstanding overall performance, including a rapid response of 0.92
μs (rise) and 0.85 μs (fall), a modulation bandwidth of
500 kHz, low noise of 230 fA Hz–1/2, high specific
detectivity of up to 3.7 × 1011Jones, a low noise
equivalent power of 0.57 pW Hz–1/2, and a broad
linear detection range exceeding 120 dB. It also offers precise spectral
control and directional sensitivity. The fabrication of this device
requires only a minimal amount of photonic crystal and a very thin
absorbing layer, making it highly efficient and desirable. These photodetectors
demonstrate potential for narrowband photodetection applications where
fast switching, high detectivity, precise spectral control, and angular
control are crucial, such as in machine vision, multispectral sensing,
and hazard detection.

The simulation of reference and
resonant cavity structures are based on the transfer matrix method, by inputting refractive index of each material
as shown inFigure S1. The absorption within
each layer is calculated by integrating it across the absorption image
map obtained from the transfer matrix method.

The spectral response
(from 200 to 1300 nm) of the transmittance and reflectance of a FA0.8Cs0.2Pb­(I0.6Br0.4)3perovskite film is measured using an Agilent Cary 7000 Universal
Measurement Spectrophotometer with the universal measurement accessory
(UMA) at angles of 0, 8, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60°, respectively,
for both s- and p-polarization. The perovskite film is deposited on
an ITO/MeO-2PACz to ensure consistent perovskite growth, as implemented
in the photodetector device. We employ a code based on the transfer
matrix method to extract the spectral response of the perovskite complex
refractive index (n+ ik) based
on the Forouhi-Bloomer model using three
oscillators by fitting the angular response of the reflectance and
transmittance spectra. We implement a genetic algorithm to optimize
the complex refractive index fitting, by including the thicknesses
of the different layers, according to the experimental characterization
in the structure as one of the fitting parameters.

1-Dimensional
photonic crystals made of three pairs of alternating titanium dioxide
(TiO2) and silicon dioxide (SiO2) layers were
deposited on glass substrates. The thickness of each layer was TiO2= (70 ± 2) nm and SiO2= (90 ± 2) nm.
The photonic crystal was deposited in an e-beam evaporation system
with plasma source assistance (Syrus 710 Pro, Bühler Leybold
Optics). The base pressure of the system was 2 × 10–6mbar. TiO2and SiO2were deposited at 0.25
and 0.6 nm s–1rates, respectively.

ITO electrodes were sputtered on glass
substrates (for reference PD) and photonic crystal substrates (for
cavity PD) with a home-built setup in the Class 10,000 clean room
in the Electrical Engineering Division, Department of Engineering,
University of Cambridge. A metal mask was used to pattern the ITO
electrodes. An In2O3/SnO290/10 wt
% target was used for sputtering at an argon flow of 20 sccm, pressure
of 5 mTorr, and power of 40 W. The rate of sputtering was 3.7 nm per
minute, resulting in an ITO conductivity of 1800 S cm–1measured with a 4-point-probe and an ITO thickness of 83 nm measured
under AFM.

Isopropyl alcohol (IPA, 99.5%), ethanol (EtOH),
N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO, anhydrous, 99.9%), chlorobenzene (CB, anhydrous, 99.8%), cesium
bromide (CsBr, 99.999%), cesium iodide (CsI, 99.999%), and polyvinylpyrrolidone
(PVP) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Formamidinium bromide (FABr)
and formamidinium iodide (FAI) were purchased from Greatcell Solar.
Lead­(II) bromide (PbBr2, 99.999%), lead­(II) iodide (PbI2), and [2-(3,6-dimethoxy-9H-carbazol-9-yl)­ethyl]­phosphonic
acid (MeO-2PACz) were purchased from TCI. Carbon-60 (C60) and bathocuproine (BCP) were purchased from Creaphys and Ossilla,
respectively. Silver (Ag) was purchased from KJ Lesker. All chemicals
were used without further purification.

Perovskite precursor was prepared by dissolving FAI (0.48 mol), FABr
(0.32 mol), CsI (0.12 mol), CsBr (0.08 mol), PbI2(0.6
mol), and PbBr2(0.4 mol) in DMF: DMSO at a ratio of 4:1.
The dissolved precursor solution is then further diluted to different
concentrations for thickness variation.

Recycled substrates were sonicated in acetone 2 times for 10 min
each. Both recycled and new ITO sputtered glass and photonic crystal
substrates were then cleaned in detergent, deionized water, acetone,
and isopropanol under ultrasonication for 10 min each, then treated
with UV ozone for 15 min. The substrates were then transferred to
a nitrogen-filled glovebox. MeO-2PACz (3 mg mL–1in ethanol) was dropped on the substrate for 10 s before being spin-coated
onto the substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s and immediately annealed at
100 °C for 10 min. PVP (0.1 mg mL–1in IPA)
was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s and post-annealed at 100 °C
for 5 min to improve wettability. The perovskite precursor was 2-step
spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 10 s and then 6000 rpm for 40 s. During
10 s of the second spin step, 100 μL of chlorobenzene antisolvent
was dripped onto the substrate, followed by a postannealing at 100
°C for 15 min. C60(20 nm), BCP (8 nm), and Ag (100
nm) were then sequentially thermal evaporated on the perovskite film.
The device area defined by the overlap area between ITO and the Ag
electrode was 4.5 mm2.

The film thicknesses of the structure
were assessed using a Bruker Dimension Icon AFM with a Bruker Scanasyst-Air
cantilever running on peak force tapping mode. A scan was made across
the depth of either a scratch made on the soft perovskite film with
a razor blade or an IPA cleaned marker pen line drawn before ITO sputtering
to reveal a clean edge without ITO. Data was analyzed with WSxM 5.0
software.

The cavity resonance (reflectance) was
characterized using an Agilent Cary 7000 Universal Measurement Spectrophotometer
with the universal measurement accessory (UMA). Due to the alignment
limitation caused by the detector blocking the excitation beam path,
the smallest reflectance angle that can be measured is 6°, where
0° is defined as perpendicular to the sample surface. The angle-resolved
reflectance was measured by setting the sample angle at θ =
7.5, 15, 22.5, 30, 45, and 60° to the excitation beam, and the
specular reflectance was collected.

The responsivity
spectrum was measured with the Bentham PVE300 system across a spectral
range of 300 to 750 nm with a step size of 2 and 5 nm. The system
was equipped with a xenon-quartz tungsten halogen dual source, a single
monochromator as light source, a chopper operating at a frequency
of 600 Hz, and the device response was recovered with the Bentham
474 transformer, ultralow-noise preamplifier, and Bentham 496 lock-in
amplifier. A silicon reference cell was used for the calibration.
The angle-resolved responsivity was measured by placing the device
on an adjustable angle plate (Thorlabs AP180) at θ = 7.5, 15,
22.5, 30, 45, and 60° to the excitation beam, calibrated with
silicon reference cell placed at similar angles, device area of both
reference cell and perovskite photodetector kept constant with a metal
mask.

wherehis the Planck constant,cis the speed of light,qis a unit charge,
and λ is the wavelength.

whereAis the device area.
NEP is a standard metric used to quantify the sensitivity and minimum
detectable power per square root of a photodetector.

The photodetector
was excited by modulated light emitted from a laser (Osram PL450B
or Thorlabs L638P150), where the laser was aligned a meter away over
free space and driven by an Agilent 33250A Function Generator (square
wave, 50% duty cycle at a certain frequency). The resulting photodetector
response was measured by an oscilloscope (Tektronix DPO 3032) to investigate
the rise and fall times. The electrical time response determines the
time a photodetector takes to react to changes in input light intensity
and is defined by the rise and fall times of the photocurrent, changing
between 10% and 90% of its steady-state peak and ground values.

The frequency response of the photodetector was evaluated in a similar
way to that for the response time measurement, using a vector network
analyzer (Keysight FieldFox N9913A). The laser was biased by a source
meter to the DC operating point; meanwhile, the −10 dBm radio
frequency signal from the vector network analyzer was combined with
the DC signal via a bias-tee. The received optical signal from the
photodetector was then fed back into the vector network analyzer,
hence the frequency response and bandwidth of the device can be directly
obtained from S21. The modulation bandwidth refers to the
frequency range over which the detector can effectively detect and
respond to light without significant signal distortion. Consequently,
photodetectors with a larger bandwidth enable a higher signal transmission
capability. The threshold is commonly defined as the frequency range
over which the optical power is reduced to half of its maximum.

TheI–Vcurve and dark
current of photodetectors were measured using a Keithley 2450 Source
Measure Unit. The linear dynamic range of the photodetector is measured
separately for low and high incident light power.

whereImaxandIminare the upper and lower current bounds of
the linear response, respectively.

The low-power range was measured
using a xenon-quartz tungsten
lamp, and the lamp intensity was reduced through the optical density
filters, and the resulting response was captured through the Bentham
474 transformer, ultralow-noise preamplifier, and Bentham 496 lock-in
amplifier. The high-power range was excited using a Thorlabs L638P150
laser and optical density filters and measured using the Keithley
2450 Source Measure Unit.

The photocurrent stability of the
photodetectors was measured using
the Bentham PVE300 system at a fixed excitation of 635 nm.

The
noise current of the spectrum analyzer and photodetectors was
measured using the Moku:GO spectrum analyzer. Noise current can also
be calculated from the sum of the shot noise and thermal noise.

ishothere has
a unit of AHz–1/2andqis a unit
charge. The dark current,Idark, is estimated
at 1.7 × 10–7A cm–2, acquired
from the current–voltage curve at −0.2 V bias, as shown
inFigureb. The shot
noise is thus estimated at 230 fA Hz–1/2.

whereK,T, andRshuntare the Boltzmann constant,
temperature in Kelvin, and shunt resistance of photodetector, respectively.
The shunt resistance is calculated from the slope of the current density–voltage
curve at a low voltage bias. The estimated shunt resistance is approximately
60 MΩ, giving a thermal noise of 16 fA Hz–1/2at room temperature.

The TEM lamella cross-section was prepared using an FEI Helios
Nanolab Dualbeam FIB/SEM instrument following standard protocols.
The lamella was transferred with minimal air exposure to a Thermo
Scientific Spectra 300 (S)­TEM operating at 300 kV and approximately
130 pA beam current. High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) images
were captured by using a Fischione detector with a camera length of
58 mm, a dwell time of 1 μs, and a spatial sampling of 1.5 nm
per pixel for high-resolution data acquisition. Energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy (STEM-EDX) maps were acquired using four Super-X
detectors with a dwell time of 50 ms, spatial sampling of 5 nm per
pixel, and a spectral resolution of 10 eV per channel. Additionally,
STEM-EDX spectrum images were obtained with a beam current of 150
pA, utilizing 40 frames, a convergence angle of 24 mrad, and a camera
length of 58 mm. The STEM-EDX data were denoised using principal component
analysis and processed using HyperSpy.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsphotonics.4c01942.

Z.Y.O., M.A.,
and S.D.S. conceived and developed the resonant cavity-enhanced perovskite
photodetector. Z.Y.O. optimized and fabricated the resonant cavity-enhanced
perovskite photodetector. Z.Y.O. measured and analyzed theJ–Vcurve, EQE, responsivity, angular-dependent EQE,
and stability of the photodetectors. S.N. and H.W. measured and analyzed
the photodetector time response and modulation bandwidth. S.N. and
Z.Y.O. measured the linear dynamic range of the photodetectors. G.V.
and A.J.-S. fitted the perovskite refractive index and simulated the
resonant structure. M.C.L. collected and analyzed the HAADF-STEM and
EDX data. T.L. supported the device fabrication, and C.-S.H. assisted
with device characterization. K.G. established experimental setups
and procedures. M.P.N. and P.N. fabricated the photonic crystal substrates.
M.A., S.D.S., S.K., S.C.-P., C.D., Q.C., and P.N. supervised the work
undertaken in their laboratories. Z.Y.O., M.A., and S.D.S. wrote the
manuscript with comments from all the authors.

The authors
acknowledge the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (HYPERION,
grant agreement no. 756962), Cambridge Royce facilities grant EP/P024947/1,
Sir Henry Royce Instituterecurrent grant EP/R00661X/1 and
the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) (grant
agreement nos. EP/R023980/1, EP/T02030X/1, and EP/S030638/1). Z.Y.O.
acknowledges scholarship from St John’s College, University
of Cambridge. S.D.S. acknowledges the Royal Society and Tata Group
(UF150033). M.A. acknowledges support from the Royal Academy of Engineering
under the Research Fellowship program. G.V. and M.A. acknowledge the
BBVA Foundation for their support through a Leonardo Fellowship. A.J.-S.,
S.C.-P., and M.A. acknowledge grants TED2021-131001A-I00, CNS2022-135967,
RYC2021-034941-I, and PID2022-142525OA-I00 funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033,
the European Union “NextGenerationEU”/PRTR and FEDER,
EU. A.J.-S. gratefully acknowledges the Spanish Ministry of Universities
for funding through a Beatriz Galindo Research fellowship BG20/00015.
M.P.N. and P.N. acknowledge support from Military University of Technology
under research project UGB 502-6700-23-759. This research was funded
in part by National Science Centre, Poland, under grant no. 2024/53/B/ST11/04193.
K.G. appreciates support from the Polish National Science Centre (Sonata
2022/47/D/ST5/03332). For open access, the authors have applied a
Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license to any Author Accepted
Manuscript version arising from this submission.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Details on the code that supports the findings
of this study can be shared upon request. The data that support the
findings of this study are openly available in ApolloUniversity
of Cambridge Repository athttps://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.119830.