The electrocatalytic nitric oxide reduction reaction (eNORR) is a highly significant because it provides a sustainable and cost-effective way to combine the elimination of nitric oxide (NO) with synthesis of ammonia (NH3). This study comprehensively investigates the performance of single non-metal atom catalysts (NM@MoS2), which are composed of single non-metal atoms that are embedded in vacancy defects in MoS2. Our results demonstrate that eight NM@MoS2catalysts (NM = B, C, N, O, P, Si, Se, and Te) exhibit remarkable thermodynamic stability. The Si, C, N, B and P@MoS2catalysts in particular effectively adsorb and activate NO molecules, displaying high catalytic activity during the subsequent protonation process. TheirULvalues are 0, 0, −0.36, −0.62, and −0.70 V, respectively. Furthermore, a detailed selectivity analysis revealed that the N, P, C, and Si@MoS2catalysts exhibit high NH3selectivity. This theoretical study has effectively identified and evaluated NM@MoS2catalysts based on stability, selectivity and high catalytic activity with a focus on NO removal and NH3synthesis.

The eNORR performance of the MoS2catalyst doped with non-metal atoms has been studied. The Si, C, N, B, and P@MoS2catalysts demonstrated great potential for eNORR. The Si, C, and B@MoS2catalysts inhibited the formation of byproducts and HER.

Fossil fuel combustion in power plants, cars and industrial facilities releases large amounts of nitrogen oxides (NOx), which endanger the environment and human health.1,2As public awareness of the pollution and health risks associated with NOxemissions increases, more stringent regulations are being enacted across various industries to limit NOxemissions.3Consequently, eliminating NOxfrom flue gases has become a key area of research within catalytic chemistry.

Currently, selective catalytic reduction (SCR) technology is the primary method for reducing NOxdischarges.4–9However, this approach is hindered by its high energy consumption, which makes it unsuitable for widespread application. For example, the SCR process usually uses ammonia as a reducing agent and operates at temperatures between 200 and 400 °C. Meanwhile, ammonia (NH3), a vital chemical for fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, and dyes, is predominantly synthesisedviathe Haber–Bosch method, which demands intensely high temperatures (300–500 °C) and pressures (200–300 atm).10These harsh conditions contribute to high energy costs and limit the sustainability and scalability of NH3production.

Nitric oxide (NO) typically accounts for around 95% of total nitrogen oxides (NOx) in flue gas emissions.11Recently, the electrocatalytic nitric oxide reduction reaction (eNORR) has emerged as an innovative, environmentally friendly solution for reducing NO emissions from sources such as thermal power stations, industrial facilities and vehicles. This process is advantageous because it operates at ambient temperatures, eliminating the need for high temperatures or pressures.

In addition, the eNORR process can utilize renewable energy sources like solar or wind power, boosting its environmental credentials. Another benefit of the eNORR process is its ability to produce valuable NH3.12Therefore, eNORR is a win–win strategy for synthesising valuable NH3and reducing environmental pollution. However, the success of this process depends on developing suitable catalysts that can enhance both product selectivity and catalytic activity. Currently, most eNORR catalysts are metallic in nature.13–17While these metal catalysts demonstrate excellent eNORR activity, their practical application is limited by factors such as poor durability, high cost, and low atom utilisation efficiency.18,19Given these limitations, the search for low-cost, highly selective eNORR catalysts has become urgent and necessary.

Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) is a typical 2D material. During the synthesis of MoS2monolayer, sulfur (S) vacancies are inevitably generated on its surface, thus exposing the underlying unsaturated molybdenum (Mo) atoms.34These S-vacancy sites on MoS2materials can provide stable catalytic active sites for eNORR.35However, in this study, we found that the intrinsic properties of monolayer MoS2with S vacancies posed certain limitations. Specifically, the three unsaturated Mo atoms exhibited excessively strong binding affinity for reactant molecules, which hindered the smooth progression of some key elementary reaction steps. For instance, the energy barrier for the NH → NH2step was found to be nearly 1.5 eV, indicating a significant kinetic barrier. This observation suggests that while MoS2with S vacancies provides a promising foundation, further modification is necessary to optimize its catalytic performance for eNORR.

In the field of gas sensing, introducing non-metal atoms into S vacancy sites of MoS2can regulate the adsorption energy of adsorbed molecules, thereby effectively improving its performance.36,37Similarly, in the context of electrocatalysis, incorporating non-metal atoms into two-dimensional (2D) materials has been shown to enhance their eNORR performance. For instance, Aliet al.38examined the eNORR performance of B4@g-C3N4catalysts and discovered that B4clusters anchored on g-C3N4materials could efficiently enhance eNORR with a limiting potential of −0.37 V. Zhuet al.39reported that a single silicon atom supported on carbon nanotubes exhibited superior catalytic activity in the eNORR, with a limiting potential of −0.25 V. Maet al.40investigated the eNORR performance of phosphorus (P)-doped C2N materials and revealed their superior catalytic activity. Meanwhile, Saeidiet al.41demonstrated the remarkably high catalytic activity of boron-doped C3N nanosheets for eNORR. Taken together, these studies highlight the potential of single non-metal atoms as effective eNORR catalysts.

In view of this, the MoS2monolayer with an S vacancy is an ideal support, with its S vacancy sites offering robust binding sites for anchoring non-metal heteroatoms.42Leveraging this characteristic, we have constructed single non-metal atom catalysts by embedding single non-metal atoms (denoted NM) into MoS2vacancies (referred to as NM@MoS2). It is anticipated that these NM@MoS2catalysts will deliver exceptional catalytic performance in the eNORR.

It is worth noting that MoS2materials doped with non-metal atoms are known for their simple and straightforward preparation process. For instance, Maet al.43demonstratedviatheoretical calculations that CO, NO, and NO2molecules can fill S vacancies in MoS2at room temperature, thereby achieving C, N, and O doping, respectively. This finding suggests that non-metal doping can be achieved under mild conditions. Furthermore, Songet al.44successfully synthesized phosphorus (P)-doped MoS2materialsviaa simple pyrolysis process, achieving remarkable oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) performance. Xieet al.45produced MoS2materials with different oxygen doping concentrations by controlling the hydrothermal reaction temperature; these nanosheets exhibited excellent catalytic performance in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Zhanget al.46prepared selenium (Se)-doped MoS2materials using a hydrothermal synthesis method. They then combined these materials with reduced graphene oxide, resulting in composites that exhibited excellent catalytic activity in lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries. Songet al.47synthesized O-doped MoS2catalystsviapyrolysis and combined them with g-C3N4, yielding materials with exceptional ORR performance. Similarly, several pieces of experimental research highlight that boron (B)-doped MoS2catalysts synthesized by the hydrothermal route exhibit excellent catalytic performance in the electrocatalytic reduction of both nitrogen and nitrate.48–50As the positions of S atoms were replaced by non-metal (NM) atoms during the doping process, the NM-doped MoS2structure is similar to that of NM@MoS2catalysts. Therefore, these research findings offer compelling theoretical support for the experimental synthesis and stability of NM@MoS2catalysts.

In this study, we employed density functional theory (DFT) calculations to systematically analyse the performance of eight non-metal single-atom catalysts (NM@MoS2, where NM represents B, C, N, O, P, Si, Se, and Te) in the eNORR process. Firstly, we calculated the binding energies of NM@MoS2catalysts to evaluate their thermodynamic stability. We then conducted a comprehensive electronic structure analysis to see how well the catalysts could adsorb and activate NO molecules. Next, we examined the eNORR performance of these catalysts in more detail, considering critical factors such as reaction pathways and product selectivity. Finally, we examined the competitive relationship between HER and eNORR. Based on this analysis, we identified potential eNORR catalysts.

In this equation, ΔErepresents the energy change between reactants and products, which can be calculated directly from DFT. ΔEZPEandTΔSare the zero-point energy and entropy changes at room temperature (T= 298.15 K), respectively, which can be calculated from vibrational frequenciesviathe VASPKIT package.57ΔGpHis the pH-induced free energy change, calculated as ΔGpH=KBT× pH × ln 10, whereKBis the Boltzmann constant and pH is set to zero. ΔGUis the correction of ΔGby the electrode potentialU, ΔGU= −eU,eis the number of electrons transferred at each step andUis the applied voltage.

For our study, we precisely substituted all eight non-metallic (NM) atoms, namely B, C, N, O, P, Si, Se, and Te, into sulfur (S) vacancy defects in the MoS2substrate, as illustrated inFig. 1a. To quantitatively evaluate the stability and experimental feasibility of the eight NM@MoS2catalysts, we first calculated their binding energies. By definition, a more negativeEbindindicates a stronger and more stable interaction between the NM atoms and MoS2substrate. As depicted inFig. 1b, all NM@MoS2catalysts showed negativeEbindvalues ranging from −0.67 to −6.81 eV, thereby confirming their stability. In addition, the stability of the catalysts was further corroborated by calculation of the electronic localization function (ELF),59which elucidates the bonding characteristics between the NM atoms and MoS2. The ELF value of 1 (represented by the red region) indicates the presence of a strong covalent bond. As shown inFig. 1c, there is a significant overlap of electron density between the NM atoms and the Mo atoms, with the NM–Mo bond situated in the red region, indicating the presence of covalent bond components between NM and Mo.

We further elucidate the bonding characteristics between NM and Mo by calculating the projected (pCOHP) and integral (ICOHP) crystal orbital Hamilton populations (seeFig. 2).60The left side corresponds to the antibonding orbitals of NM–Mo and the right side to the bonding orbitals in pCOHP. Notably, below the Fermi level, the NM–Mo bond states are predominantly found in the low-energy bonding region, suggesting the stability of the NM–Mo bond. Furthermore, a quantitative assessment of the NM–Mo bond strength using the ICOHP method revealed that, with the exception of the Se@MoS2(−4.47) and Te@MoS2(−4.09) systems, the ICOHP values for the B@MoS2(−5.72), C@MoS2(−5.98), N@MoS2(−5.82), O@MoS2(−5.64), P@MoS2(−4.85) and Si@MoS2(−4.74) systems were all lower than that of pristine MoS2(−4.70). This implies that, in addition to the systems doped with Se and Te, NM–Mo bonds are stronger than S–Mo bonds. This demonstrates that covalent bonds are also formed between the NM (B, C, N, O, P and Si) atoms and the surrounding Mo atoms. Consequently, NM@MoS2can serve as a stable electrocatalyst in the eNORR process.

The adsorption and activation of NO molecules are pivotal steps in initiating the eNORR and significantly influence the subsequent protonation process. In this study, we thoroughly investigated three potential adsorption configurations of NO molecules on the surface of NM@MoS2catalysts: N-end, O-end, and NO-side, as illustrated inFig. 3a. It is important to highlight that for the O@MoS2, Se@MoS2, and Te@MoS2catalysts, the N-end configurations stable, yet they only exhibit physical adsorption of NO molecules, as evidenced by their ΔG(*NO) values being greater than zero (Fig. 3b). Given their insufficient adsorption strength for NO molecules, these catalysts were deemed unsuitable for the eNORR process and were thus excluded from the list of potential eNORR candidates.

For the remaining five NM@MoS2catalysts, NO molecules preferentially adsorb in the N-end configurations on the catalyst surface, exhibiting the smallest ΔG(*NO) values. Notably, after structural optimization, the NO-side adsorption configurations become unstable and spontaneously transition to the N-end configurations. Once adsorbed in the N-end configuration, the NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O bond lengths increase to 1.19 Å (B@MoS2), 1.20 Å (C@MoS2), 1.20 Å (N@MoS2), 1.20 Å (Si@MoS2), and 1.23 Å (P@MoS2), respectively. These values are significantly longer than the bond length of 1.16 Å in the free NO molecule, indicating that the NO molecule is effectively activated upon adsorption onto the catalyst surface.

To further elucidate the active origins of these catalysts, we conducted detailed electronic structure calculations, including charge density difference (CDD) and Bader charge analysis,61,62to reveal the charge distribution between the active sites and adsorbed NO (*NO) molecules. These analyses help explore the underlying interaction mechanisms. Additionally, we employed pCOHP, ICOHP, and partial density of states (PDOS) to gain deeper insights into the orbital contributions and chemical bonding characteristics at the active sites. This systematic study provides a comprehensive theoretical foundation for understanding the fundamental origins of the catalysts activity.

As depicted inFig. 4, we plotted the CDD diagram for NO adsorption on NM@MoS2catalysts. The green areas signify electron accumulation, while the red areas indicate electron depletion. A significant charge redistribution occurs between the *NO and the catalyst surface. Specifically, electrons are primarily concentrated on the *NO molecule, while the neighboring non-metal (NM) atoms lose electrons. Bader charge analysis further confirms this phenomenon, revealing that electrons are transferred from the NM@MoS2catalyst to the *NO molecule, with the transferred electron amounts being 0.75e(B@MoS2), 0.73e(Si@MoS2), 0.70e(P@MoS2), 0.62e(C@MoS2), and 0.04e(N@MoS2). Additionally, a substantial electron density is concentrated between the NM atoms and the *NO molecule, suggesting that the newly formed NM–N bond exhibits covalent bonding characteristics.

Fig. 5apresents the PDOS plots for NO molecules after adsorption on different catalysts. It is evident that there is significant orbital mixing between the NM-2p orbitals and the NO-2π* orbitals near the Fermi energy level, indicating a strong interaction between the NO molecules and the NM atoms. Moreover, the energy of the NO-2π* orbitals decreases upon adsorption due to electrons transfer from the NM-2p orbitals.

To further investigate NO activation, we plotted the COHP diagram for NO adsorption on NM@MoS2catalysts, as shown inFig. 5b. Upon adsorption of NO molecules on NM@MoS2catalysts, the antibonding orbitals of the NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O bonds shift downward near the Fermi energy level, resulting in more antibonding states of the NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O bonds below the Fermi energy level. The integral COHP (ICOHP) values, which quantify the strength of chemical bonds, are −16.99 (P@MoS2), −18.31 (N@MoS2), −18.37 (C@MoS2), −19.17 (Si@MoS2), and −19.19 (B@MoS2). These values are less negative compared to −19.79 for the free NO molecule, indicating effective activation of the NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O bonds upon NO adsorption.

Based on these findings, non-metal atoms act as active sites, effectively adsorbing and activating NO molecules. Given that the N-end adsorption configurations of NO molecules is more stable, we primarily focus on discussing the eNORR behavior of NO in the N-end adsorption configuration.

We evaluated the catalytic performance of B@MoS2, C@MoS2, P@MoS2, Si@MoS2, and N@MoS2catalysts in the eNORR for NH3synthesis based on the possible pathways shown in the reaction schematic inFig. 6a. The results are summarized in Table S1 andFig. 7. As shown inFig. 7, the eNORR process begins with the adsorption of NO molecules to form *NO species. Subsequently, the protons in the electrolyte react with *NO to form *HNO or *NOH intermediates. Then sequential hydrogenation processes occur, finally yielding NH3and H2O.

As shown inFig. 7a, the most selective pathway for the C@MoS2catalyst is Mix2, with all elementary steps being exergonic (ΔG< 0 eV). This suggests that the eNORR process can proceed spontaneously. As a result, the limiting potential (UL) for the C@MoS2catalyst is 0 V. For the Si@MoS2catalyst, the most favorable path is the N-end path depicted inFig. 7b. In this pathway, the energy of each intermediate species decreases, enabling the eNORR process to occur at 0 V, meaning that theULfor the Si@MoS2catalyst is also 0 V. For the N@MoS2catalyst, the optimal reaction path is the N-end path (Fig. 7c). Here, the energies of all elementary steps decrease, except for the final step (*NH2→ *NH3), which exhibits an energy increase (ΔG= 0.36 eV). This step is identified as the RDS, with a correspondingULof −0.36 V. For the B@MoS2catalyst (Fig. 7d), the optimal reaction pathway is Mix1. Along this pathway, overcoming the energy barrier of 0.62 eV (ΔG= 0.62 eV) in the *NO → *NHO step is the RDS, resulting in aULof −0.62 V. Similarly, for the P@MoS2catalyst, the Mix1 pathway is identified as the optimal reaction pathway (Fig. 7e). Here, the energy of all elementary steps decreases, except for the NH2→ NH3step, which has an energy barrier of 0.70 eV. This step is the RDS, with aULof −0.70 V. Under acidic conditions, the conversion of NH3to NH4+is typically exergonic.64Therefore, the catalytic activity of the NM@MoS2catalysts for eNORR to NH3was evaluated without considering NH3desorption further.

Since no thermodynamic energy barrier was observed on the C@MoS2and Si@MoS2catalysts. Taking the C@MoS2catalyst as an example, we employed the climbing-image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method to calculate the energy barriers for each elementary step along the optimal reaction path of Mix2. The energy barriers (EB) for all elementary reaction steps are shown in Fig. S1. As shown in Fig. S1, the energy barrier (0.92 eV) for the third hydrogenation step (NHOH + H++ e−→ *NH2OH) is higher than for the other steps. Consequently, this process constitutes the kinetically rate-determining step of this reaction pathway. However, from NO(g) to the NH2OH species, all elementary reaction steps are exergonic, with a total energy of −2.89 eV. This value is higher than the kinetic energy barrier (0.92 eV), suggesting that the energies released from the previous elementary reactions are sufficient to overcome the energy barrier.

To further elucidate the impact of NM atom modification, we examined the eNORR activity of MoS2containing sulfur vacancies (MoS2@VS). For the MoS2@VScatalyst, the most favorable path is the O-end pathway, as depicted inFig. 7f. Along this pathway, the *NH → *NH2process is the RDS with aULvalue of −1.44 V. This demonstrates that theULvalues of the NM@MoS2catalysts are substantially altered compared to the unmodified MoS2@VScatalyst: theULvalues of C@MoS2and Si@MoS2are both elevated to 0 V; theULvalue of N@MoS2is increased to −0.36 V; theULvalue of B@MoS2is elevated to −0.62 V; and theULvalue of P@MoS2is increased to −0.70 V. These analyses clearly demonstrate that NM atom modification dramatically enhances the eNORR activity of MoS2catalysts.

Based on the above analysis, the catalytic performance of the C@MoS2and Si@MoS2catalysts is superior to that of the B@MoS2, N@MoS2, and P@MoS2catalysts. To elucidate the differences in catalytic activity, we conducted an electronic structure analysis of each catalyst. Fig. S2 shows the band structures of N@MoS2, P@MoS2, B@MoS2, C@MoS2, and Si@MoS2. Notably, the bandgap widths of C@MoS2(0.97 eV) and Si@MoS2(0.78 eV) are significantly smaller than those of N@MoS2(1.62 eV), P@MoS2(1.54 eV), and B@MoS2(1.37 eV). Consequently, C@MoS2and Si@MoS2exhibit higher electron mobility throughout the eNORR process. This optimizes the adsorption of reaction intermediates and reduces the energy barriers of key steps, such as*NO → *NHO or *NH2→ *NH3, thereby significantly enhancing eNORR activity.

It has been well-documented that at high NO concentrations, *NO molecules can form dimers (*NONO), as illustrated in the configuration shown inFig. 3a. These *NONO dimers can adsorb onto the catalyst surface in either a 2O-side or 2N-side configuration, leading to the formation of by-products such as N2O or N2(Fig. 6bshows possible reaction pathways).63To further investigate the catalytic behavior of eNORR at high NO concentrations, we conducted a detailed analysis of the catalytic activity for this reaction (see Table S2).

For the C@MoS2, P@MoS2, and N@MoS2catalysts, the high electronegativity of the C, P and N elements significantly inhibits electron transfer during adsorption. This results in an unstable 2N-side adsorption configuration of NONO, thereby preventing the side reaction that leads to N2formation. Additionally, the N@MoS2catalyst lacks an O-end adsorption configuration for NO monomers, which prevents *NONO from adsorbing in the 2O-side configuration.65Consequently, the N@MoS2catalyst exclusively produces NH3as the main product while effectively suppressing the formation of N2O and N2by-products.

In contrast, on B@MoS2and Si@MoS2catalysts, we discovered that *NONO has a preference for adsorbing on the 2O-side configuration by contrasting the adsorption energies of *NONO in two different configurations. This selective adsorption configuration inhibits the formation of N2, thereby reducing the likelihood of N2being produced as a by-product. Therefore, we focused on the reaction pathway from *NONO to N2O over the C@MoS2, P@MoS2, B@MoS2, and Si@MoS2catalysts, as shown inFig. 8.

As depicted inFig. 8, the rate-determining step (RDS) for N2O formation is the conversion of OH to H2O. The corresponding limiting potentials (UL) for this process are −0.36 V (C@MoS2), −1.04 V (Si@MoS2), −1.17 V (P@MoS2), and −1.63 V (B@MoS2). Based on these results, the aforementioned catalysts exhibit high selectivity for NH3, even at high NO coverage, as evidenced byUL(NH3) >UL(N2O). Furthermore, the N@MoS2catalyst demonstrates high selectivity for NH3given that the formation of *NONO is unfavourable on this catalyst.

In summary, the C@MoS2, P@MoS2, B@MoS2, Si@MoS2, and N@MoS2catalysts all demonstrate excellent selectivity for NH3products under conditions of high NO coverage. This suggests that these catalysts are highly promising for the efficient synthesis of NH3viathe eNORR process.

In aqueous solutions, the HER is the main competitive process for the eNORR.66Thus, we compare theUL(NH3) andUL(H2) values for the five NM@MoS2catalysts (seeFig. 9).

As shown inFig. 9, theUL(H2) values on the five catalysts are as follows: −0.06 V (Si@MoS2), −0.27 V (B@MoS2), −0.78 V (C@MoS2), −1.00 V (P@MoS2), and −1.53 V (N@MoS2). Our calculations reveal that, for P@MoS2, N@MoS2, C@MoS2, and Si@MoS2, theUL(NH3) values are notably higher than theUL(H2) values. At the initial potential, eNORR can effectively inhibit the occurrence of HER, thereby enhancing the selectivity and efficiency of eNORR.

Consequently, N, P, C, and Si@MoS2catalysts demonstrate superior performance in prioritising eNORR over HER, rendering them highly promising candidates for efficient NH3synthesisviaeNORR.

In summary, we used DFT calculations to identify and screen potential catalysts for NH3synthesisviathe eNORR. We focused on eight thermodynamically stable NM@MoS2catalysts (where NM = B, C, N, O, P, Si, Se, or Te), evaluating their ability to adsorb and activate NO molecules. Our computational results revealed that five of the catalysts (those with NM = B, C, N, P and Si) exhibited effective adsorption and activation of NO molecules and significant potential for the eNORR, withULvalues of 0 V for Si@MoS2and C@MoS2, −0.36 V for N@MoS2, −0.62 V for B@MoS2, and −0.70 V for P@MoS2. These catalysts also exhibited high NH3selectivity by suppressing HER competition and minimizing side reactions. These results demonstrate that NM@MoS2catalysts excel in terms of stability, selectivity and catalytic activity, making them highly promising eNORR candidates. This study offers fresh perspectives on the management of NO and the synthesis of NH3, and could pave the way for more efficient and sustainable catalytic processes.