Tribe Philadelpheae, belonging to the Hydrangeaceae family, is mainly composed of two generaDeutziaandPhiladelphus, both of which demonstrate disjunct distribution in Eastern Asia, North America to Central America, or Southeastern Europe. So far, the phylogenetic relationship and evolutionary history have not yet been well resolved.

In the current study, we report the complete plastomes ofDeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies. Comparative analysis of gene content, structure variation, simple sequence repeats (SSRs) distribution, pseudogenes, as well nucleotide diversity were investigated. The structures of these plastomes of bothDeutziaandPhiladelphuswere generally conserved without any expansion/contraction of the IR regions. Phylogenetic analysis based on the complete plastomes was conducted, which strongly supported the monophyly of each genus. Remarkable associations were detected between species and their geographic distributions, indicating regional geographic specificity. Diversification rate estimation showed relatively higher diversification rate occurring in Eastern Asia than that of Europe and North America.

The plastomic data provided new insights into the phylogenetic relationships and enhanced the understanding of the evolutionary history of tribe Philadelpheae, which will provide more genomic information for further phylogenomic analyses, speciation or biogeographic inference of tribe Philadelpheae or the Hydrangeaceae family.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12870-025-07073-w.

The plastome is widely present in algae and plants with important functions in the process of photosynthesis, carbon fixation, and stress response [1,2]. It is a circular molecule and is noted as being highly conserved in gene content of most angiosperms [3]. It shows a typically quadripartite structure composed of a large single-copy (LSC) region and a small single-copy (SSC) region, which are separated by two copies of a large inverted repeat (IR) region [3–6]. It is characterized by length variation between 115 and 165 kb, uniparental inheritance and similar gene order or content among most land plants [6]. Despite the consistency between plastomes in plants, size variation, gene loss, structural changes, and simple sequence repeats (SSRs) have been frequently observed. Meanwhile, variability in some plastomic regions at different taxonomic levels was also identified [7,8]. Pseudogenes, which are nonfunctional copies of functional genes, are often present within plastomes as well, and hold significant importance in advancing phylogenetic studies [9–11]. Pseudogenes provide critical insights into gene loss, genome dynamics, and adaptation. In combination with broader genomic and ecological studies, pseudogenes can provide valuable insights into evolutionary history, genome dynamics, and lineage relationships.

As is known, the plastome has played a pivotal role in understanding evolutionary relationships, plant diversification, and the historical distribution of species, due to their genetic stability, uniparental inheritance, and conserved nature [12,13]. In phylogenetic research, plastome is widely used for reconstruction of evolutionary relationships, resolving complex lineages and molecular dating [14,15]. In biogeographic research, plastome is applied for tracking historical vicariance and dispersal events, identifying origin center, and referring glacial refugia [15]. Most recently, the development of sequencing technologies has stimulated a rapid and successful achievement in the database of plastomes [16–18]. Analyses methods have been improved in parallel, which also promotes the increasingly wide application of plastomic data.

DeutziaandPhiladelphuscontaining ca. 60 species, are two major genera in tribe Philadelpheae in the Hydrangeaceae family. Both genera are ecologically significant as pollinator-friendly plants, economically valuable as ornamental shrubs, and scientifically important as subjects of evolutionary and ecological research. Some species are well known as horticultural plants and are frequently cultivated in the botanical gardens [19,20]. Some species are also used as traditional Chinese herbal medicine for the external treatment of eczema and infections, while some possess high economic values for the production of soap and perfumes [20].DeutziaandPhiladelphusare important groups for studying the evolutionary relationships within the family Hydrangeaceae and related plant groups. Previous phylogenetic analysis revealed tribe Philadelpheae to be monophyletic [20]. However,Philadelphuswas suggested to be a paraphyletic group with the monotypic genusCarpenterianested within [21].Kirengeshomawas consistently revealed to be more related withDeutzia[21–23]. Both genera demonstrate disjunct distribution in Eastern Asia, North America to Central America, or Southeastern Europe. Among the disjunct distributed continents, higher species diversity ofDeutziaandPhiladelphusis found in Eastern Asia than North America or Europe [21,24]. The geographical distribution pattern of the tribe Philadelpheae is thus suggested to reflect the historical biogeography related to past climatic or geologic events. However, there are still some unsolved issues in phylogeny and biogeography, such as the phylogenetic position ofCarpenteria, the monophyletic group ofDeutziaand the genetic relationship ofPhiladelphusspecies, as well as the species evolutionary history and divergence time.

Plastomes serve as crucial molecular evidence for tracing species’ evolutionary history; however, they have been scarcely studied within the tribe Philadelpheae. To date, only a limited number of plastome sequences from this tribe are available, and comprehensive analyses of gene components and structural variations remain unexplored. Addressing the underrepresentation of Philadelpheae plastomes is essential to fill a critical gap in plant evolutionary research. Expanding plastome sequencing efforts in this tribe not only enhances our understanding of their evolutionary and biogeographical history but also contributes to broader phylogenetic, ecological, and conservation frameworks. In the current research, we sequenced altogether 37 species of bothDeutziaandPhiladelphusin tribe Philadelpheae, among which 12 species were selected to represent and characterize the complete plastomes. The structural variation, gene arrangement and component, as well as distribution of SSRs, are analyzed and compared between the two genera. The analysis of evolutionary genetics was conducted for some pseudogenes. Phylogenetic relationship and diversification rate estimation were analyzed. Our results aim to (1) provide plastomic data for further use in comparative genomics, phylogenetic analysis, speciation, and biogeographic inference of tribe Philadelpheae; (2) reveal the phylogenetic relationship among the two genera; (3) explore the diversification rate and species evolutionary history of tribe Philadelpheae.

Sample collections were conducted based on 22Deutziaspecies and 15Philadelphusspecies to represent each genus. Individuals were either collected from different geographical regions according to the herbarium records, or obtained from the botanical gardens in China or abroad. Dr. Rongjing Zhang undertook the formal identification of the plant material of both genera. The vouchers are deposited in the herbarium of SCAU (CANT). Tender leaves were sampled and stored in dry silica gel for subsequent experiments. Additionally, in order to get more plastomic data, sequencies of twoDeutziaspecies,D. compacta,D. crassifolia, as well as twoPhiladelphusspecies,P. calvescensandP. lewisii, were downloaded from NCBI. Altogether 24Deutziaand 17Philadelphusspecies were used for plastomic data analysis. The analyzed species represent about 70% of the total species inDeutziaandPhiladelphus. The incomplete sampling in the two genera was attributed to geographic limitations, rarity of species, or taxonomic ambiguity. The accession information and geographical distribution are listed or demonstrated in TableS1and Fig.5. In the following analysis, twelve species were selected to represent the gene content and structure ofDeutziaandPhiladelphus, as they are either widespread of geographic representative.

Leaf tissue was ground in tubes with stainless steel beads using a tissue homogenizer Tissuelyser-96 (Shanghai Jingxin Industrial Development Co., Ltd). Total genomic DNA was extracted by Cetyl Trimethyl Ammonium Bromide (CTAB) method [25] with minor modifications. We used 3× extraction buffer containing: 3% CTAB (w/v), 1.4 M NaCl, 0.8 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 0.5 M EDTA pH 8.0 (autoclaved). DNA pellet was washed with 500 µl of 70% ethanol and inverted once to dissolve residual salts and eliminate the contamination. The DNA concentration was quantified with a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and a final DNA concentration of > 30 ng/µL was used.

At Novogene Co. Ltd, Beijing, an Illumina HiSeq2000 sequencer was used to sequence paired-end (PE) sequencing libraries with an average insert length of 300 bp. From this, over 10 million clean reads were passed through quality control with a 100 bp each read length.

The plastomic sequences from the finalized data set were aligned with MAFFT v7.0.0 [30] with manual adjustments when necessary. The presence of pseudogenes or the change of size variation of angiosperm plastomes is mainly caused by the expansion/contraction of the IRs, LSC and SSC [11,31,32]. Therefore, we conducted a comparative analysis to detect the variations in the LSC/IR/SSC boundaries among the species. Gene synteny analysis was performed with MAUVE [33] as implemented in Geneious with default settings.

We used MISA (available online:http://pgrc.ipk-gatersleben.de/misa/misa.html) [34] to search for potential simple sequence repeat loci (SSRs). The minimum number (thresholds) of SSRs was set as 10, 5, 3, and 3 for mono-, di-, tri-, and tetra- SSRs, respectively. All SSR loci, motif types and length variations were manually verified and the redundant ones were all removed. Nucleotide diversity was estimated by DnaSP v.6.0.7 [35] to identify the highly informative phylogenetic loci.

A total of 44 species and 55 individuals were used to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships, among which 24 species fromDeutzia, 17 fromPhiladelphus, three species ofKirengeshoma palmate,Carpenteria californicaandWhipplea modesta(TableS1). Using multiple outgroups can provide a more robust rooting of the tree and reduce bias from the selection of a single outgroup [36]. Nine species in tribe of Hydrangeeae of the Hydrangeaceae family were used as outgroups, due to the close relationship with tribe Philadelpheae according to Yang et al. [37]. Bayesian inference (BI) was performed by using MrBayes v. 3.2.6 [38] with base frequencies estimated from the data. The most widely used GTR + Γ model, which is assumed to be reliable for accounting complex substitution dynamics and rate variation across sites, was selected for phylogenetic inference in the current research [39]. Four Markov Chains Monte Carlo (MCMC) for 50 million generations were run using default settings for priors and saved one tree every 1000 generations. We discarded the first 10% of the trees, as determined with the aid of the program Tracer version 1.6 [40]. The posterior probability (PP) of each clade (i.e., the “clade credibility value”) was estimated with 50% majority-rule consensus trees.

Divergence time within tribe Philadelpheae was further estimated using the relaxed-clock model in BEAST [40] with the priors settings of a Yule speciation tree prior, a log-normal tmrca prior, and an exponential (0.05) ucld.mean prior. The yule.birthRate was set to uniform [0,1] and the other parameters were kept as default. The MCMC chain length was set to 30 million generations and the chain was sampled every 1,000 generations. We assessed convergence and checked the effective sample size (ESS) > 200 for each parameter by Tracer. The first 10% of trees as burn-in were discarded, followed by the generation of the maximum clade credibility (MCC) chronogram from the remaining trees with nodal mean heights and 95% confidence time intervals using TreeAnnotator in BEAST. Divergence times were calibrated with two fossils 8.45 Ma at F1 and 4.0 Ma at F2, based on the fossil records. Fossil F1 originates fromP. nevadensiswhich is closely related toP. lewisii, and fossil F2 is fromSchizophragmawhich is highly morphologically similar toSchizophragma hydrangeoides[41,42]. Uniform model and Offset 0 were selected for both F1 and F2.

For the diversification rate analyses, one or two random samples from each species were used for the following analyses. The temporal dynamics of diversification inDurtziaandPhiladelphuswere measured using LTT plots in the APE package of R [43]. To compare the diversification rates, the net diversification rates were estimated forDurtziaandPhiladelphus, respectively. Plots were produced based on the branching time information obtained from the BEAST analysis. The GEIGER package in R [44] was used to calculate the net diversification rates (c) ofDurtziaandPhiladelphusbased on the Eq. (7) of [45] (with no extinction e = 0 and high extinction rate e = 0.90). However, the BAMM v.2.5.0 program was also applied to explore the diversification rate heterogeneity among lineages in different geological periods [46]. The analysis was run with 100 million MCMC generations, which were sampled every 10,000 generations. The convergence was tested based on the MCMC output using the CODA package in R [47] with a burn-in of 25% and effective sample sizes exceeding 1,000 for all estimated parameters. The BAMM output was used to calculate diversification rates with BAMMtools v.2.1.10 in R [46]. The 95% credible shift configurations were filtered using a Bayes factor of 5, and the mean phylorate for net diversification, and marginal probabilities were plotted with the getEventData and plot.bammdata functions.

A total number of 2 × 150 bp pair-end reads of 4,897,511 ~ 10,544,660 were produced with 1.51 ~ 3.61 Gb of clean data. All reads data were deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA). Altogether 12 representative species, includingD. calycosa,D. crassidentata,D. crenata,D. faberi,D. ningpoensis,D. uniflora,P. coronarius,P. lushuiensis,P. mexicanus,P. pekinensis,P. subcanusandP. zhejiangensis, were selected to show the statistic results. The size of the complete plastome ranges from 156,854 bp to 157,111 bp among the species inDeutzia, while from 157,087 to 157,515 bp inPhiladelphus(Fig.1; Table1). InDeutzia, the plastome displays a pair of IRs ranging from 25,837 bp to 25,929 bp, separated by LSC region from 86,503 bp to 86,596 bp and SSC region from 18,578 bp to 18,755 bp (Fig.1; Table1). InPhiladelphus, the plastome displays a pair of IRs from 26,058 bp to 26,065 bp, separated by LSC region from 86,239 bp to 86,476 bp and SSC region from 18,586 bp and 18,735 bp (Fig.1; Table1). The GC content of the plastomes is 37.6% inDeutzia, while 37.8% inPhiladelphus(Table1). When duplicated genes in the IR regions were counted only once, the plastome encodes 132 predicted functional genes in above 12 species. Totally, 85 or 86 protein-coding genes (PCGs) occur in sixDeutziaspecies, while 83 to 89 PCGs in sixPhiladelphusspecies. A total of 37 tRNA genes and four rRNA genes are identified. The remaining non-coding regions include introns, intergenic spacers, and pseudogenes. Nineteen genes are duplicated in the IR regions, including eight PCGs, seven tRNA genes, and four rRNA genes as revealed in all species (Fig.1; Table1). Each of the four genes (two PCGs and two tRNA genes) contains one intron (Table1). In the IR regions, the four rRNA genes and two tRNA genes (trnIandtrnA) are clustered as 16 S-trnI-trnA−23 S–4.5 S-5 S in all species. This is consistent with the plastomes ofHydrangea[48–52].

Synteny analysis identified highly conserved plastomic structure of gene number and gene order, attributable to the absence of genome rearrangement and inversions among the species (Fig.S1). However, some nucleotide substitutions and length variations are still present particularly in the LSC/IR/SSC boundaries (Fig.1). Three pseudogenes were detected among 12 species inDeutziaandPhiladelphus, which are Ψrps19, Ψycf1 and Ψycf15. As the SSC/IRb junction region is located within Ψycf1 CDS region, only a partial gene is duplicated in the IRa region. Therefore, pseudogene Ψycf1 is produced. The length of the Ψycf1 pseudogene in the IR regions ranges from 1,025 bp to 1,058 bp (Fig.2). Five nonsynonymous substitutions were detected in Ψycf1 among the 12DeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies. In Ψycf1, five and two indels ranging from six to 21 bp are detected inDeutziaandPhiladelphus, respectively. A nine base pair (bp) indel was identified inD. crassidentataonly. In the current study, the Ψycf15was found to be also pseudogenized due to one third to half missing sequences. Among12DeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies, one nonsynonymous substitution was identified in Ψycf15with a length of 132 bp inDeutziaand 198 bp inPhiladelphus, respectively (Fig.2). Because it is partially duplicated in the IR regions, the Ψrps19 inPhiladelphushas lost its protein-coding ability, thus producing the pseudogenized Ψrps19. Four nonsynonymous substitutions were detected without any indels (Fig.2).

Plastomic SSRs have a wide use in plant population genetics and biogeographic studies, especially at lower taxonomic levels, due to the length variation of variable repeated numbers [53,54]. The distribution, type and presence of SSRs were studied for bothDeutziaandPhiladelphus. A total of 644 SSRs of ≥ 10 bp in length were found in all species.PhiladelphusspeciesP. coronarius,P. pekinensis,P. subcanusandP. zhejiangensisexhibit relatively higher number of SSRs thanDeutzia. Particularly, among the 12 species,Philadelphuspossess remarkably higher numbers of tetra- SSRs (Fig.3). The lowest number of SSRs was detected inD. ningpoensis, with 41 SSRs in total (Fig.3). Most SSRs are present in the LSC regions, accounting for an average of 83.19% of the total SSRs in each species. Among all of the SSRs, the mononucleotide A or T repeat units were most common, accounting for an average of 77.19%. Monopolymers were found in the highest proportion of 73.29%, while di-, tri-, and tetra- polymers occurred with much lower frequency < 10% (Fig.3). Compound polymers were identified in all species, among whichD. rubens,D. crassifolia,P. pekinensisandP. schrenkiihave the highest number of five compound polymers.

As is well known, the highly variable regions of plastomes are valuable and can provide useful information for plant taxonomic analyses, phylogenetic reconstruction, and biogeographical investigation at different taxonomic levels [55,56]. In the current study, the average nucleotide variability (Pi) value was estimated to be 0.013 among allDurtziaandPhiladelphusspecies based on the comparative analysis with DnaSP (Fig.4). As for all species, the highest variation was found in the LSC and SSC regions. The IR regions had much lower nucleotide diversity withPi< 0.01. Six regions (trnK-rps16,trnS-rps4,ycf4-cemA,ndhF-rpl32,rps15-ycf1, andycf1) were the most variable among allDeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies. The first three loci are present in the LSC, while the next three are in the SSC region. Besides the commonly shared variable loci, additionally different loci were shown variable among the two genera, includingtrnHandpsbAinDeutziaandrpoB-trnCandpetG-trnWinPhiladelphus. Those highly variable regions are suggested as phylogenetic informative markers for phylogenomic analysis of the tribe Philadalpheae.

Altogether, a total of 55 individuals from 44 species in the tribe Philadelpheae were used to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships with 9 species in the Hydrangeaceae family as outgroups. The total aligned length was 68,160 bp for the protein coding sequence. EitherDeutziaandPhiladelphuswas recovered as monophyly with strong posterior probabilities in BI and ML analyses (Fig.S2& S3).Whipplea modestais at the basal branch of the phylogenetic tree, followed by two major clades (I and II). Clade I is mainly composed ofDeutziaspecies and clade II mostly containsPhiladelphusspecies.Deutziashows relatively more close relationship withKirengeshoma palmate, whilePhiladelphuswithCarpenteria californica.

Geographical region specificity was detected in both genera in Eastern Asia. Most species distributed in southwestern China are clustered in the same clade, especially forPhiladelphus. As forDeutzia, species from central China show relatively close relationship with those in southwestern China, while species in eastern China are more closely related with Taiwan and Japan (Figs.5and6). As forPhiladelphus, species from eastern or northern China have more close relationship with those from central China, while species from southwestern China displayed a distinct clade. Samples from Europe and North America form distinct clades (Fig.6). Therefore, we suggested a strong association between species and geographic distribution regions based on the phylogenetic tree.

According to Fig.6, the calculated divergence time between clade I and II was estimated as 16.73 Ma (95% HPD = 11.54–23.02) near the middle Miocene.DeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies diversified at the ages of 8.18 Ma (95% HPD = 4.34–12.58) and 10.83 Ma (95% HPD = 9.80–12.60), respectively, during the late Miocene. BAMM identified no rate shifts between the two genera (Fig.7). The overall diversification rate of the tribe Philadelpheae is 0.761, which is a bit lower than that ofDeutzia(0.863 species/Myr) andPhiladelphus(0.842 species/Myr). Concerning the different geographical regions, Eastern Asia shows relatively higher diversification rate ranging from 0.832 to 0.887 species/Myr than that of Europe (0.829 species/Myr) or North America (0.708 species/Myr). In China, no remarkable shift was detected among the different geographical regions. However,Deutziashows a higher diversification rate in western China, which is lower inPhiladelphus(Fig.7). In tribe Philadelpheae, the overall speciation rate increases remarkably through time (Fig.7).

The structure variation and gene content of plastomes are highly connected with speciation and the ability of species adaptation to environmental changes. The plastomes also play an important role in plants growth and development, as they encode key proteins involved in photosynthesis and other metabolic processes. As is known, the variation in plastome size is mainly attributed to expansion/contraction of the IR regions, gene loss and additional gene duplications outside of the IR, and the sizes of introns and intergenic spacer regions [57]. In the current study, complete plastomes were obtained forDeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies, ranging from 156,854 bp to 157,515 bp. The gene content and structure are comparable with previous research. The overall structure is relatively conserved, without major gene deletions or rearrangements. No expansion/contraction was detected in IR regions either. The GC content of the plastomes for both genera also demonstrates high congruence with those of other species in theHydrangeaceaefamily. The conservation of plastomes across diverse taxa offers significant advantages for phylogenetic reconstruction and biogeographic inference. It provides consistent homologous genetic markers that are useful for resolving evolutionary relationships, reconstructing biogeographic histories, and addressing broader questions in plant evolution and adaptation [12,13]. Future studies leveraging plastome data, integrated with other genomic and environmental datasets, will continue to unravel the complexities of plant evolution and adaptation in the context of a changing world.

Pseudogenes are frequently identified in plastomes, which contribute to understanding genome evolution, structural variation, and species relationships [30,33]. A total of three pseudogenes were detected forDeutziaandPhiladelphus, including Ψrps19, Ψycf1and Ψycf15(Fig.2).Ψrps19null andΨycf1are found to be pseudogenized, which are located at SSC/IRb and LSC/IRa boundaries, respectively. This is generally the case in the Eudicots [58,59]. Concerningycf15, the completeycf15genes were found to be mainly distributed at basal group of Asterids and some Rosidstaxa, with an average 257 bp in length. An intervening sequence of size 250–300 bp ofycf15has been reported inArabidopsis thaliana,Spinacia oleracea,Zea mays, andOenothera berteriana[60,61]. However, in the current study, the lengths of Ψycf15inDeutziaandPhiladelphuswere 132 bp and 198 bp, respectively, which seem to be much lower than the average level. Therefore, length variation and deletion, as well as sequence degeneration, are suggested to occur inDeutziaandPhiladelphus, producing pseudogenization of Ψycf15.Similar results have been identified in other plant groups, such as Triticeae and Cactaceae [62,63].

Phylogenetic reconstruction revealed that bothDeutziaandPhiladelphusare monophyly, which is consistent with the results of Kim et al. [23]. However, the results are different from the findings of Guo et al. [21]., which proposed thatPhiladelphusis paraphyletic group andCarpenteria, a monophyletic genus, locates withinPhiladelphusclade. In our research,Carpenteriashows a close relationship withPhiladelphus, and independently forms a monophyletic clade with strong posterior probability. Concerning the species ofDeutzia, close relationship was revealed to be with monophyleticKirengeshoma, which is consistent with previous research [21–23]. The monophyly ofPhiladelphus,Deutzia,CarpenteriaandKirengeshomabased on plastomes strongly suggested independent evolutionary histories without interruption by intermixing or hybridization between the genera [64]. However, given that only two individuals ofCarpenteriaandKirengeshomaspecimens were included, its precise phylogenetic position remains incompletely resolved. More individuals and a more comprehensive sampling are suggested to confirm if its phylogenetic relationship among these species. Meanwhile, as only plastomes were applied in the current research, more molecular evidence is suggested to be included in the future analyses in order to have a deep investigation of the phylogenetic relationship within tribe Philadelpheae.

The estimated divergence time between clade I and II was 16.73 Ma during the early middle Miocene, whileDeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies diversified at the ages of 8.18 Ma and 10.83 Ma, respectively, during the late Miocene. As is known, the Miocene epoch (23.03–5.33 Ma) was a time interval of global warmth, relative to today. Continental configurations and mountain topography transitioned toward modern conditions, and many plant groups evolved into the same taxa that exist today [65]. However, a climate fluctuation occurred during the middle Miocene, when a relatively warm condition of the Middle Miocene Climatic Optimum (MMCO) changed to a cooler and drier condition due to the major Antarctic ice sheet expansion and global cooling (Middle Miocene Glaciation; MMG) [66]. The Miocene’s climatic fluctuations led to cycles of habitat expansion and contraction. These changes created new ecological niches and geographic barriers, promoting allopatric speciation and adaptive radiation. Diversification rates in plants and animals increased as species adapted to these newly emerging environments [67,68]. The divergence between the two clades happened approximately at the beginning of the Middle Miocene Climate Transition, which might contribute to the divergence between the two genera. Afterwards, the climatic fluctuations took place, including temperature increasing and precipitation patterns varying during the late Miocene, which were suggested to facilitate adaptive radiation and speciation within these genera in different geographical regions [66]. Many other phylogenetic analyses show bursts of diversification corresponding to the Miocene, underscoring its impact as a key driver of evolutionary dynamics [67–69].

The association between species clusters and geographic distributions was strongly discerned in the BI tree. Most species distributed in southwestern China seem to occur in the same clade, especially forPhiladelphus. Southwestern China is suggested as one of the biodiversity hot spots as has been supported in various research [70,71]. In particularly, the Hengduan Mountains in southwestern China consist of peaks and valleys, showing an exceptional range of climates due to changes of both elevation and latitude, and thus providing advantages to possess high uniqueness of species [70,71]. This might contribute to the species growing the Hengduan Mountains forming the same clade inPhiladelphus. As is seen, species in eastern China are more closely related with those in Taiwan island and Japanese archipelagos, which is consistent with previous research suggesting an origin from eastern China or a continuous distribution for the species occurring between eastern mainland China and Japanese archipelagos or Taiwain island [72].

BAMM identified slightly rate shifts among intercontinental geographical regions and remarkable increasing rate through time for tribe Philadelpheae. The diversification rate ofDeutziaandPhiladelphusexhibits regional specificity across different geographical continents. Concerning the intercontinental geographical distribution, Eastern Asia shows a higher diversification rate than that of Europe or North America. In East Asia, the unique geographical and climatic conditions, such as mountainous terrains and monsoon climates, may have provided a wealth of ecological niches and higher species diversity for these genera. In contrast, in Europe or North America, the diversification rate of these genera seems to be lower. This variation between regions may reflect the impact of climatic and geographical history on species diversification and the availability of ecological niches in these areas. Similar cases have been identified in many other plant species with the same intercontinental disjunct distribution pattern, such as the tribe Lysimachieae and the big-bracted dogwood cladeBenthamidiaofCornus, both showing greater species diversity and diversification rate in Eastern Asia compared to North America [73,74].

At the macroevolutionary scale, different diversification rates in angiosperms have been frequently identified among families, genera or species over time [75,76]. Higher diversification rates are supposed to be associated with high species numbers and rapid radiation [45,69,77]. The older clades are normally supposed to have slower rates of diversification [78,79]. Within tribe Philadelpheae, speciation rate increased through time, indicating a slight radiation during its evolutionary history. The diversification rates between the two genera, which are 0.842 species/Myr and 0.863 species/Myr, respectively, seem to be comparable. When compared with other plant groups, the diversification rates of the two genera seem to be averagely smaller thanPetalidium(0.6 to 1.5 species/Myr) [80], especially than the rapid radiation group, such asOreocharis(1.03 species/Myr) in Hengduan Mountains in China [69],Lupinus(2.49–3.72 species/Myr) and bellflowers (1.83 species/Myr) in the Andes in South America [81,82], that latter two of which are rapid radiation species. However, it shows a remarkably higher diversification rate than tribe Anastaticeae (0.17 species/Myr) [83], tribe Conringieae (0.18 species/Myr) [84], andSaxifraga(0.46 species/Myr) [85]. In general, we suggest that no rapid radiation or remarkable diversification shifts involved in tribe Philadelpheae, which seems to possess a relatively stable evolutionary history.

In the current research, we report the complete plastomes ofDeutizaandPhiladelphusspecies, belonging to tribe Philadelpheae. Using the next generation sequencing and the developed pipeline, we sequenced and assembled the whole plastomes. Comparisons of the gene content, structure variation and SSRs distribution suggested that the structures of these plastomes of bothDeutziaandPhiladelphuswere generally conserved. No gene loss and additional gene duplications were detected. No expansion/contraction occurred in IR regions, either. Analyses of sequence divergence and nucleotide diversity detected six phylogenetic informative markers which is highly variable. Phylogenetic analysis strongly supports the monophyly ofDeutziaandPhiladelphus, respectively, which were suggested to possess independent evolutionary history and inferred to divergent or diversify during middle and late Miocene due to the global climatic fluctuation. Estimation of diversification rates supported no rapid radiation in tribe Philadelpheae, with moderate diversification rates in both genera. Therefore, tribe Philadelpheae is suggested to show a stable evolutionary history. Meanwhile, greater species diversity and higher diversification rates are indicated in Eastern Asia than that of Europe or North America. The greater species diversity and higher diversification rates in Eastern Asia reflect its role as a key region for biodiversity evolution, driven by stable climate, geographical complexity, and historical biogeographic processes.

Based on the above results, our current study would contribute to further taxonomic study, DNA barcoding analysis, phylogenetic reconstruction and biogeographical inference in this tribe or the Hydrageaceae family. The findings of this study will also have several practical applications, particularly in the fields of conservation biology and horticultural breeding programs, such as establishment of evolutionary significant unit, development of ornamental varieties, and preservation of rare traits. However, more species samples and combination with more molecular data sets are suggested to be included in future research based on whole genomic sequencing, which is supposed to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the evolutionary history of tribe Philadelpheae.

Supplementary Material 3. Fig. S1 Gene order comparison amongDeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies by using MAUVE program. The boxes above and below the line represent the gene sequences in clockwise and anticlockwise directions, respectively. The gene names at the bottom indicate the genes located at the boundaries of the boxes in cp genome.

Supplementary Material 4. Fig. S2. Bayesian inference (BI) phylogenetic tree of theDeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies. Constructed using the GTR+Γ model with 50 million generations and a burn-in of 5,000 trees. Posterior probabilities are shown at the nodes. The tree strongly supports the monophyly of each genus, with the red clade representingDeutziaand the green clade representingPhiladelphus.

Supplementary Material 5. Fig. S3. Maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree of theDeutziaandPhiladelphusspecies.

The authors thank Xiaojie Li, Jinhua Ran and Gang Yao for assisting in field work and data analyses. This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC; 32270218; 31600169; 31970231 and 41471046), and Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province, China (2017A030303067).

Wei Gong conceived and designed the experiment and research, and supervised the project. Zhilong Huang, Qin Fan and Wei Gong contributed to data analysis and the writing of the manuscript. Wei Gong and Mimi Li edited the manuscript. Mimi Li, Qin Fan, Pan Li and Shu’an Wang conducted the field trips and collected the samples. Chuxin Liang, Qin Fan, Wenya Yu and Meixiu Lin carried out the lab experiments. Rongjing Zhang supervised the field work, including sample collection and taxonomy identifications, and joined in discussion.

This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC; 32270218; 31600169; 31970231 and 41471046), and Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province, China (2017A030303067).