Light plays a crucial role in regulating nocturnal sleep patterns. This cross-sectional study evaluated the potential association between levels of light exposure in real-life settings and sleep parameters in individuals with bipolar disorder. We included 204 ambulatory individuals with bipolar disorder who participated in the APPLE (Association between Pathology of Bipolar Disorder and Light Exposure in Daily Life) cohort study. Daytime illuminance and sleep were assessed using actigraphy over a seven-day period. In addition, a portable light meter was used to evaluate the illuminance levels in the bedroom during nighttime. The median values of daytime illuminance and nighttime illuminance were 221.8 lux (interquartile range: 150.9–306.9 lux) and 2.3 lux (0.3–9.6 lux), respectively. Multivariable linear regression analyses, adjusting for potential confounders, revealed a significant association between greater daytime illuminance and higher sleep efficiency as well as shorter sleep onset latency and wake after sleep onset. Moreover, the interaction term of daytime and nighttime illuminance demonstrated a significant correlation with sleep efficiency (95% confidence interval [CI], −10.45 to −2.17;P= 0.003), sleep onset latency (95% CI, 0.18 to 0.91;P= 0.004), and wake after sleep onset (95% CI, 13.47 to 50.1;P< 0.001). Our findings indicate the existence of a significant positive correlation between daytime light exposure and sleep parameters in individuals with bipolar disorder. The interaction of increased daytime light and decreased nighttime light appears to be positively associated with sleep quality.

Bipolar disorder is a severe, persistent, and recurrent mental illness. Furthermore, an extensive body of literature underscores the pivotal role of sleep disruptions in bipolar disorder [1]. Sleep disturbances are prevalent in both depressive and manic states, and they may manifest even during euthymic periods [1–3]. Sleep disruptions in individuals with bipolar disorder correlate with residual mood symptoms, recurrence of mood episodes, and diminished quality of life [4–8]; therefore, it is imperative to promptly identify the factors associated with sleep disturbance in such individuals.

Light plays a crucial role in nocturnal sleep regulation. Previous studies involving both healthy adults and those with bipolar disorder have indicated that evening or nighttime light exposure negatively affects sleep quality [9–12]. Conversely, daytime light exposure exerts the opposite effect. Various field studies have reported that more daytime light is associated with an earlier sleep–wake phase, shorter sleep latency, higher sleep efficiency, and enhanced sleep quality [13–16]. Furthermore, greater daytime melanopic equivalent daylight illuminance is positively correlated with improved sleep quality at night [17]. This evidence suggests that increased light exposure during daytime may lead to improved sleep. However, to our knowledge, no previous study has investigated whether the level of daytime light exposure in real-life settings is associated with sleep quality in patients with bipolar disorder, in whom there is evidence for disrupted light sensitivity [18]. In addition, previous experimental studies have demonstrated that increased light exposure during the daytime may reduce the sleep–wake cycle effects associated with unavoidable nighttime light exposure [19,20]. This evidence indicates that daytime and nighttime light exposure interact with each other on the sleep–wake cycle. Given that light exposure in daily life is associated with several symptoms such as altered mood, circadian rhythm, and obesity in bipolar disorder [21–24], the interaction of daytime and nighttime light exposure could affect sleep in those with bipolar disorder.

This cross-sectional study primarily aimed to assess the association between daytime light exposure and sleep (as measured by actigraphy) in a cohort of 204 individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder. The secondary objective was to examine the effect of the interaction term of daytime and nighttime illuminance on sleep.

Between August 2017 and May 2021, we enrolled 218 individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder aged 18–75 years in the “Association between Pathology of Bipolar Disorder and Light Exposure in Daily Life (APPLE)” cohort study [9]. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th edition criteria were used to diagnose bipolar disorder I or II. The study excluded participants who were nightshift workers, those at high risk of suicide as determined by a trained psychiatrist, and individuals experiencing acute mood episodes.

Demographic and clinical characteristics were assessed at the clinic, and participants were then instructed to adhere to the following guidelines for seven consecutive days: (1) wear an actigraph capable of measuring ambient light (Actiwatch Spectrum Plus; Respironics, Murrysville, PA, USA) on the non-dominant wrist; (2) avoid covering the actigraph with clothing— participants were given an armband to prevent their shirtsleeves from covering the device; (3) keep in a sleep diary; and (4) record bedroom illuminance from bedtime to rise time using a portable light meter (LX-1128SD; Sato Shoji, Kanagawa, Japan). The light sensor in the Actiwatch Spectrum consists of light sensitive photodiodes that measure illuminance from 400–700 nanometers in units of lux and the range is 0.1–35,000 lux. The optical sensor of LX-1128SD has a spectral sensitivity approximating that of the human eye and provides an illuminance sensitivity 0–100,000 lux with ±4% accuracy.

Of the 218 participants, 204 completed actigraphy and bedroom light measurements, maintained a sleep diary for seven consecutive days and underwent clinical assessments.

The authors assert that all procedures contributing to this work comply with the ethical standards of the relevant national and institutional committees on human experimentation and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008. All procedures involving human patients were approved by the Ethics Committee of Okehazama Hospital (identifier: H29-011). Written informed consent was obtained from all patients before participating in the study. The study is registered at the University hospital Medical Information Network Clinical Trials Registry (UMIN-CTR identifier: UMIN000028239).

Sleep was evaluated by actigraphy for seven days. Movement data were collected at 1-min intervals and sleep state (i.e., sleep or wake) was imputed using a standard algorithm [25] with a “moderate” (40 counts/min) sensitivity threshold (Actiware version 6.0.9; Respironics Inc., PA, USA), as suggested for use in those with bipolar disorder [26]. This method of actigraphy analysis has been utilized in prior research involving individuals with bipolar disorder [9,27]. Time in bed was set by the bedtime and rise time recorded in the sleep diary. The following four sleep parameters were estimated: (1) sleep efficiency—the percentage of total sleep time between bedtime and rise time; (2) sleep onset latency—the time between bedtime and sleep onset; (3) wake after sleep onset—the time spent awake between sleep onset and rise time; and (4) total sleep time—the sleep time between the sleep onset and sleep offset excluding wake after sleep onset.

Daytime light exposure, from the interval between the participant’s rise time and bedtime, was assessed using an actigraph at 1-min intervals. The actigraph software detection algorithm (Actiware, version 6.0.9, Respironics) automatically excluded intervals when the device was not in contact with the participant’s skin (≥2 mm away). If any of these periods exceeded 50% of the daytime period, the data for that day were excluded from the analysis. Illuminance values below 1 lux during the day were considered artifacts due to clothing coverage and were consequently removed from the analysis [28]. Daytime illuminance was defined as the mean illuminance between rise time and bedtime.

Nighttime light exposure in each participant’s bedroom was assessed using a portable light meter at 1-min intervals from the participant’s bedtime and rise time. Nighttime illuminance was defined as the mean illuminance between bedtime and rise time.

The participants’ depressive and manic states were evaluated using the Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) and the Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS), respectively [29,30]. Cutoff points for both scales (MADRS: 8 points; YMRS: 8 points) were defined to indicate depressive and manic states per the recommendations of the International Society for Bipolar Disorders Task Force [31]. The first measurement day for each participant, reflecting the duration of daylight from sunrise to sunset in Aichi, Japan (latitude, 35°N), was obtained from the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan’s website. Data concerning participants’ medication regimens, encompassing lithium, anticonvulsants (lamotrigine, valproate, and carbamazepine), sedative antipsychotics (olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone), sedative antidepressants (trazodone and mirtazapine), and hypnotics, was retrieved from medical records.

Statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS version 25.0 for Windows (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). Continuous variables were represented as medians and interquartile ranges, while categorical variables were presented as numbers and percentages. Mean values of seven consecutive days were utilized for analyzing light exposure and sleep parameters. Two-sided P-values < 0.05 were regarded as statistically significant.

Linear regression models incorporated sleep parameters as dependent variables and daytime illuminance parameters as independent variables. In multivariable analysis, simultaneous adjustments were made for sleep associated variables, including age (per year), gender (female/male), current smoking status (yes/no), depressive and manic status (yes/no), day length (per minute), nighttime illuminance (high/low, categorized based on the median value), and the use of sedative medications (sedative atypical antipsychotic, sedative antidepressant, and hypnotics; yes/no). For linear regression models, daytime illuminance and sleep onset latency were analyzed using natural log-transformed continuous variables due to the skewed nature of data distributions. Nighttime illuminance, even after log transformation, remained nonnormally distributed; therefore, a categorical variable based on the median value was used (≥2.28/ <2.28 lux). Interaction of daytime illuminance (x1: per log lux) and nighttime illuminance (x2: low, 0; high, 1) on sleep parameters (y) were assessed by introducing an interaction term (x1× x2) into the linear regression formula: y = β0+ β1(x1) + β2(x2) + β3(x1×x2) + ε, where β0= intercept, β1= regression coefficient for daytime illuminance, β2= regression coefficient for nighttime illuminance, β3= regression coefficient for the interaction of daytime and nighttime illuminance, and ε = error. In the interaction analysis, daytime illuminance was analyzed after centering to avoid multicollinearity. Multicollinearity was assessed using variance inflation factor.

The median age of the participants was 44 years, with an interquartile range of 34–53 years, and there were 112 (54.9%) female participants. The median daytime illuminance was 221.8 lux (150.9–306.9 lux), while the nighttime illuminance was 2.3 lux (0.3–9.6 lux) (Table1). The sleep parameter medians were as follows (Table1): sleep efficiency, 83.5% (77.1–87.6%); sleep onset latency, 16.0 min (9.1–27.1 min); wake after sleep onset, 55.1 min (39.1–80.3 min); and total sleep time, 386.5 min (334.3–436.9 min).

Data are expressed as the median (interquartile range) or number (%).

MADRSmontgomery–åsberg depression rating scale,YMRSyoung mania rating scale.

Univariable linear regression analyses demonstrated the presence of significant associations among increased daytime illuminance, higher sleep efficiency, and shorter sleep onset latency (Crude model: Table2). In multivariable models, after adjusting for potential confounders, including age, gender, current smoking status, depressive and manic status, day length, nighttime illuminance, and the use of sedative atypical antipsychotics, sedative antidepressants, and hypnotics, greater daytime illuminance was significantly associated with higher sleep efficiency, shorter sleep onset latency, and shorter wake after sleep onset (Adjusted model: Table2).

Linear regression results for sleep parameters associated with daytime illuminance (per log lux).

The daytime illuminance was analyzed after natural logarithmic transformation. Adjusted for age, gender, current smoking status, depressive and manic status, day length, nighttime illuminance, and use of sedative atypical antipsychotics, sedative antidepressants, and hypnotics.

In the subsequent analysis, we assessed the interaction of daytime and nighttime illuminance on sleep parameters. There was no significant multicollinearity detected in any of the multivariable models, as all variance inflation factors were below 10. The graphic representation in Fig.1illustrates the associations between quartile daytime illuminance and sleep parameters, stratified by median nighttime illuminance, facilitating the interpretation of statistical results. In the lower nighttime illuminance group (Nighttime illuminance < 2.28 lux), sleep efficiency was higher as increments in daytime illuminance (Fig.1A), whereas sleep onset latency and wake after sleep onset were shorter (Fig.1B, C). Conversely, in the higher nighttime illuminance group (Nighttime illuminance ≥ 2.28 lux), sleep efficiency and sleep onset latency were not significantly associated with increasing daytime illuminance (Fig.1A, B), and wake after sleep onset was longer (Fig.1C). Total sleep time was longer with higher daytime illuminance in both groups (Fig.1D). The interaction term of daytime and nighttime illuminance was significantly associated with sleep efficiency, sleep onset latency, and wake after sleep onset (Fig.1and Supplementary Table1).

Blue solid lines present mean values in each sleep parameter, including sleep efficiencyA), sleep onset latencyB), wake after sleep onsetC), and total sleep timeD), in the lower nighttime illuminance group. Red dotted lines represent mean values in each sleep parameter in the higher nighttime illuminance group.Pfor interaction presents the interaction of daytime illuminance (per log lux) and nighttime illuminance (high/low) on sleep parameters.

Table3presents the linear regression analysis results for sleep parameters associated with daytime illuminance, stratified by median nighttime illuminance. Daytime illuminance in the lower nighttime illuminance group was significantly associated with higher sleep efficiency, shorter sleep onset latency, and shorter wake after sleep onset, whereas daytime illuminance in the higher nighttime illuminance group was not significantly associated with any sleep parameter.

Linear regression results for sleep parameters associated with daytime illuminance stratified by nighttime illuminance.

Daytime illuminance was analyzed after natural logarithmic transformation. Nighttime illuminance, even after log transformation, remained nonnormally distributed; therefore, a categorical variable based on the median value was used (≥2.28/<2.28 lux).

We demonstrated the existence of a statistically significant association between daytime light exposure and sleep in patients with bipolar disorder. This association remained robust even after adjusting for major potential confounders, including age, gender, smoking status, mood symptoms, day length, nighttime light exposure, and sedative use. Moreover, we identified a significant interaction of both daytime and nighttime light exposure on sleep.

Our analysis aligns with the findings of prior studies that have reported a correlation between daytime light exposure and sleep in individuals not specifically selected for bipolar disorder. For example, a recent field study involving 400,000 participants from the UK Biobank revealed that increased daytime light was associated with a decrease in insomnia symptoms (Odds ratio: 0.94–0.97) [14]. Furthermore, a crossover field study conducted on twelve healthy students indicated that morning bright light exposure, compared with regular office light, led to higher sleep efficiency, reduced fragmentation index, and shorter sleep latency [13]. The findings of our study not only support the outcomes of these earlier investigations but also demonstrate the independence of these results from several potential confounders, including the influence of sedative psychiatric medications. Given that individuals with bipolar disorder have been reported to be hypersensitive to nocturnal melatonin suppression by light, the influence of daytime light exposure on sleep could be stronger in those with bipolar disorder as compared to the healthy people. Further studies to confirm the relationship between daytime light and sleep by comparing those with bipolar disorder and unaffected controls are required.

The impact of bright light therapy on sleep in patients with bipolar disorder remains a subject of debate. In a previous randomized controlled trial investigating bright light therapy in bipolar disorder, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index scores significantly improved in the bright light therapy group compared with the placebo group [32]. Conversely, another randomized controlled trial in bipolar disorder reported that despite significant improvement in depressive symptoms in the bright light therapy group compared with the placebo group, the enhancement in sleep quality did not differ significantly [33]. We speculate that the conflicting results in previous studies may be attributed to nighttime light exposure. Our results indicate that the impact of daytime light exposure on sleep varies depending on the level of nighttime light exposure (Table3). The aforementioned previous studies did not measure nighttime light exposure because they primarily focused on bright light exposure during the daytime. Therefore, in order to reap the improved sleep associated with increased daytime light exposure, avoiding nighttime light exposure be necessary in those with bipolar disorder.

Previous studies have presented evidence that the adverse effects of evening/nighttime light can be alleviated through early-day bright light exposure [19,20,34]. Although the contrasting impacts of light exposure during the daytime and evening/nighttime on sleep and circadian function are well established [35,36], these modulatory effects also extend to more immediate actions of evening light, such as its ability to suppress melatonin. Therefore, our investigation focused on assessing the interaction between daytime and nighttime light exposure concerning sleep in patients with bipolar disorder. As anticipated, the interaction of daytime and nighttime light exposure was statistically significant. Although we did not observe a reduction in the negative effects on sleep associated with nighttime light exposure with increased daytime light exposure, we identified a positive association on sleep quality through the interaction of heightened daytime light and diminished nighttime light.

Although the mechanisms underlying the association between daytime light exposure and sleep in patients with bipolar disorder remain elusive, previous studies have proposed several potential ones. Light exposure is widely acknowledged as the primary synchronizing stimulus for the human circadian system [35,36]. Daytime light exposure induces circadian-phase advance and increased melatonin secretion [23,35,37], which are —both linked to sleep improvement [38,39]. Another conceivable mechanism is that daytime light exposure may enhance sleep by increasing the amplitude of the circadian rhythm during awakening [40]. A larger circadian activity rhythm could produce both a stronger signal for alertness during the day and a stronger signal for nocturnal sleep [41,42]. Conversely, nighttime light exposure diminishes amplitude, leading to sleep disturbance. Previous studies have specifically noted that individuals with bipolar disorder show hypersensitivity to nocturnal melatonin secretion induced by light compared with healthy adults [18]. Therefore, sleep disturbance, especially in bipolar disorder, may be attributed to light/dark cycle attenuation.

Our findings indicate that appropriate light exposure could contribute significantly to sleep management in patients with bipolar disorder. Currently, individuals spend most of their time indoors (on average 93%), and recent studies have revealed that people are often exposed to less light during the daytime and more light prebedtime than recommended [43,44]. Daytime indoor light intensities are typically much lower than outdoor light exposures, whereas evening/nighttime indoor light intensities (from artificial light sources and light-emitting screens) are high relative to outdoor light at night, potentially leading to sleep disturbances. Since many individuals with bipolar disorder are reported to spend much time in a sedentary state [45], they are likely to spend much time indoor more frequently than healthy individuals, resulting in exposure to inappropriate light. Moreover, in bipolar disorder, inappropriate light exposure is not only linked to sleep issues but also contributes to circadian disruption, mood alterations, and metabolic changes [23,24,46,47]. Therefore, appropriate light exposure is paramount in the management of individuals with bipolar disorder.

The strengths of this study include its objective measurement of both light exposure and sleep, coupled with the assessment of the interaction between daytime and nighttime light exposure on sleep. Nevertheless, the study also has some limitations. First, the cross-sectional design of the study prevents us from establishing causality in the association between daytime light exposure and sleep in patients with bipolar disorder. It may also be that the increase in nighttime light exposure was not a cause of the disrupted sleep but rather a consequence. That is, when a participant’s sleep was disrupted, they would turn on a light. Second, the nonrandom selection of study participants may have introduced selection bias, which could impact the robustness of our results. Third, our evaluation of sleep relied on actigraphy. Although various methods (such as sleep diaries, questionnaires, and polysomnography) exist for assessing sleep, polysomnography is considered the gold standard. However, actigraphy was found to be comparable to polysomnography in measuring sleep parameters for patients with bipolar disorder [26]. Additionally, conducting polysomnography in a home setting is challenging. Therefore, the use of actigraphy for sleep evaluation in patients with bipolar disorder is justified. Finally, we measured daytime light exposure over only a seven-day period, which might be considered relatively short. However, we speculate that this timeframe provides an approximate representation of an individual’s behavioral patterns because it encompasses both weekdays and weekends.

Our investigation revealed a significant and positive correlation between daytime light exposure and sleep in patients with bipolar disorder. This association remained statistically significant even after adjusting for potential confounders. Notably, we observed a potential interaction between daytime and nighttime light exposure on sleep.

We thank the participants of this study. This work was supported by Scientific Research funding from JSPS KAKENHI (grant number: 18K15529), the Japan Foundation for Neuroscience and Mental Health, and the Neuroscience Research Center.