While monoclonal antibodies have significantly improved cancer treatment, their accumulation in off-target tissues not only limits efficacy, but also induces toxicity. A major contributor to this problem is the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS). This collection of innate immune cells is a critical regulator of immune homeostasis that effectively scavenges nanoparticles and biologics, preventing their therapeutic effects within solid tumors. Here, pinocytosis inhibitory nanoparticles are demonstrated to safely and temporarily disable the MPSviaenhanced delivery of the small molecule actin inhibitor latrunculin A (LatA). This “indirect targeting” strategy is applied to improve anti-programmed death receptor 1 (aPD-1) antibody administration in mice bearing melanoma and colon carcinoma, decreasing aPD-1 interaction with the MPS, avoiding liver toxicity, increasing engagement with target cells, and modulating the immune microenvironment of solid tumors. The resulting change in biodistribution significantly improved safety, anticancer efficacy, and overall survival. Our methodology may be employed to enhance a wide range of monoclonal antibody therapies.

Indirect targeting improves monoclonal antibody biodistribution, safety and efficacy in the treatment of solid tumors.

Monoclonal antibodies have emerged as an important modality in cancer treatment, boasting superior specificity to chemotherapy and radiation. However, suboptimal biodistribution and unwanted clearance can limit therapeutic antibody efficacy and safety. A major contributor to this is the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS), a collection of innate immune cells that passively sample the environment around them to maintain homeostasisviaa process called pinocytosis, and unfortunately as a result, also scavenge therapeutics. In this work, we employ a strategy called “indirect targeting” using pinocytosis inhibitory nanoparticles to safely and temporarily disable antibody uptake by the MPS, a problem that has largely been overlooked in antibody delivery. This approach was used to ameliorate the biodistribution of the monoclonal antibody anti-programmed death receptor-1 (aPD-1) by decreasing its accumulation in off-target tissues and promoting its engagement with target cells in solid tumors. This enhanced delivery translated to significant improvements in both the efficacy and safety of aPD-1 treatment. Additionally, this strategy does not rely on antigen or tissue-specific features and avoids the need to modify antibody structure or administration, making it a broadly applicable drug delivery strategy.

The mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS) consists of a broad range of phagocytic cell populations, including macrophages, monocytes and dendritic cells that are spread throughout the body. These cells are important regulators of immune homeostasis and critical modulators of drug delivery and clearance. While passively sampling their surroundings to alert for signs of foreign compounds and danger, they can uptake therapeuticsviapinocytosis, limiting target interactions and efficacy.10,11Organs containing concentrated populations of MPS cells overlap with sites of drug off-target accumulation and toxicity, notably the liver, lung, kidney and spleen.12For many pharmaceuticals, including antibody-based therapeutics, the MPS has been proven to have a significant impact on biodistribution and clearance.11,13Thus, the MPS is an additional—and critical—modulator of therapeutic antibody efficacy and safety, and an important consideration in drug delivery.

Previous work to improve antibody delivery has consisted of both active and passive targeting strategies. For example, protein- and glyco-engineering approaches to increase neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) binding have been shown to prevent antibody catabolism after cellular internalization.14Other attempts have included modifying the isoelectric point of the antibody and increasing affinity for the target antigen, though the latter has not been shown to impact clearance. Changing the amino acid sequence of the antibody can also cause unwanted immunogenicity.14,15For ADCs and radiotherapies, bio-orthogonal chemistry is under investigation for targeting tumor-specific receptors.16In aggregate, these attempts represent efforts to prevent drug clearance and increase half-life, which is correlated with therapeutic efficacy.17Unfortunately, such strategies largely fail to acknowledge the MPS, and a need exists for an orthogonal and broadly applicable method of directly avoiding accumulation of antibody therapeutics within MPS cells and organs.

In this proof-of concept work, we found that indirect targeting can limit aPD-1 uptake by the MPS and increase its interaction with T cells. Importantly, we show that LatA can generate significant enhancements in the anticancer efficacy, while meaningfully reducing the systemic toxicity, generated by aPD-1.28,29Bothin vitroandin vivoresults show encapsulation within nanocarriers was necessary to avoid toxicity of free form LatA. Given it is antigen- and tissue-agonistic and that our pre-injection protocol avoids the need to modify the formulation or administration of the monoclonal antibody, we believe these pinocytosis inhibitory nanoparticles can improve the delivery of a wide variety of therapeutic antibodies across tumor-type and disease indication to have a significant clinical impact.

LatA-loaded polymersomes (LatA-PS) were formed from the self-assembly of methoxy poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(propylene sulfide)-benzyl (mPEG17-PPS30-Bz)viathin film hydration as previously described.23Polymer purity was confirmed with1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and gel permeation chromatography (GPC) (Fig. S1, ESI†). Cryogenic-transmission election microscopy (cryo-TEM) and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) confirmed the vesicular nanoparticle morphology (Fig. 1A and B). Dynamic light scattering was used to determine thez-average, polydispersity and zeta potential of LatA-PS, which were 97.0 nm, 0.24, and −3.8 mV respectively (Fig. S2, ESI†). Particle diameter and membrane thickness were also determined by SAXS, which were estimated to be 65.0 nm, and 9.5 nm, respectively (Fig. S2B, ESI†). LatA loaded well within the nanoparticles, with an encapsulation efficiency of 45.8 percent, as determined by reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC, Fig. S2B, ESI†).

LatA has been previously shown to decrease nanoparticle uptake by inhibiting macropinocytosis, which occurs in as little as 30 min and maintains peak efficacy for greater than one hour after drug removal (Fig. S4, ESI†). However, its influence on antibody uptake; which can occur through multiple receptor-dependent and independent pathways including antigen-binding, Fc receptor (FcR) binding and pinocytosis; had yet to be determined.18,33To investigate this, RAW 264.7 macrophages were treated, or primed, with LatA-PS or PBS for 24 h and then incubated with Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1 for 2 h. Remaining aPD-1 in solution was washed away, and the amount of aPD-1 engaged with cells was determined by fluorescence (Fig. 1F). Cells treated with LatA-PS were found to have significantly less aPD-1 interaction, decreasing mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) by up to 4.3-fold. Inhibition of cellular uptake was confirmed by confocal microscopy. RAW 264.7 cells were primed with LatA for 30 min, treated with Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1 for 15 min, and stained with NucBlueTM. Confocal revealed a lower number of cells positive for aPD-1 upon treatment with LatA-PS (Fig. 1G). Collectively, these results demonstrate that LatA can block the cellular internalization of aPD-1 by relevant cells within the MPS.

To determine if LatA-PS priming could promote indirect targeting of tumors, enhancing therapeutic antibody accumulation in tumor tissue and reducing uptake in MPS organs, mice bearing melanoma were treated with free LatA or LatA-PS and Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1 (Fig. 2). Briefly, C57BL/6 mice were injected subcutaneously with 5 × 105B16F10 cells and tumors were allowed to grow to 100 mm3. Mice received two 7 μM injections of either free LatA or LatA-PS at 24 h and 4 h prior to aPD-1 administration, according to an established dosing regimen.18Mice then received a single 100 μg injection of Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1. Untreated mice and mice receiving only aPD-1 were used as controls. Anin vivoimaging system (IVIS) was employed to measure aPD-1 uptake, with the imaging angle optimized to visualize aPD-1 tumor accumulation in real time. At 2 days-post aPD-1 injection, mice were sacrificed and aPD-1 uptake in the heart, lung, spleen, liver, kidney and tumor, were assessedex vivo(Fig. 2A). Total radiant efficiency was calculated for each organ using the Living ImageTMsoftware.

IVIS imaging showed LatA priming to significantly increase aPD-1 accumulation in the tumor over the course of 2 days post-injection (Fig. 2B, Cand Fig. S5, ESI†). That is, pre-administration of free LatA or LatA-PS increased the aPD-1 signal 7-fold and 5.4-fold, compared to aPD-1 injection alone, respectively (Fig. 2C). This increase in tumor accumulation might be attributed at least in part to decreased MPS uptake, which can promote antibody clearance, and may have allowed more aPD-1 to circulate and reach target tissues.11,13Altogether, these results suggest that LatA priming allows for the indirect targeting of tumors, by promoting accumulation in the TME.

We anticipated that the shift in organ-level biodistribution of aPD-1 would be accompanied by changes at the cellular level. To test this, mice bearing colon carcinoma were treated with Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1 in the presence or absence of free LatA or LatA-PS (Fig. 3). A CT26, rather than B16F10, model was selected for cellular-level antibody biodistribution, immunomodulation and tumor growth inhibition experiments due to the CT26 model's increased immune infiltration and PD-L1 expression in the TME, which confer better responsiveness to ICIs.34,35Additionally, since we only sought to change the biodistribution of the therapeutic antibody, rather than its mechanism of action, choosing a model already well-established to respond to aPD-1 treatment was paramount. Briefly, mice were injected subcutaneously with 2 × 105CT26 cells and began treatment when tumor volumes reached approximately 120 mm3. Mice receiving treatment were administered 10 mg kg−1aPD-1 three times, once every 3 days. Mice primed with LatA received either 7 μM free LatA or LatA-PS injections at both 24 h and 4 h prior to each aPD-1 administration (Fig. 3A). Untreated mice were used as controls. Mice were sacrificed 24 h after the final aPD-1 injection and flow cytometry was performed to determine the cellular biodistribution of aPD-1 in the tumor. Changes in the anticancer immune response were also analyzed in the tumor and spleen.

Since highly phagocytic cells can scavenge therapeutic antibodies, aPD-1 was expected to co-localize with myeloid cells in the TME.36Indeed, there was a distinct CD11b positive population in the tumor positive for Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1 by flow cytometry (Fig. S6A, ESI†). This CD11b positive cell engagement was lower in response to LatA priming, presumably due to inhibition of antibody uptake. This decline was significant in mice treated with LatA-PS, which reduced engagement 2-fold (Fig. 3B). Importantly, the decline in myeloid cell uptake was accompanied by an increase in target cell engagement. While PD-1 is expressed on a variety of cell types, T cells are considered to be the main driver of aPD-1's therapeutic activity.37,38LatA-PS priming significantly boosted the number of T cells in the tumor engaged with Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1, from 2.3 percent to 6.3 percent (Fig. 3Cand Fig. S6B, ESI†). This can likely be attributed to the increased aPD-1 tumor accumulation (Fig. 2B and C), which would facilitate and increase T cell binding. The effect of LatA on the cellular-level biodistribution of aPD-1 was greatly enhanced by polymersome encapsulation. Since nanoparticles have increased uptake by the MPS, it is likely that LatA-PS more effectively targeted MPS cells than free LatA.39More efficient disabling of the system then resulted in greater changes in aPD-1 biodistribution. Overall, these results demonstrate that indirect targeting ameliorates both the organ-level and cellular-level biodistribution of aPD-1.

The decreased MPS uptake, increased tumor accumulation and elevated T cell engagement of aPD-1 translated to improvements in anticancer immunity. Flow cytometry indicated mice treated with aPD-1 monotherapy experienced lower levels of PD-1 expression on T cells in the spleen, suggesting less T cell exhaustion. These differences were only significant when combined with free LatA or LatA-PS (Fig. 3D).38As in the case of the T cell response, the innate immune response in the TME was heightened with indirect targeting. Flow cytometry indicated that there were ∼35 percent less CD163 positive macrophages in the tumor in response to LatA-PS priming (Fig. 3E). Free LatA priming resulted in a similar decline in the percent of CD163 positive macrophages, though this trend was not significant. CD163 is an important marker of macrophage polarization, indicating a more regenerative, less inflammatory phenotype.40Thus, lower, levels of CD163 positive macrophages suggests a more anti-cancer immune microenvironment. No significant differences from the untreated control were observed in mice that received the aPD-1 monotherapy alone.

To determine if the immune response was maintained over time, a second set of mice were treated with the same injection regimen and were sacrificed when tumor volumes reached 1000 mm3or at 40 days-post treatment initiation. The tumors were harvested, sectioned and stained for various markers. The tumor sections of these mice revealed significantly higher T cell infiltration in response to LatA-PS priming (Fig. 3F, Iand Fig. S7, ESI†). Specifically, the CD3 signal in the tumor increased 3.2-, 8.5- and 6.3-fold in response to LatA-PS priming, compared to the free LatA-priming, aPD-1 monotherapy, or no treatment, respectively. Mice at efficacy endpoints also had a stronger myeloid cell presence in tumor tissues. Indirect targeting augmented CD11c expression in the TME (Fig. 3G, I, and Fig. S8, ESI†). That is, tumor tissues of mice primed with LatA-PS and treated with aPD-1, exhibited significantly higher CD11c expression than those of other groups, with an increase in MFI of over 25-fold for the LatA-PS group compared to all other groups. The CD11c positive cells appeared absent in some groups, as their presence was minimal in comparison to the strong CD11c signal in the LatA-PS primed group. Increasing the intensity of the CD11c group allows these cells to be more easily visualized but saturates the signal in the LatA-PS group (Fig. S8, ESI†). Differences in MHC II levels in the TME were similarly dramatic, with LatA-PS priming significantly increasing MHC II levels the TME 4.2- to 6.6-fold compared to all other groups (Fig. 3H, Iand Fig. S8, ESI†). Collectively, these results indicate that indirect targeting enhances the anticancer immune response initiated by aPD-1 in a robust manner.

Since indirect targeting was found to improve aPD-1's accumulation in the tumor, engagement with T cells, and anticancer immune response, we anticipated it would also have a significant effect on tumor growth. To investigate this, mice were treated with the therapeutic dosing regimen described previously and tumors were allowed to grow until a volume of 1000 mm3or until 40 days after treatment initiation (Fig. 4A). We found that the anticancer efficacy of aPD-1, which had only a small impact on tumor growth inhibition when used alone, was enhanced with LatA priming. On day 8, the average tumor size of mice that received free LatA or LatA-PS were similar, paralleling the similar aPD-1 organ-level biodistribution results seen inFig. 2These tumors were significantly smaller than untreated mice, with 46.5 and 49.8 percent decreases in tumor volume, respectively (Fig. 4B, Cand Fig. S9A, ESI†). This reduction in tumor volume in the LatA-PS group was also significant compared to the aPD-1 monotherapy group, with a 40.9 percent reduction in tumor volume comparatively. Furthermore, some mice treated with LatA-PS not only had slower growth, but also experienced reductions in tumor volume, a phenomenon that was not observed in any other group (Fig. 4C). The dynamics of tumor growth were confirmed on a cellular level, as the tumors of mice treated with aPD-1, with or without LatA priming, exhibited less Ki67 expression (Fig. 4Dand Fig. S9B, ESI†). Ki67 is a marker of cellular proliferation, and thus tumors with lower Ki67 expression experienced slower growth. This difference was significant between the LatA-PS primed group and the untreated control, with a 27.5-fold decrease in MFI. Importantly, slower tumor growth translated to increased survival (Fig. 4E). Treatment with aPD-1 alone had a weak impact on survival, increasing median survival time from 9 to 11 days. The addition of free LatA or LatA-PS increased median survival time to 19.5 and 26.5 days, respectively, a significant improvement compared to the untreated and monotherapy groups. Notably, the LatA-PS group had significantly better survival than the free LatA group. This is consistent with the previous results showing polymersome encapsulation enhances LatA activity by increasing the engagement of aPD-1 with CD3 positive cells in the tumor (Fig. 3C). Additionally, the treatment was well-tolerated, with no significant changes in body weight observed during dosing (Fig. S9C, ESI†). Collectively, this data demonstrates that LatA priming can ameliorate the antitumor effects of aPD-1 and that indirect targeting is a promising strategy for improving therapeutic antibody efficacy.

Enhancing the activity of aPD-1 has important clinical implications. Perhaps the most significant consequence is that increasing the efficacy of a drug generally improves outcomes for the patient. Additionally, greater therapeutic activity could allow for reductions in dose, which can have several benefits. First, lowering the concentration of a pharmaceutical can reduce the likelihood and/or severity of adverse events that may lead to treatment discontinuation and failure in clinical trials.29,41,42Second, dosing frequency may be reduced, which can increase patient compliance and decrease healthcare costs, especially for therapeutics that require intravenous infusion.43Third, lower doses can increase affordability and accessibility of treatment. Thus, achieving enhanced therapeutic antibody efficacy with indirect targeting can be a tremendous benefit to the healthcare ecosystem.

The differences in toxicity observed in the liver may be the result of both organ- and cellular-level changes. It is possible that LatA-PS priming resulted in lower aPD-1 liver accumulation, which subsequentially decreased aPD-1-mediated toxicity (Fig. 2). Moreover, since ICIs can disrupt immune homeostasis, the resulting small modulations of immune cells can expand and propagate into wide ranging and often toxic effects. Depending on the immune mechanisms involved, these changes may not correlate directly with the concentration of aPD-1 in specific organs. These effects likely involve complex inflammatory pathways instead of direct cell killing and toxicity observed for chemotherapies.13,28Additionally, LatA may affect processes such as antigen presentation and receptor cycling, which rely on actin polymerization and modulate inflammatory responses.51–53The impact of indirect targeting on aPD-1 safety has important clinical implications, and additional work should be performed to elucidate how LatA-PS affect aPD-1-mediated off-target toxicity.

To further enhance the clinical relevance of the indirect targeting platform, additional injection regimes can be explored. The time points and route of administration selected here were based on an established scheme to ameliorate nanoparticle delivery. In the previous work, two dosing schedules were tested.18The first had a 24 h and 4 h pre-injection of LatA prior to the effector nanoparticle administration. The other platform had a 24 h pre-injection of LatA followed by a co-injection of LatA with the effector nanoparticle. Here, we chose to match the 24 h and 4 h pre-injection regimen. PEG-b-PPS polymersome accumulation is noticeable in MPS tissues such as the liver, kidney and spleen in as little as 1 h after intravenous injection and continues to have significant accumulation through at least 48 h.27We wanted to ensure the nanoparticles had sufficient time to accumulate and exert their effects on macropinocytosis before administering the antibody. Additionally, the effects of LatA on endocytosis inhibition start in as little as 30 min and begin to wane between 1 and 2 hin vitro, but still have significant effects for at least 2 h (Fig. S4, ESI†).27Thus, we hypothesized that the established pre-treatment strategy would have a positive effect on aPD-1 biodistribution. As this work is a proof-of-concept demonstrating the impact of LatA priming on aPD-1 therapeutic activity, additional dosing regimens were not evaluated. Exploring a co-injection strategy, in which LatA and aPD-1 are administered simultaneously, may be more translatable to the clinic, as it would require fewer intravenous infusions. Instead of using the intravenous route, more easily administered subcutaneous injections of LatA might also be of benefit for clinical translation. Regardless, this work highlights the ability of indirect targeting to improve both the safety and efficacy of aPD-1 administration.

In this work, a new indirect targeting strategy was developed to enhance the delivery of therapeutic antibodies to solid tumors. Priming with pinocytosis inhibitory LatA-PS was shown to improve the biodistribution of aPD-1 by decreasing accumulation within the MPS, enhancing tumor accumulation, and increasing interaction with T cells. This change in biodistribution translated to meaningful benefits in the anticancer immune response and tumor growth inhibition initiated by aPD-1. Furthermore, this approach improved the safety of aPD-1 by minimizing its off-target toxicity. This enhanced efficacy and reduced off-target toxicity may result in many benefits in the clinic, including better prognosis, fewer adverse events, less frequent dosing, greater patient compliance and lower cost.41,43,56Given its ability to augment both efficacy and safety, antigen- and tissue-agonistic approach, and capacity to complement other targeting strategies, we anticipate that indirect targetingviaLatA-PS will improve a wide variety of therapeutic antibodies across solid tumors and for diverse disease indications.

The goal of this work was to determine how changing the biodistribution of aPD-1 to prevent its uptake by the MPS affected its anticancer response. To do this, we formed LatA-loaded nanoparticles to inhibit the MPS. We explored their effect on actin polymerization and aPD-1 cellular uptakein vitro, and how they change aPD-1 organ- and cellular level biodistributionin vivo. We investigated their ability to enhance aPD-1's anticancer immune response and tumor growth inhibition. Finally, we evaluated the toxicity of the approach.

LatA and was Phalloidin-iFluor™ 488 Conjugate were purchased from Cayman Chemicals. Anti-Mouse PD-1 (CD279) Rat Monoclonal Antibody [RMP1–14] was purchased from Bio X Cell. Flamma® Fluors 648 was purchased from BioActs. Zeba spin desalting columns, NucBlueTMand dialysis cassettes were purchased from ThermoFisher. DMEM was purchased from Gibco. Collagenase III and liberase TH and were purchased from Worthington Biomedical and Roche, respectively. Zombie live/dead, red blood cell lysis buffer, cell staining buffer, fluorescent antibodies and cell fixation buffer were purchased from BioLegend. All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

Murine colon carcinoma CT26 cells, melanoma B16F10 cells, and RAW 264.7 macrophages were purchased from ATCC. CT26 and DC2.4 cells were cultured in complete media, consisting of RMPI 1640 with 10% FBS, 100 U mL−1and 100 μg mL−1streptomycin. Murine B16F10 cells and RAW 264.7 macrophages cells were purchased from ATCC. Raw 264.7 cells were cultured in DMEM media with 10% FBS, 100 U mL−1and 100 μg mL−1streptomycin. Cells were utilized in experiments during the logarithmic growth phase.

Female C57BL/6 mice (6–8 weeks old) were purchased from Jackson Laboratories. Male Balb/c mice (6–8 weeks old) were purchased from Jackson Laboratories. All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines and regulations approved by the Laboratory Animal Welfare and Ethics Committee of Northwestern University (Approved Protocol Numbers: IS00017606 and IS00007992).

PEG17-b-PPS30-Bz was synthesized according to established procedures.26Methyl ether PEG was functionalized with a mesylate groupviathe addition of sodium hydroxide and methanesulfonyl chloride. PEG mesylate was then used to generate PEG thioacetate. Finally, PEG thioacetate was used to initiate the living polymerization of propylene sulfide, which was end capped with benzyl bromide.1H NMR spectroscopy and GPC were used to characterize the synthesized polymer.

To prepare polymersomes, PEG17-b-PPS30-Bz (10 mg) was measured and placed in a sterile 2 mL glass vial and dissolved in THF (200 μL). LatA (10 μg) was dissolved in THF (100 μL) and then combined with the polymer. The THF was removedviadesiccation and the polymer deposit was rehydrated with PBS solution (1 mL, pH 7.4). The sample was shaken overnight at RT. Unencapsulated drug was removed by filtering samples with a Zeba spin desalting column (7 KD MWCO, 0.5 mL). Debris and nanoparticle aggregates were removed by filtering through a PTFE filter (0.2 μm, 14 mm).

Polymersome size and zeta potential were determined with dynamic light scattering (DLS, Zetasizer, Malvern, UK). Samples were prepared by diluting PS formulations (0.1–0.3 mg) in PBS (1 mL, pH 7.4) using a disposable low-volume sample cuvette. Particle morphology was visualized using cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL 1400 Flash,120 kV, JAPAN) and a Gatan OneView 4k camera. Nanostructure morphology was further confirmed by small angle X-ray scattering, which was performed at Argonne National Laboratories. Data reduction/buffer subtraction and model fitting were performed using the BioXTAS RAW 2.8.3 and SasView 5.0.5 software, respectively.57Vesicle sphere models were used to fit the data.

To determine LatA drug loading, aliquots of LatA-loaded PS (0.1 mg) were dried under vacuum. The resulting solid was resuspended in 95% 100 μL methanol and sonicated for 5 min. The sample was placed at −80 °C for 6 h and centrifuged at 170 00gat 9 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in 95% methanol and placed at −20 °C for 1 h. The solution was spun at 17 000gat −9 °C for 10 min. The supernatants from each spin were combined for analysis. The concentration of LatA was determined with RP-HPLC. HPLC was performed using a C18 column (Avantor) and methanol/water gradient for the mobile phase. Absorbance values were determined at 235 nm and LatA concentration was determined with a LatA calibration curve in methanol.

Flamma® Fluors 648 was dissolved in DMSO (1 mg, 100 μL). APD-1 was dissolved in reaction buffer (500 mM carbonate, pH 9.5). The dye was slowly added to the aPD-1 solution and allowed to stir for 1 h at RT. The solution was dialyzed against water (20 KD MWCO, 12 mL) to remove any unconjugated dye.

The cytotoxicity of free LatA and LatA-PS was evaluated using an MTT assay. Briefly, CT26 cells or RAW 264.7 macrophages were seeded on a 96-well plate (6 × 104cells well−1) and allowed to adhere overnight. Cells were treated with complete media, free LatA (100 μL, 0.05, 0.5, 1, 2, 4 or 7 μM LatA) or LatA-PS (100 μL, 0.05, 0.5, 1, 2, 4 or 7 μM LatA) for 24 h. After incubation, the cells were washed and treated with MTT (100 μL, 0.4 mg mL−1) for 4 h. Then the media was removed and 150 μL DMSO was added to each well. Absorbance was detected at 630 nm (A630) and 570 nm (A570). Viability was calculated with the formula: viability (%) = (A630−A570of treated cells/A630−A570of untreated cells) × 100%.

The cytotoxicity of free LatA and LatA-PS was evaluated in RAW 264.7 macrophages by flow cytometry. RAW 264.7 macrophages were incubated with complete media, free LatA (100 μL, 0.01, 0.1, 1, or 10 μM) or LatA-PS (100 μL, 0.01, 0.1, 1, or 10 μM) for 24 h. Cells were collected and stained with Zombie NIR (1 μL in 1000 μL of cell staining buffer) for 15 min at RT. Flow cytometry was run (Aurora 3L, Cytek, USA) and the percentage of Zombie NIR-negative cells of singlets were determined with FlowJoTMsoftware version 10.10. The percentage of Zombie-negative cells corresponded to cellular viability.

To determine when the effects of LatA-PS on pinocytosis start, DC2.4 cells were incubated cells with LatA-PS (2 μM) for 0.5 h and then with DiD-loaded polymersomes (DiD-PS) at the same polymer concentration for 6 h. To determine how long the effects of LatA-PS last, DC2.4 cells were incubated cells with LatA-PS (2 μM) for 2 h, allowed to recover for 0 h, 1 h or 2 h, and then incubated with DiD-PS for 6 h. Cellular uptake was measuredviaDiD fluorescence using flow cytometry. Data was analyzed using the FlowJoTMsoftware version 10.10.

The effect of Lat A-PS on cells on actin polymerization was investigated with confocal microscopy. 3 × 105RAW 264.7 cells were seeded on a 35 mm dish and incubated for 24 hours at 37 °C and 5.0% CO2. Cells were treated with Lat A-PS (7 μM) for 24 hours. Cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde solution (15 min, RT). Then cells were washed and permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 (15 min, RT). Cells were blocked with 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) overnight prior to staining. To stain F-actin, cells were incubated with Alexa 488-Phalloidin diluted 1000× in 1% BSA (20 min, RT). Cells were washed with PBS and stained with NucBlue (1 drop mL−1media, 30 min, RT). Cells were washed again with fresh CDMEM and imaged with Nikon Super-resolution by Optical Re-assignment (SoRa) Spinning-disk Confocal System. Images were collected with a 60× oil immersion objective magnification lens was used with SoRa obtaining final magnification of 168×. The image was analyzed with NIS elements imaging software version 5.41.02.

The effect of LatA-PS on aPD-1 engagement with RAW 264.7 macrophages was investigated. Briefly, 8.1 × 105cells were seeded on a 48-well plate and incubated for 24 h. Cells were then treated with either 7 μM LatA, 1 μM LatA or PBS for 24 h. Cells were washed and then incubated with Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1 (12.5 μg mL−1) for 2 h. Cells were washed to remove aPD-1 in solution and the fluorescence was (λex: 646 nmλem: 648 nm) measured to approximate aPD-1 engagement with cells.

RAW 264.7 macrophages were seeded on a 4-well confocal dish (2 × 105cells well−1) and allowed to adhere overnight. Cells were treated with complete media, free LatA (500 μL, μM) or LatA-PS (500 μL, 2 μM) for 30 min. After incubation, the cells were washed and treated with Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1 (500 μL, 16 μM) for 15 min. Then the cells were washed and stained with NucBlue (1 drop mL−1) for 15 min. Confocal microscopy was performed (SP8, Leica, Germany) with a 63× oil immersion objective magnification lens.

To establish murine melanoma, mice were injected subcutaneously with B16F10 cells (5 × 105) in the right hind flank. Tumors were allowed to grow until ∼100 mm3at which point mice received a single 100 μg intravenous injection of Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1. Mice in LatA-PS or free LatA groups received two intravenous LatA doses (7 μM, 100 μL) 24 h and again 4 h prior to the aPD-1 injection. Tumor size was measured with calipers (V= 0.5LW2, whereWis the shorter perpendicular distance). aPD-1 tumor accumulation was measured with IVIS at 1 h, 12 h, 24 h, and 48 h after aPD-1 accumulation. Imaging angle was optimized to facilitate measuring tumor uptake in real time. Mice were sacrificed 48 h post-injection andex vivoimaging of the heart, lung, spleen, liver, kidney and tumor was performed. Images were analyzed with the Living Image® software. For quantification, background elimination was performed by subtracting the average total radiant efficiency of untreated mice from each respective organ.

To establish colon carcinoma, mice were injected subcutaneously with CT26 cells (2 × 105) in the right hind flank. Tumors were allowed to grow until ∼120 mm3at which point treatment with Flamma® Fluors 648-labeled-aPD-1 (10 mg kg−1) or a saline control was initiated. For all experiments, mice received 3 intraperitoneal aPD-1 injections, separated by 3 days. Mice in LatA-PS or free LatA groups received intravenous LatA injections (7 μM, 100 μL) 24 h and again 4 h prior to each aPD-1 injection. Tumor size was measured with calipers (V= 0.5LW2, whereWis the shorter perpendicular distance). One day after the final treatment the mice were sacrificed. The spleens and tumors were excised. Tumors were minced and digested with 600 μL of Collagenase III (3000 units mL−1in HBSS) or 400 μL of Liberase TH and 100 Kunitz units of DNase I. Then, single cell suspensions were generated by passing the digested tumor tissue and spleen through a 70 μm cell strainer. Red blood cells were removed with RBC lysis buffer (5 min, 4 °C). The harvested cells were stained with various antibodies to analyze with flow cytometry (Aurora 3L, Cytek, USA). Data analysis was performed FlowJoTMsoftware version 10.10.

A CT26 model was established, and treatment was performed as described above, though unlabeled aPD-1. Body weight and tumor size were observed daily. Mice were sacrificed when tumors were 1000 mm3or at 40 days after treatment began, whichever came first. In some cases, the tumor and major organs were collected for further analysis.

Tumors were excised from mice at efficacy endpoints and embedded in OCT solution prior to freezing at −80 °C. Samples were sectioned, stained and imaged with a PhenoCycler-Fusion. Samples were analyzed using the QuPath software version 0.5.1. The DAPI signal of some Ki67 images were enhanced to normalize signal background.

The heart, lungs, liver, kidney and spleen from mice at efficacy endpoints were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin prior to section. Hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed to evaluate organ-specific toxicity.

Statistics were performed using a one-way ANOVA and Tukey's multiple comparison test using the software GraphPad Prism version 10.4.1. Statistical significance was determined if thep-value was below 0.05. *p-value < 0.05, **p-value < 0.01, ***p-value < 0.001, ****p-value < 0.001.