Bronchial arterial chemoembolization (BACE), as a safe and effective minimally invasive treatment method, is increasingly being accepted by more and more patients with advanced nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In recent years, drug-eluting beads (DEB)-BACE has also been applied in the field of lung cancer. It is still unclear which is more recommended due to the limited number of comparative studies between conventional BACE (C-BACE) and DEB-BACE.

To compare the safety and efficacy of C-BACE (BACE with gelfoam particles) and DEB-BACE for advanced NSCLC.

From January 2021 to April 2023, 48 consecutive patients (37 males and 11 females) with advanced NSCLC treated with DEB-BACE (group A) or C-BACE (group B) at our center were collected retrospectively in this study. There were 18 patients in group A and 30 patients in group B. The technical success rate, adverse events, objective response rate (ORR), disease control rate (DCR), progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS) were compared between the 2 groups.

The technical success rate in both groups was 100%. The median OS times were 19.5 months and 12.5 months in group A and group B, respectively (P=0.0062). The median PFS times were 13 months and 7 months in group A and group B, respectively (P=0.0072). The ORRs at 6 months were 72.2% and 46.7% in group A and group B, respectively (P=0.084). The DCRs at 6 months were 88.9% and 63.3% in group A and group B, respectively (P=0.043). Grade 1 adverse events like chest pain, and cough were common, while serious adverse events did not occur.

BACE with DEB or gelfoam particles were equally safe. The DEB-BACE showed better survival and tumor response than C-BACE for advanced NSCLC.

Therefore, we retrospectively analyzed the data of lung cancer patients who underwent DEB-BACE or C-BACE treatment at our center and conducted a comparative analysis, hoping to provide some guidance for clinical treatment.

The study procedures conformed to the ethical guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki, and the institutional review board approved this retrospective study. The requirement for informed consent of recruitment was waived. Inclusion criteria: (1) Pathologically confirmed NSCLC; (2) Newly diagnosed patients who cannot tolerate or refuse systemic chemoradiotherapy and surgery; (3) Patients who have failed first-line system treatment; (4) The patient’s physical condition allowed him to tolerate the interventional treatment, and her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS) score ranged from 0 to 2. Exclusion criteria: (1) Severe coagulation, liver, kidney, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction; active infection; cachexia; and other contraindications for interventional treatment; (2) Difficulty in controlling distant metastatic lesions; (3) ECOG PS score >2; (4) Patients refused intervention treatment.

From January 2021 to April 2023, 48 consecutive patients (37 males and 11 females) with advanced NSCLC treated with DEB-BACE (group A) or BACE with gelfoam particles (group B) at our center were enrolled in this study. All patients signed informed consent for DEB-BACE and C-BACE before the operation. DEB-BACE was recommended for hypervascular NSCLC patients. There were 18 patients in group A and 30 patients in group B. The flowchart of patient selection is shown in Figure1.

The flowchart of patient selection. BACE indicates Bronchial arterial chemoembolization; C-BACE, conventional-BACE; DEB, drug-eluting beads; ECOG PS, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status; NSCLC, nonsmall-cell lung cancer.

All patients underwent chest contrast-enhanced (CE) computed tomography (CT) before surgery. All procedures were performed by 2 interventional radiologists with at least 10 years of experience. After disinfecting and covering the bilateral inguinal area, the modified Seldinger technique was used to puncture the right/left femoral artery under local anesthesia, after which a 5F vascular sheath was inserted. According to the indications for preoperative chest CECT, 5F Cobra, MIK, and other catheters were used to select the bronchial artery for angiography. If this was difficult, a pigtail catheter was used for thoracic aortic angiography to identify the origin of the bronchial artery. If necessary, angiography should be performed on the intercostal artery, subclavian artery, internal thoracic artery, thyroid carotid artery branch, diaphragmatic artery, left gastric artery, etc., to check the blood supply of the tumor. A microcatheter was used to select the tumor-feeding arteries. Chemoinfusion was performed after confirming the absence of the spinal artery. The infusion time generally exceeded 30 minutes. The total chemotherapy dose of BAI is 50% of the recommended dose of systemic intravenous chemotherapy. The chemotherapeutic agents for lung adenocarcinoma include pemetrexed (200 mg/m2) and cisplatin (20 mg/m2), while for squamous cell carcinoma, gemcitabine (500 mg/m2) and cisplatin (20 mg/m2) are preferred. For some patients who have failed first-line systemic treatment, adjustments will be made based on their previous medication regimen. Patients with positive targets in lung adenocarcinoma gene test results are recommended to receive combination targeted drugs unless the patient refuses.

After infusion of chemotherapeutic agents, embolization was performed with gelform particles (C-BACE) or DEBs (DEB-BACE). Before embolization, it must be confirmed that no obvious arteriovenous fistula was present. CalliSphere (Jiangsu Hengrui Medicine Co., Ltd., Jiangsu, China) or HepaSphere (V325HS/V225HS; Merit Medical Systems, Inc, South Jordan, Utah) were used for DEB-BACE and loaded with cisplatin (20-40 mg) or doxorubicin (40-60 mg). The embolization endpoint was defined as when tumor staining disappeared and blood flow in the tumor-feeding artery trunk stagnated after 5 heartbeats.

The first tumor response assessment was conducted 1 month after treatment. Indications for a repeated BACE were to control tumor progression or patients’ respiratory symptoms. BACE was repeated on-demand. In cases receiving repeated treatments, the same regimen was adopted unless tumor progression was detected. If tumor was obviously progressed, the other drugs or local treatments was selected or added to, such as iodine-125 particle implantation or palliative ablation.

Differences between the 2 groups were analyzed by the Studentttest, the Wilcoxon rank sum test, the χ2test, the Fisher exact test, and the log-rank test. Survival curves were constructed with the Kaplan-Meier method.P<0.05 was considered to indicate a significant difference. All the statistical analyzes were performed with SPSS 25.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) or R software (version 3.6.1).

There were 18 patients in the DEB-BACE group (a typical case was shown in Fig.2) and 30 patients in the C-BACE group (a typical case was shown in Fig.3). The baseline characteristics of the patients are summarized in Table1. The histopathologic types of the included NSCLC patients were adenocarcinoma (ADC) (28/48, 58.3%) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) (20/48, 41.7%). No differences were found in age (P=0.316), sex (P=0.249), concomitant diseases (allP>0.05), ECOG PS score (P=0.939), histologic subtype (P=0.364), tumor size (P=0.563), or tumor node metastasis (TNM) stage (P=0.594), between the 2 groups.

A patient of advanced lung adenocarcinoma received bronchial artery chemoembolization with drug-eluting beads. A, Chest CT scan shows that the tumor is located in the lower lobe of the left lung, with a maximum diameter of 10 cm. B, Left bronchial artery angiograph showing the tumor with abnormal staining before embolization. C, Left bronchial artery angiograph showing the abnormal tumor staining subsided after embolization with drug-eluting beads. D, Chest CT scan performed 3 months later shows the tumor volume is significantly reduced with the formation of a cavity.

A patient of advanced lung adenocarcinoma combined with pulmonary interstitial fibrosis received bronchial artery chemoembolization with gelfoam particles. A, Chest CT scan shows that the tumor is located in the lower lobe of the right lung, with a maximum diameter of 7.6 cm. B, Right bronchial artery angiograph showing the tumor with abnormal staining before embolization. C, Right bronchial artery angiograph showing the abnormal tumor staining subsided after embolization with gelfoam particles. D, Chest CT scan performed 2 months later shows the tumor volume is significantly reduced.

CHD indicates coronary heart disease; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Forty-eight patients underwent a total of 180 sessions of intervention procedures, with group A and group B receiving 58 and 122 sessions, respectively. Patients in group A and group B underwent 3.2±1.7 and 4.1±3.0 sessions, respectively (P=0.288). A total of 18 (100%) patients in the DEB-BACE group and 30 (100%) patients in the C-BACE group achieved technical success in BACE (P=1.000). There were no CR patients in either group 6 months after BACE. PR was achieved in 13 patients in the DEB-BACE group and 14 patients in the C-BACE group. SD was achieved in 3 patients in the DEB-BACE group and 5 patients in the C-BACE group. Two patients in the DEB-BACE group and 11 patients in the C-BACE group experienced PD. The ORR at 6 months after DEB-BACE and C-BACE were 72% and 47%, respectively (P=0.084). The DCRs 6 months after DEB-BACE and C-BACE were 89% and 63%, respectively (P=0.043).

The median follow-up time of the patients was 16 (4-37) months. The median OS times were 19.5 months and 12.5 months in group A and group B, respectively. The 6-month, 12-month, and 24-month OS rates were 100.0%, 100%, 50%, 93.3%, 66.1%, and 23.3%, respectively (P=0.0062). The median PFS times were 13 months and 7 months in group A and group B, respectively. The 6-month, 12-month, and 24-month PFS rates were 88.9%, 50%, 5%, 53.3%, 16.7%, and 3%, respectively (P=0.0072). The OS and PFS analysis were shown in Figure4.

Overall survival and progression-free survival analysis with the Kaplan-Meier method.

No major complications occurred in either group. Coughing was the most common minor complication in both groups and could be alleviated without additional treatment. The incidences of cough in the DEB-BACE and C-BACE groups were 44.4% (8/18) and 46.7% (14/30), respectively (P=0.881). Other adverse events, such as chest discomfort or pain (3/18, 16.7% vs. 2/30, 16.7%;P=0.349), fever (4/18, 22.2% vs. 4/30, 13.3%;P=0.451), and nausea or vomiting (2/18, 11.1% vs. 4/30, 13.3%;P=0.599), were also found in the DEB-BACE and C-BACE groups.

Intravascular interventional therapy has been widely used for hepatic carcinoma and is recommended by many clinical guidelines. However, there is still insufficient evidence-based medical data for the treatment of lung cancer using this technology. We compared the effectiveness and safety of 2 commonly used endovascular intervention methods (DEB-BACE and C-BACE) for the treatment of NSCLC in clinical practice. Our results showed that BACE with DEB or gelfoam particles was equally safe, but DEB-BACE had a better ORR (6 mo: 72% vs. 47%) and longer survival time than C-BACE (median OS: 19.5 mo vs. 12.5 mo).

Bronchial arterial infusion (BAI) chemotherapy as an intravascular treatment for lung tumors was first reported by Neyazaki et al16in 1969. BAI has a favorable local response and improved survival in optimally selected patients with locally advanced lung cancer who were refractory or and contraindicated for standard chemotherapy.17BAI improved the drug concentration within tumors compared with systemic drug infusion, as expected for local tumor control. BACE has also been proven to be more effective than systemic chemotherapy and has fewer side effects.18Compared with C-BACE, DEB-BACE can release chemical drugs more slowly and continuously, further improving the local drug action time and enhancing treatment effectiveness theoretically.

DEB-BACE loaded with gemcitabine,8adriamycin,19or cisplatin10has been reported to have good efficacy and safety in the treatment of advanced NSCLC. In our study, DEB-BACE loaded with doxorubicin or cisplatin was commonly used.

The technical success rate of BACE (C-BACE and DEB-BACE) was 100% in this study, consistent with previous research.12The key technical point lies in successfully searching for tumor-feeding arteries. Preoperative chest CECT is crucial for quickly locating the tumor-feeding arteries during operation.

In this study, DEB-BACE demonstrated superior tumor control efficacy to C-BACE, with a higher ORR and DCR. The ORR at 6 months after DEB-BACE and C-BACE were 72% and 47%, respectively (P=0.084). The DCRs of 6 months after DEB-BACE and C-BACE were 89% and 63%, respectively (P=0.043). Several studies have compared the clinical response of the DEB-BACE and C-BACE/BAI. He et al13retrospectively analyzed the clinical efficacy of DEB-BACE (n=20) or C-BACE (n=16) in 36 patients with advanced squamous cell lung cancer. The 6-month ORR was 50% versus 12.5% in the DEB-BACE and C-BACE groups, respectively. Bie et al8conducted a study on DEB-BACE loaded with gemcitabine for patients with stage II/III NSCLC who progressed after standard treatment or were unable to receive standard treatment. The results showed that the 6-month ORR and DCR were 50.0% and 66.7%, respectively, and the quality of life of the patients was significantly improved after treatment. Bi et al20retrospectively analyzed the clinical efficacy of DEB-BACE in 29 patients with advanced NSCLC. The results showed that the 6-month ORR and DCR were 29.4% and 58.8%, respectively. The ORR in our study was greater than that in the above 3 studies, possibly because most of the patients in our study were newly diagnosed with lung cancer, while the patients included in the above 3 studies were first-line systemic treatment failure patients. Shang et al19conducted a prospective cohort study on 60 patients with stage II-IV lung cancer. The 6-month DCR was 93.3% versus 73.3% (P=0.080), and the ORR was 86.7% versus 60.0% (P=0.039) in the DEB-BACE and BAI groups, respectively. The DCR and ORR in this study were both greater than those in our study, which may be related to the inclusion of some phase II patients. In summary, our research findings and previous studies have shown that DEB-BACE can result in a better clinical response than C-BACE in the treatment of newly diagnosed or first-line systemic treatment failure NSCLC patients.

The median follow-up time of this study was 16 (4-37) months. The median OS times were 19.5 months and 12.5 months in the DEB-BACE group and C-BACE group, respectively (P=0.0062). The median PFS times were 13 months and 7 months in the DEB-BACE group and C-BACE group, respectively (P=0.0072). The DEB-BACE resulted in better survival than the C-BACE. Considering that DEB loaded with chemotherapeutic agents can continuously and slowly release drugs into tumor tissue, and the small particle size of DEB is a permanent embolic material that can embolize the tumor vascular bed and better cause tumor ischemic necrosis. Research by He et al13revealed that during a median follow-up period of 8.9 months, the median OS was 13.7 months in the DEB-BACE group and 6.5 months in the C-BACE group (P<0.01). The median PFS in the DEB-BACE group was 4.3 months, whereas it was 3.2 months in the C-BACE group (P=0.030). Our OS and PFS data were greater than those of the above study, which may be related to the fact that most of the patients in our study had newly diagnosed lung cancer, while the patients included in the above study were first-line systemic treatment failure patients. Another reason may be related to the short follow-up time. In any case, these studies suggest that DEB-BACE can lead to better survival conditions than C-BACE in the treatment of advanced NSCLC.

Previous studies have shown that fever, chest pain, and cough are common adverse reactions of DEB-BACE/C-BACE treatment and can be treated symptomatically or disappear spontaneously.8,12,13In line with the findings of previous studies, we found that no serious complications (such as spinal cord injury) occurred after DEB-BACE or C-BACE. The cough is related to the stimulation of chemotherapy drugs through the tumor-feeding artery. Fever and chest pain are related to tumor ischemic necrosis after tumor-feeding artery embolization. Both DEB-BACE and C-BACE treatments for advanced lung cancer are safe.

Interesting findings were discovered in this study, but several limitations still exist. First, this was a single-center retrospective observational study. However, further validation with multicenter prospective randomized controlled trials is necessary. Second, this study had a small sample size. However, further validation in a larger population is necessary. Third, this study included patients who were newly diagnosed and whose first-line systemic treatment failed or was unfeasible, which could cause bias. It is necessary to conduct subgroup analysis for specific populations with sufficient sample sizes in the future.

In conclusion, both DEB-BACE and C-BACE are safe and effective at treating advanced NSCLC patients, but compared with C-BACE, DEB-BACE is associated with a greater clinical response and prolonged survival. Our findings suggest that DEB-BACE might be a better choice for advanced NSCLC patients.