It has been reported that the morphology and volume of the maxillary sinus (MS), which is the largest paranasal sinus, have an impact on the success of surgical procedures that are to be performed in the MS region. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of sphenopalatine foramen (SPF) and alveolar antral arterial canal (AAAC) diameters and posterior dentition status (PDS) on maxillary sinus volume (MSV).

The study included cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) images of patients over 20 years of age with no impacted teeth in the MS, and in whom the entire MS margins, AAAC, and SPF were clearly visible. Only images without metal or motion artefacts and with adequate clarity were selected. In this study, a total of 90 patients’ CBCT images, 47 males and 43 females, with a mean age of 47.10 years, were evaluated. AAAC diameter was measured on the coronal section, and SPF diameter was measured on the axial section of CBCT. MSV was measured on axial sections with 3D DOCTOR software.

The mean MSV was 14.02 cm3, 14.47 cm3in dentate patients, and 13.21 cm3in edentulous patients. The mean MSV was found to be 24.99 cm3in the female group and 30.84 cm3in the male group. Statistical analysis revealed that the mean MSV and AAAC diameter were higher in males (p= 0.000). While the mean MSV was higher in the dentate group, this disparity did not demonstrate statistical significance (p= 0.126). A weak negative correlation was identified between MSV and SPF diameter (p= 0.004,r= -214).

In the present study, CBCT evaluation revealed that a negative correlation was found between MSV and SPF, and a positive correlation between SPF and AAAC, while no significant relationship was observed between MSV and AAAC. It is recommended that the sample size be increased in future studies to evaluate the possible statistical relationship between MSV and AAAC. The AAAC diameter was larger in patients with edentulous PDS, suggesting increased caution is needed during sinus elevation in such cases. MSV was higher in males, indicating its potential use in sex determination in forensic sciences.

The maxillary sinuses (MSs), which are the largest of the paranasal sinuses, are a pyramid-shaped air-filled cavity located in the maxillary bone [1,2]. It has been reported that the maxillary sinus volume (MSV) on average is 6–8 cm3at birth and can reach 15 cm3by the age of 18 years [3]. The MS is supplied by the posterior superior alveolar artery (PSAA), which branches from the maxillary artery, the infraorbital artery (IOA), the posterior lateral nasal artery (PLNA), which branches from the sphenopalatine artery (SPA), and the descending palatine artery [4,5]. The alveolar antral artery (AAA) is an anastomosis between the PSAA and IOA. It provides blood supply to the mucosa of the MS and the periosteum of the maxilla [6]. PLNA forms anastomoses with the branches of the facial artery, nasal arteries and both anterior, and posterior ethmoidal arteries, extending toward the lateral wall of the nasal cavity. This anastomosis supplies blood to the concha, meatuses, and posterior and medial wall of the MS [5]. SPA is the terminal branch of the maxillary artery, known as the epistaxis artery by otolaryngologists. Kisselbach’s plexus is responsible for anterior epistaxis, whereas the SPA and its branches account for posterior epistaxis [7].

Due to the superposition and uneven magnification of 2-dimensional imaging modalities, 3-dimensional (3D) imaging modalities, including computed tomography (CT) and cone beam computed tomography (CBCT), are preferred for diagnostic imaging of complex anatomical structures, including the maxillary sinus [8]. Compared to CT, CBCT is an imaging modality that requires a much lower dose of radiation, is easily accessible, occupies less space, allows for rapid image acquisition, and is cost-effective; thus, CBCT is being increasingly used in clinical dentistry [9,10]. Furthermore, it has been reported that volumetric data can be obtained from 3D images and imaging software using advanced algorithms [11].

Previous studies measured the volume of the maxillary sinus using different semi-automated 3-dimensional image processing software as well as certain methods, including the ellipsoid formula and stereology [8,9,12,13].

It has been reported that MSV is affected by multiple factors, including age, sex, tooth loss, height, and weight [14]. Previous studies have focused on the relationship between MSV and various factors, including impacted maxillary canine teeth [15], cleft palate [16], age and sex [9], nasal septa [17], obstructive sleep apnoea [18] oral or nasal breathing [19] and different craniofacial patterns [20]. The effect of the vascular structures that supply MS on MSV has not been investigated yet. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the relationship between MSV and the diameters of arteries supplying MS. It is crucial to have a good understanding of the anatomy of the maxillary sinus and the position and diameter of vascular structures, including alveolar antral arterial canal (AAAC) in the region to prevent possible bleeding complications that may occur during maxillofacial surgery, dental implant treatment and sinus augmentation operations [1,9,21,22].

This study aimed to investigate the relationship of sphenopalatine foramen (SPF) and AAA diameter with MSV and review the relationship of maxillary sinus volume with demographic data, including age, sex, and posterior dentition status (PDS) using CBCT images and a semi-automated three-dimensional image processing software (3D-DOCTOR).

The study was designed as retrospective cross-sectional research. The research protocol was approved by Kütahya Health Science University Non-Interventional Clinical Research Ethics Committee (decision date and approval number: 16.08.2023-2023/09). Patient consent was not obtained as this was a retrospective study. The work was carried out in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The CBCT images retrieved from the archives of the authors’ institution were used in this study. CBCT images dated between 01.10.2020–11.08.2023 for implant planning and evaluation of bone structure in temporomandibular joint disorders (TMJs) were included in the study.

The present study included CBCT images of patients over 20 years of age who had no impacted teeth in their MS and in whom the entire MS margins, AAAC, and SPF could be evaluated. CBCT images without metal and motion artefacts and with adequate clarity were included, allowing for the evaluation of the MS, AAAC, and SPF. Moreover, the patients included in the study had no prior history of trauma or surgical intervention in the maxillofacial region. Patients under the age of 20 years, with artefacts (motion and metal artefacts) that would affect the evaluation and measurement process, in which the entire MS margins, AAAC and SPF were not included in the imaging field; patients with a history of lesions, trauma and surgery affecting the maxillofacial region; and patients with impacted teeth in the MS were excluded from the study.

The sample size was calculated using the G-power 3.1 (ver. 3.1.9.6; Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany) software. In order to investigate the association between MSV and AAAC diameter, a sample size of 82 was required for this study. This was calculated using an effect size of 0.30 (medium), a margin of error of 0.05 (95% confidence level), and 80% power using two-way hypothesis testing.

Of the 774 obtained CBCT at the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology, 459 were excluded because cannot be seen all boundaries of the MS, 55 were excluded because of under 20 years, 39 were excluded because of impacted teeth, 7 were excluded because of artefacts, 34 were excluded because of MS pathologies. The study flowchart is shown in Fig.1.

The age of the patients included in the study was divided into three groups to examine the relationship between the diameter of the canals supplying the MS and MSV.

PDS was classified as dentulous if at least one of the posterior maxillary teeth including, numbers five, six, and seven was present, or edentulous if all were missing.

The oral and maxillofacial radiologist who performed all measurements was blinded to the age and sex of the participants during the image evaluation process. Demographic data were not visible during image analysis, as the CBCT datasets were anonymized and coded by a second researcher before measurements were conducted.

All the measurements were performed in a quiet room with low light levels by an oral and maxillofacial radiologist (A.T.) with 3 years of experience. All cone beam computed tomography images in the study were obtained using 89 kVp, 4–12 mA with the CBCT device (Instrumentarium Dental, Palo DEx Group Oy Nahkelantie 160 FI-04300 TUUSULA, Finland) located in the authors’ institution. All the length measurements on CBCT images were performed using OnDemand3D Dental (Cybermed, Seoul, South Korea) digital software on a device with a 0.5 mm slice thickness and high screen resolution (Acer Veriton VZ4880G, 23.8-inch, 1920 × 1080 resolution). To assess intraobserver reliability, all measurements were performed twice by the same oral and maxillofacial radiologist with a four-week interval between sessions. The intra-class correlation coefficient was calculated to assess intraobserver agreement.

MSV measurements were performed using 3D DOCTOR Software (Able Software Corp., Lexington, MA, USA). The software performs the measurement of volume on the axial plane. The voxel sizes were calibrated to match the values on the device used for the relevant procedures before calculating the MSV.

The region of interest (ROI) was defined to include the entire extent of the maxillary sinus (Fig.2A). The next step was the staining and delimitation of regions in the densities of the sinus cavity within the area of the ROI by the software (Fig.2B).

Borders were then manually adjusted. Slice-by-slice manual segmentation was performed to determine the exact maxillary sinus boundaries. Following the segmentation of all axial CBCT images that include MS, a maxillary sinus model was generated. The volume of the resultant model was calculated using the software (Fig.3).

CBCT datasets were reoriented before all measurements such that the occlusal plane was parallel to the ground and the sagittal plane was perpendicular to the ground on OnDemand3D Dental Software. AAAC diameter was measured on coronal CBCT sections using the technique described by Laovoravit et al. [23]. The widest diameter of the AAAC was identified and recorded (Fig.4A). SPF diameter was measured in axial sections based on the method of Şeker et al. [24], specifically at the level of the middle nasal conchae to ensure measurement standardization (Fig.4B).

Demographic data of 90 patients, including age, sex, PDS, bilateral MSV, AAAC, and SPF measurements, were compiled using an Excel spreadsheet. The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (IBM SPSS, IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) software version 26.0 was used for statistical analyses, and a p-value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Intra-observer agreement was tested using the intra-class correlation analysis. Continuous variables were presented as mean ± standard deviation. The normal data distribution hypothesis was checked using visual inspection and tested by the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Paired-samples t-test was used for the relationship between mean MSV, AAAC, and SPF values on the right and left sides, where the independent sample t-test was used for the relationship between mean values between two groups, and one-way analysis of variance test was used for the relationship between mean values between three groups. The relationship among MSV, AAAC, and SPF was analysed using the Pearson correlation test.

In total, 180 maxillary sinus images from 90 patients, including 47 men and 43 females with ages of 20–78 years (mean = 47.10 years), were evaluated. Of the 180 half mandibles in the images included in the study, 116 were dentulous and 64 were edentulous. The MSV was calculated using the 3D DOCTOR software and presented in cm3. The intra-class correlation coefficients for MSV, AAAC, and SPF were 0.915, 0.934, and 0.967, respectively. The mean MSV of 90 patients was calculated as 28.04 cm3. The mean AAAC and SPF diameters were 1.15 mm and 3.3 mm, respectively. There was no statistically significant relationship between the mean MSV, AAAC, and SPF diameters measured on the right and left sides (p> 0.05) (Table1).

The statistical relationship between sex and MSV, AAAC, and SPF diameter is given in Table2. Among these variables, there was a statistically significant relationship between MSV and AAAC diameter and sex. MSV and AAAC diameters were statistically higher in men compared to females (p< 0.05). Although the mean SPF diameter was greater in men, this difference was not statistically significant (p= 0.253) (Table2).

The relationship between MSV, AAAC, and SPF diameter with PDS in the maxilla was investigated, and the results are presented in Table3. As observed in Table3, there was only a statistically significant relationship between AAAC diameter and PDS (p= 0.047). MSV was higher in dentulous patients, although this was not statistically significant (p> 0.05). Although the relationship between PDS and SPF diameter was not statistically significant, SPF diameter was wider in edentulous patients (p> 0.05) (Table3).

The relationship between MSV, AAAC, and SPF diameter and age groups is given in Table4. There was no statistically significant correlation between these parameters and age groups. Upon analysis of the relationship between MSV and age groups, the mean volume in Group I was higher compared to the other groups. Upon analysis of the relationship between AAAC and age groups, the mean diameter of AAAC in Group II was larger compared to the others. Upon analysis of the relationship between SPF diameter and age groups, the mean SPF diameter in Group III was larger compared to the others. Regardless, none of these differences were statistically significant (p> 0.05) (Table4).

Pearson’s correlation test was used to investigate the relationship between MSV, AAAC, and SPF diameters. Thep-value and correlation coefficients (r) obtained as a result of statistical analysis are given in Table5. MSV and SPF diameters had a weak negative correlation (p< 0.05,r= −0.214). As the SPF diameter increased, the MSV decreased. AAAC diameter and SPF diameter had a weak positive correlation. As the SPF diameter increased, the AAAC diameter increased (Table5).

It has been reported that maxillary sinus pathology, shape, and volume significantly influence the difficulty and complications of MS elevation procedures, and therefore, the MS should be evaluated before surgery [20,25]. Numerous studies have been conducted on the impact of various factors on MSV, including cleft palate [16], nasal septa [17], craniofacial patterns [20], impacted teeth and obstructive sleep apnoea [26], as well as age and sex [9]. However, the effect of artery diameters supplying the MS on MSV has not been investigated. Therefore, this study investigated the relationship between MSV and the diameters of the SPF and AAAC supplying the MS.

Previous studies have reported that MSV measurements are made by different imaging methods, including cephalometric radiography, panoramic radiography, CBCT, CT, and magnetic resonance imaging [20]. Unlike conventional radiographs, which allow only 2-dimensional assessment of anatomical structures, it is possible to make a 3D assessment of anatomical structures in CT and CBCT [27]. Despite Aktuna Belgin et al. [9] reporting that metal artefacts are higher in CT than CBCT, other publications have indicated the opposite [28,29]. Compared to CT, CBCT has lower radiation dose; moreover, it is cheaper and easier to use in the clinic, and thus more accessible [9]. Accordingly, the CBCT images were used in this study.

The MS is a critical anatomical structure for dentists due to its anatomical proximity to the maxillary posterior teeth [20,27]. Since surgical procedures such as endodontic surgery, extraction of impacted teeth, orthognathic surgery in the maxillary posterior region [20], and especially implant surgery in patients with edentulism in this region [14], the anatomy of this region should be well known. Moreover, the pathologic status, shape, and size of the MS have been reported to significantly affect the indications, difficulty, and complication rate of MS augmentation [25]. Therefore, in order to prevent complications that may occur before any surgical procedure, such as implant surgery, MS augmentation, or impacted tooth extraction in the posterior maxilla, it is recommended to perform a detailed evaluation of this region, especially the vascular structures, with a three-dimensional imaging technique such as CBCT. A detailed assessment of the MS anatomy before the surgical procedure is a must, not only to avoid complications of maxillofacial surgery, but also for dental implant planning, estimation of the required amount of graft for MS augmentation, and planning for infra-zygomatic mini-screw placement [30].

Previous studies used different 3D imaging programmes, including Mimics, 3D-Slicer, 3D-Doctor, and Horos for MSV measurement [3,8,9,31]. It was reported that the use of different programmes might lead to different results [32]. The segmentation method was reported as the most accurate and reliable method for sinus volume measurement [9]. Although sinus volume can be measured by fluid injection into the sinus, it was suggested that it could not be used under in vivo conditions. Furthermore, it was reported that volume measurement results in cadaveric studies might not give accurate results associated with soft tissue loss in cadavers [32]. 3D-Doctor is a medical and 3D imaging software used in segmentation and volumetric analysis, frequently cited in scientific publications and approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration [33]. In the present study, the CBCT images and the 3D-Doctor software were used for the MSV measurements of 90 patients.

A previous study reported that the segmentation programmes changed the measurement result [34]. A study by Aktuna Belgin et al. [9] reported the mean right MSV as 14.49 cm3and the mean left MSV as 14.59 cm3, whereas Dinç and İçöz [20] reported the same as 14.49 cm3and 15.38 cm3, respectively, and Asantogrul and Cosgunarslan [27] as 14.02 cm3and 13.18 cm3, respectively. In the present study, sinus volumes were similar to the results of the above study (mean right MSV 14.05 cm3, mean left MSV 13.99 cm3). The reason for the less than 1 cm3differences in MSV measurements reported by previous studies may be attributable to variations in the programmes utilised for MSV measurement or the eligibility criteria employed by studies.

Previous studies reported multiple factors that affected the MS dimensions. One of these was reported as sex [20]. In the present study, the mean MSV in males was statistically higher compared to that in females. It was considered that this difference was due to sexual differences and the larger body size of males. Results reported by many previous studies are consistent with this result [9,20,30,35,36]. Previous studies by Lessa et al. [3] and Güleç et al. [32] reported that although the mean MSV in males was higher compared to that in females, this difference was not statistically significant.

Although it was reported that MSV might vary by age and side of MS [27], there was no statistically significant relationship reported by most previous studies, which compared MSV on the right and left sides [9,20,32]. Results of the present study were consistent with the previous studies, and the statistical relationship between right and left MSV was not significant. Prabhat et al. reported that the right MSV was higher compared to the left MSV [36]. The differences in the number of samples, imaging methods, and segmentation softwares used in the studies might have accounted for this difference.

It was seen that different results were reported by studies that investigated the relationship between MSV and age. Ariji et al. reported that MSV increased until the age of 20 years and decreased after the age of 20 years [37]. Aktuna Belgin et al. reported similar results in their study [9]. Patients aged 20 years and older were included in our study, and similar to the aforementioned studies, the mean MSV decreased with increasing age; nevertheless, this decrease was not statistically significant in this study sample (p> 0.05). This result was consistent with certain previous studies in the literature [17,32,38,39]. It was considered that this difference might be due to multiple factors, including age ranges in the study samples or PDS [32].

Different results were reported by previous studies about the relationship between PDS and MSV. Some studies reported a decrease in MSV by increasing posterior edentulism [25,40]. Some studies did not find any statistically significant relationship between these two parameters [3,41]. In the present study, MSV in patients with posterior edentulism was lower compared to that in posterior dentulous patients, although this was not statistically significant.

It was reported that the risk of bleeding increased as the AAAC diameter increased in MS augmentation procedures [42]. The mean AAAC diameter was reported as 1.05 mm by Laovoravit et al. [23], 0.9 mm by Stanek et al. [6], 1.1 mm by Çiftçi et al. [42], and 1.3 mm by Güncü et al. [43]. In the present study, the mean AAAC diameter was 1.15 mm. In certain studies, the AAAC diameter was measured separately in each tooth region in the posterior part of the maxilla [6,42,43], whereas others, as in the present study, measured the largest AAAC diameter [23]. Although the measurement methods of AAAC diameter varied, the AAAC diameter value obtained as a result of the study was consistent with the range of results reported by previous studies. Additionally, the prevalence of AAAC in the present study was 100%. The prevalence of AAAC was reported as 64.5–94.6% by previous studies [23,43]. This wide range can be explained by the use of different imaging methods and different sample sizes. Furthermore, it was reported that AAAC might not be detected when the voxel size was larger than the channel diameter [23].

The AAA, an anastomosis between the PSAA and the infraorbital artery, runs in the lateral wall of the maxillary sinus, and its relationship with demographic data, including diameter, localisation, age, sex, and PDS, has been studied in the literature [6]. Laovoravit et al. [23] reported that the diameter of AAAC was statistically higher in males. The same result was also reported by Stanek et al. [6], Güncü et al. [43], and Albuquerque et al. [44]. In contrast to the above results, Çiftçi et al. reported that the relationship between AAAC and sex was not statistically significant [42]. The reason for this difference can be explained by the difference in the measured cross-sections. The statistical relationship between age and AAAC diameter was not statistically significant in the present study. This was consistent with previous studies [23,43]. Furthermore, previous studies reported that there was no statistically significant relationship between maxillary PDS and AAAC diameter [23,42]. In the present study, the diameter of the AAAC in edentulous patients was statistically significantly larger compared to that in dentulous patients. This difference can be explained by the difference in the definition of edentulism.

There were many previous morphometric studies of SPF using CT on skulls and cadavers. These studies investigated the relationship between morphometric features, including the shape, number, diameter, and distance to anatomical structures of SPF and age, sex, and side [45–47]. To the best of our knowledge, there were no CBCT studies that investigated the morphometric properties of SPF in living organisms. A study by Eordogh et al. investigated only the location of the SPF on CBCT images from cadaveric skulls [48].

Sir and Eksert reported a mean SPF of 3.79 mm in a cadaveric head and skull study with a sample size of 38. Relationship between SPF and demographic data was not analysed AS the age and sex of the samples examined were not known [45]. El-Shaarawy and Hassan measured the number, shape, and diameter of SPF using CT images of adult cadavers and skulls. They reported the average SPF diameter as 5.5 mm [46]. The mean SPF diameter in the present study was 3.3 mm. The reason for the larger SPF diameter reported by previous studies on cadavers compared to the present study can be explained by the fact that the anatomical integrity of the measured specimens might have been disrupted.

A study by Nalavenkata et al. [47] analysed the paranasal CT images of 102 patients, and the mean SPF diameter was reported as 4.62 mm, 4.76 mm in males and 4.47 mm in females. They reported that although the mean SPF diameter was higher in males compared to females, this difference was not statistically significant. In the present study, this difference was not statistically significant, although the SPF diameter was higher in males compared to females. The mean SPF in their study was higher compared to the present study. The difference in the imaging method may account for this difference.

A previous study reported that the vessel diameter increased with increased MS width and lateral wall thickness [49]. The present study investigated the relationship between the MSV and the diameters of SPF and AAAC, through which the arteries supply the MS. Given the application of the ellipsoid formula, the result obtained in the present study appears to be incompatible with the finding reported in the aforementioned literature. However, due to the lack of measurement of MS width and lateral wall thickness in our study, a definitive interpretation could not be made. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study on this subject. In the present study, there was a weak negative correlation between SPF and MSV. There was no correlation between AAAC diameter and MSV.

The present study has a few limitations. First, the study was conducted in a small Turkish population. As such, multifocal studies are required to reach a more comprehensive conclusion. In the present study, AAAC diameter was measured only in the widest section, and the effect of AAAC location on MSV was not investigated. It is recommended to increase the sample size, to make measurements in each tooth region, and to evaluate the position of the AAA to investigate the relationship between AAAC diameter and MSV in more detail in future studies. The diameter of the descending palatine artery feeding the MS could not be measured in the present study. Furthermore, the PLNA could not be measured, and the SPA from which the PLNA originates was measured due to the lack of anatomical studies on the location of the PLNA on CBCT. Future studies should address this gap.

In the present study, a negative correlation was identified between MSV and SPF, and a positive correlation between SPF and AAAC. The investigation revealed no statistically significant relationship between MSV and AAAC. Further studies are required to examine the possible statistical relationship between MSV and AAAC by increasing the sample size. Furthermore, the mean diameter of AAAC was found to be larger in patients with edentulous PDS. It is imperative to take greater care when performing maxillary sinus elevation in patients with edentulous PDS to avoid damage to the AAAC. In the present study, MSV was found to be higher in male subjects. MSV can be used in the field of forensic medicine to determine the sex of cases where the body has not been identified.

Patient consent was not obtained as this was a retrospective study that used pre-existing data without any direct interaction with the participants or interventions.

Arif Türkoğlu: Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing–original draft, Writing – review and editing. Halil Ayyıldız: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing–original draft, Writing – review and editing.

The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received during the preparation of this manuscript.