Fiber Bragg gratings represent a pivotal advancement in the field of photonics and optical fiber technology. The numerical modeling of fiber Bragg gratings is essential for understanding their optical behavior and optimizing their performance for specific applications. In this paper, numerical solutions for the revered optical fiber Bragg gratings that are considered with a cubic-quintic-septic form of nonlinear medium are constructed first time by using an iterative technique named as residual power series technique (RPST) via conformable derivative. The competency of the technique is examined by several numerical examples. By considering the suitable values of parameters, the power series solutions are illustrated by sketching 2D, 3D, and contour profiles. The results obtained by employing the RPST are compared with exact solutions to reveal that the method is easy to implement, straightforward and convenient to handle a wide range of fractional order systems in fiber Bragg gratings. The obtained solutions can provide help to visualize how light propagates or deforms due to dispersion or nonlinearity.

Optical fiber is now a primary component of global and local telecommunication systems. A few basic experiments in signal transmission in the 1960s have grown into a multi- billion dollar industry, establishing fiber-based communication networks around the world1. Over the past three decades the advancements in optical fiber have undoubtedly improved and reshaped fiber optic technology so that optical fibers plus related components have become synonymous with telecommunication. In addition to applications in telecommunications, optical fibers are also utilized in the rapidly growing field of fiber sensors2. Optical fiber would not have been possible without fiber Bragg gratings (FBGs)3. FBGs are now commercially available and have found key applications in routing, filtering, control, and amplification of optical signals in the next generation of high-capacity Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) telecommunication networks4. Rehman and Ahmad5investigated a distinct set of optical solitons solutions to FBGs with dispersive reflectivity possessing the Kerr law of nonlinear refractive index.

FBGs have a wide range of uses in optical communication systems when chromatic dispersion (CD) is limited. CD is a phenomenon that occurs when various wavelengths of light move at different speeds through fiber. By providing wavelength-specific filters that compensate for changes in propagation velocity, Bragg gratings can be used to lessen the effects of CD. By minimizing signal distortion and retaining the integrity of the sent data, this strategy can help to improve the quality and dependability of optical communication systems, particularly over long distances. Furthermore, Bragg gratings have a number of other vital applications and physical relevance when CD is minimal. Among these applications are the following: The compensation of CD-induced signal distortion is a significant use of Bragg gratings in the setting of CD running down. Bragg gratings can be constructed to cause a precise phase change in reflected light, which can be used to compensate for the phase shift caused by CD. By doing so, the optical signal’s distortion can be decreased or eliminated, enhancing the quality and reliability of data transmission. This capability is especially relevant in high-capacity optical communication systems, because CD effects can be a substantial limiting factor in system performance. Bragg gratings are the versatile and necessary component6.

The analysis of differential equations and dynamical systems is fundamental in modeling and understanding complex physical as well as engineering phenomena. A variety of analytical and numerical methods are employed to obtain solutions to these systems, depending on their linearity, order and complexity. The implementation of unique techniques to create precise solutions of nonlinear PDEs appearing in optical fibers, thermodynamics, wave propagation, and nonlinear optics is one of the most rapidly developing areas of nonlinear dynamics in recent years. In order to obtain the solutions of nonlinear PDEs, the various approaches such as the extended (G’/G)-expansion technique7, extended direct algebraic method8–10, modified mapping method11, sardar subequation approach12,13, the improved generalized Riccati equation mapping technique14,-model expansion method15, the Hirota bilinear symbolic computational method16, the generalized exponential rational function method16, modified exponential technique17, modified extended tanh-expansion method18and generalized Kudryashov method19have been employed in literature.

Several topics have been discussed so far in this area, including, Koh et al.20studied optical solitons by He variational Principle in a Non-Kerr Law media. Biswas et al.21studied resonant 1-soliton solution in anti-cubic nonlinear medium with perturbations. Yan et al.22discussed dromion-like structures and periodic wave solutions for variable-coefficients complex cubic-quintic Ginzburg-Landau equation influenced by higher-order effects and nonlinear gain.

Theis wave of propagation forward andis wave of propagation backward, whileare reflex coefficients of dispersion. After that,are the self-phase modulation (SPM) coefficients;are the cross-phase modulation (XPM) for cubic nonlinearity portion. The nonlinear quintic part,andrepresent the coefficients of XPM, andrepresent the coefficients of SPM. While, the coefficients of SPM are represented by, and the coefficients of XPM are denoted by,and. The inter-modal dispersion and defining parameters are indicated byand, respectively. All coefficients are constants of real values. The exact solution of (1) is reported by Seadawy et al.23.

In24, Al-Ghafri et al. examined the behaviors of chirped optical solitons in fiber Bragg gratings with dispersive reflectivity. The form of nonlinear refractive index represents polynomial law nonlinearity. Chirped optical solitons having various profiles such as W-shaped, bright, dark, kink and anti-kink solitons are derived. Malik et al. discussed cubic-quartic optical solitons in fiber Bragg gratings having polynomial law of nonlinear refractive index structures via Lie symmetry analysis25. Biswas et al.26retrieved bright and singular soliton solutions to optical fiber Bragg gratings that is considered with cubic-quintic-septic form of nonlinear medium with the extended trial function scheme. The modified simple equation to implemented to obtain dark and singular optical solitons to fiber Bragg gratings with Five forms of nonlinear refractive index27. In28, the auxiliary equation approach is used for obtaining optical solitons with fiber Bragg gratings and polynomial law of nonlinear refractive index. The analytical solutions of the coupled nonlinear Schrodinger equation with cubic-quintic-septic dispersive reflectivity and a polynomial nonlinear refractive index are derived subject to specific constraints. These constraints include conditions on the nonlinear coefficients to ensure solution stability, bounds on the polynomial refractive index parameters to maintain physical validity, and limits on the coupling constants to preserve system coherence.

The primary objective of this work is to obtain, for the first time, numerical solutions to the proposed model using the conformable derivative approach. The incorporation of conformable calculus into the study of optical solitons enhances the understanding of their dynamics by providing a more accurate and versatile framework for modeling. This approach offers a deeper insight into soliton behavior, stability, and propagation, which is essential for advancing the design and optimization of photonic devices in optical communication systems29,30.

The residual power series technique is a useful mathematical tool for constructing the numerical solutions of various differential systems. RPST is effective and easy to use for solving linear and nonlinear initial value problems without linearization, purturbation or discritization. This technique constructs an analytical approximate solution in form of series that are infinitely many times differentiable. Also, it doesn’t take a lot of time or computer memory to arrive at the results. Its nature is global in terms of the approximative analytical answers, and it can be applied to research a range of physical, mathematical, and engineering issues. In addition to applying approximate analytical solutions and their derivatives, it also gives the option of selecting any point inside the integration period. However, the primary technique for computing coefficients in the RPST has two main drawbacks. First, it can be cumbersome due to the repeated evaluation of residual errors at each iteration. Second, it involves numerous calculations of fractional derivatives during the solution process. Nevertheless, these drawbacks are relatively minor and do not outweigh the overall effectiveness and reliability of the method. Consequently, RPST remains a valuable and dependable approach for solving nonlinear equations involving conformable derivatives.

This proposed technique is used to solve time-fractional Whitham–Broer–Kaup equations31, KdV equation32, Fractional Bagley–Torvik problems33, fractional Klein–Gordon problem34, time fractional gas dynamics equations35and other physical phenomena. Alquran36discussed in depth the residual power series (RPS) for the time-fractional foam drainage equation. Al-Khaled’s et al.37purpose of his research is to present a RPST for approximating a Drinfeld-Sokolov-Wilson system. Kumar et al.38used a robust approximate iterative mathematical approach based on residual power series (RPS) algorithm in order to get the numerical solutions of the nonlinear time fractional Black-Scholes (BS) equations based on European options. Abu Arqub et al.39obtained approximate analytical solutions to a complex nonlinear fractional models that are fractional Kundu-Eckhaus and massive Thirring models. Based on the generalization of conformable power series, this method proposes a systematic process for creating a set of periodic wave series solutions and provides the unknown coefficients in a clear pattern. Al-Smadi et al.40taken into consideration an innovative and successful analytical strategy to solve classes of nonlinear coupled fractional Schrödinger equations and nonlinear time-fractional resonant Schrödinger equations under conformable fractional derivatives. The methodology for the solution entails minimizing the residual error functions to produce an infinite conformable series solution with a trustworthy wave pattern. El Ajou et al.41used RPST for nonlinear fractional KdV-Burgers equation via conformable fractional derivative. Senol et al.42introduced the RPST for finding approximate solutions of the time-fractional Burgers type equations using the conformable fractional derivative definition. El-Ajou43investigated the conformable fractional derivative based time-fractional nonlinear dispersive (TFND) partial differential equations using RPST.

Extensive research has been devoted to the analytical treatment of coupled nonlinear Schrodinger equations incorporating cubic-quintic-septic nonlinearities and dispersive reflectivity, governed by a polynomial law for the nonlinear refractive index. Despite these efforts, there has been little to no attention given to the numerical investigation of such models, leaving a significant gap in the literature regarding their computational analysis and practical behavior under general conditions.

The primary motivation of this work is to obtain, for the first time, numerical solutions of the coupled nonlinear Schrodinger equation with cubic-quintic-septic dispersive reflectivity, incorporating a polynomial law for the nonlinear refractive index. In this article, the RPST is employed, for the first time, to construct numerical solutions to the proposed problem. RPST offers a series-based approach to solving dynamical systems without the need for an analytical solution. By utilizing a truncated power series, this method effectively approximates the desired solutions. The graphical results illustrate the impact of the temporal conformable derivative on the behavior of the solutions, highlighting the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

The paper is organized as follows: The brief introductions to conformable fractional derivative and RPST are presented in “Some fundamental concepts from conformable calculus” and “Fundamental concepts for the RPST”, respectively. “RPST to FBGs for cubic-quintic-septic dispersive reflectivity with time-fractional derivative” gives a description of the basic processes of the suggested method. “Application of RPST” represents the power series solutions and graphical findings for various applications. The results and discussion are given in “Graphical representation”. Section 7 presents the conclusion.

Note that if the functionis-differentiable in (0,a) then. The definition of conformable derivative satisfies the properties stated in the theorem given below44,45.

whereandare functions ofand can be defined as the coefficient of the series.

The required expressions forth fractional power series solutions will be obtained by varyinginand.

The required values ofand,can be derived by solving the systems (16). Finally, theresidual power series solutions can be obtained.

The 1st, 2nd and 3rd residual power series solutions of the suggested problem are developed in the succeeding section.

By applying a similar procedure as above, the approximate solutions withare be interpreted in Appendix A.

To depict the reliability of the RPST via conformable derivative, three applications are examined.

In the optical fiber industry, RPS helps model and predict the behavior of light and signals in fibers under real-world conditions. The power series represents how the optical field evolves along the fiber. Each term refines the approximation, giving more accurate insight into the behavior of the light wave. Also, it will help to predict how ultrashort pulses evolve under nonlinear and dispersive effects. In short, these solutions can be used to enhance fiber design, optimize performance, and reduce cost in the optical fiber industry. RPSM solutions have direct physical meanings: they describe light intensity, phase, pulse shape, and wave behavior in optical fibers. These solutions help the industry by enabling: accurate modeling of nonlinear and dispersive effects, faster design and optimization of fibers and better performance of communication systems.

In this work, we have constructed the numerical solutions of real and imaginary functions of the wave propagation forward and backward for time-fractional orders,and also for the standard motion. The graphical results are shown in Figs.1,2,3,4for the three-dimensional study and Fig.5for the two-dimensional study. Fig.6show the effect of space and time described at counter-plot.

3D surface plots of analytical solution and approximate solutionsatof Example 1 withand.

3D surface plots of analytical solution and approximate solutionsatof Example 1 withand.

3D surface plots of analytical solution and approximate solutionsatof Example 1 withand.

3D surface plots of analytical solution and approximate solutionsatof Example 1 withand.

2D graphs of the 3rd residual power series solutionsandwith various values offor Example 1 withand.

Contour plots for the 3rd residual power series solutionsandwith various values offor Example 1 withand.

This recent iterative technique provides the solution as a rapidly convergent series with computable components. The two-dimensional plots showed the nearly similar and coinciding behavior of the numerical solutions and for the standard case. From three-dimensional plots, it can be observed that analytical and approximate series solutions are nearly in perfect agreement. The suggested approach provides excellent approximation results with the help of only a few terms, and adding more terms to the series can make the overall error smaller. The geometric behavior of the solutions obtainedandwith various values ofcan be studied. In addition, series solutions are continuously based on the temporal derivative by viewing the comparison results in Fig.6. Using RPST has the benefit of establishing continuous approximate solutions of a coupled nonlinear Schrödinger equation with the cubic-quintic-septic dispersive reflectivity having a Polynomial law of nonlinear refractive index.

For Example 2, the mathematical behavior of the obtained solutions of (25) is represented geometrically in Figs.7,8and9. By using many terms, the efficiency of the process can be increased while reducing errors.

3D surface plots of approximate solutionsandatof Example 2 withand.

2D graphs of the 3rd residual power series solutionsandwith various values offor Example 2 withand.

Contour plots for the 3rd residual power series solutionsandwith various values offor Example 2 withand.

Fig.10represents the 2D plotting of the established approximated solutions of nonlinear Schrödinger equation with polynomial law of nonlinearity given in Exmaple 3. The efficacy of RPST is dramatically enhanced using additional terms ofandfrom its-th truncated series. This can be seen that by varying the values of, there is a minor difference in the geometric behavior of the approximated solutions.

2D graphs of the 3rd residual power series solutionsandwith various values offor Example 3 withand.

These solutions can provide help to visualize how light propagates or deforms due to dispersion or nonlinearity.

For the first time, the RPST was successfully applied within the framework of conformable derivatives to obtain numerical solutions for a coupled nonlinear Schrodinger equation with cubic-quintic-septic dispersive reflectivity, incorporating a polynomial law for the nonlinear refractive index. The use of the conformable derivative simplified the fractional modeling process while preserving essential physical characteristics. RPST via conformable derivative does not require transformations, perturbations, linearizations, or discretizations. One of the key strengths of RPST lies in its ability to ensure the convergence of the series solution by minimizing the residual error. The applicability of the method was validated by solving three distinct problems, demonstrating its robustness. In each case, RPST produced rapidly convergent, series-based approximations with high accuracy. Accurate solutions were obtained and illustrated using 2D, 3D, and contour plots, all of which demonstrated consistent behavior across varying values of the fractional order. The results confirm that RPST is a powerful and effective method for solving high-order nonlinear equations, providing reliable solutions even in the presence of strong nonlinear effects. Realistic models along with variable-order systems may be the focus within future extended approaches.

This project was supported by the Ongoing Reserarch Funding program, (ORF-2025-464), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi- Arabia.