This article provides a philosophical justification for a three‐step analysis framework in healthcare research, using the terms ‘address’, ‘talk’ and ‘refer’ to describe stages of reaching out to understand informants' subjective worlds. It also discusses the process for conducting qualitative research interviews and analysing these using hermeneutic phenomenology.

To present an ontological strategy for hermeneutic data analysis, emphasising the importance of understanding patients' experiences through sensitive qualitative inquiry.

We employ an existential lifeworld caring theory alongside hermeneutic ontology to guide the qualitative situational dialogue, the data collection process and the application to empirical research studies. This approach is structured around three sequential steps of data analysis aimed at accurately representing patients' perspectives on their lifeworld experiences and circumstances.

The three analytic steps reflect that understanding a patient's experiences is guided by the topics the informant addresses in dialogue and how they do so. This is followed in the next step by focusing on what the informant is talking about, identifying what they consider most significant, and exploring the relationships between these topics and their present, past and future situations. The final step is focusing on how the informant refers to actual experiences, and how these are linked to what is being addressed and how it is being talked about.

We present an ontological strategy for hermeneutic data collection and a three‐step analysis, which makes the hermeneutic interpretation more transparent. Through the terms ‘address’, ‘talk’, and ‘refer’, this methodology offers a robust framework for capturing the nuances of patients' experiences. It contributes to a deeper understanding of their lifeworlds in an ethical way that is sensitive to informants' vulnerabilities. This study emphasises the importance of remaining attentive to informants' subjective experiences.

The experiences and reflections that inspired this article emerged from a PhD project involving longitudinal interviews with adults living with severe obesity who were admitted to a Danish hospital department. The department offered a lifestyle intervention with an interdisciplinary team including physiotherapists and nurses [1]. The PhD project focused on generating and analysing interview data on topics of a particularly sensitive nature and used Kathleen Galvin and Les Todres' caring theory of well‐being and suffering [2]. This theory is humanistic, person‐centred and based on a lifeworld approach with an ontological foundation based on the work of Edmund Husserl, Martin Heidegger and H‐G Gadamer, and the French modern understanding of the body as described by Maurice Merleau‐Ponty [2].

We focus on how caring theory can support healthcare researchers' sensitivity to individual well‐being, vulnerability and suffering in data collection and data analysis. The caring theory of well‐being and suffering offers ways for healthcare researchers to open dialogue with patients by offering a wide range of descriptive terms based on six existential domains (spatiality, temporality, inter‐subjectivity, mood, identityandembodiment) within the dimensions of dwelling and mobility, combined in dwelling‐mobility. This approach involves 18 variations of the phenomena of well‐being, vulnerability and suffering. Each phenomenon is illustrated through its existential domain and related through the dimensions of universal aspects of human life [2,3].

An ontological understanding of qualitative research supports a humanised approach to engage with others [2] and is fundamentally grounded in dialogue as an authentic encounter between people [7]. In hermeneutic methodology, the primary data for analysis are excerpts of texts from interview transcripts that are understood in context via circular hermeneutic interpretation [8]. Sensitive topics, such as sexuality and maternal mental health problems [9], body dissatisfaction, or shame and a sense of failure regarding obesity [10], may be relevant for qualitative researchers to gain insight into sensitive subjective experiences. Additionally, a broad range of literature exists to guide researchers on how to best protect and support themselves and their informants [6,9].

Todres and Galvin [11] argue that healthcare can be humanised by making presence central and emphasising interpersonal connection, that is knowing and being with people in a sensitive practice context by attending to ‘what it is like’ and what matters for the person and responding to patients in highly human and sensitive ways [11]. Moreover, it is vital not only to understand the ‘insiderness’ of another, but more importantly, to let it guide action in caring practice [12].

Gadamer's philosophical workTruth and Methodemphasises the relevance of experience [8]. The concept of experience is presented as the epistemological basis for knowledge that extends beyond the purely subjective, making it particularly relevant in humanistic health research.

Every experience we talk about or refer to in a piece of research is taken from the personal continuity of life and simultaneously related to the whole of one's life: ‘It is itself within the whole of life, the whole of life is present in it too’ ([8]: 63). To experience is to encounter or undergo things in life, and it is always characterised by the lasting significant impact the experience leaves [8]. Experiences can be shared by people in a dialogue through the medium of language; however, the challenge for the interviewer is to develop the sensitivity to discover messages addressed by the informant beyond their spoken words. A dialogue is a hermeneutic process of interpreting the spoken word, addressing and understanding experiences as part of a significant whole [8]. In addition, there is something in a person's experiences that needs to be dealt with as ‘an inner relation to life’, or a relationship between experience and life ([8]: 61). Everything that is experienced is experienced by the self, and part of its meaning is that it belongs to the unity of this self and is an element in the life process itself. It is connected to the whole of one's life and brings a sense of adventure [8].

We developed a qualitative research methodology, along with methods for data analysis and presentation, grounded in a hermeneutic understanding of language. This methodology is combined with a situational approach to exploring what informants address, talk about and refer to during interviews. The aim is to capture and respect the essence of person centred dialogue throughout the research process.

The philosophical justification for our development and future use of the terms ‘address’, ‘talk’ and ‘refer to’ in research is based on Heidegger's texts on language in section 31–38 ofBeing and Time[13] andOntology–The Hermeneutics of Facticity[14] as well as Gadamer's bookTruth and Method[8] (see Table1).

Philosophical background for the use of the terms address, talk and refer, addressed through quotations and authors additional reflections.

In this section, we present specific methodological considerations involved in creating coherence between data collection and data analysis in two empirical studies [10,15] involving a series of individual and focus group interviews (FGI) with people living with severe obesity about their experiences of making lifestyle changes and being physically active. Prior to data collection, different questions and discussion topics were prepared for the individuals and the FGI (Table2) as the latter included several interacting participants. Participation in an FGI about lifeworld experiences holds different risks and degrees of potential harm, as the interviewer asks the informants to talk about personal and potentially sensitive issues that may elicit emotional reactions. This may become a process of acknowledging one's own circumstances, adding personal insights in front of others. Some precautions can be implemented to conduct an FGI in an ethical manner, including taking responsibility for the group interaction and dynamics and for protecting everyone from harm [6] (see Table2).

Trust and confidentiality were sought by sampling informants who were already known through previous individual interviews, meaning that informants were familiar with the researcher. We also limited group size to 4–8 informants to allow speaking time for everyone, adjusted the duration of the FGI depending on informants' capacities, comfort, and repeated FGI to expand on prior insights. Interviews were scheduled one at a time to make it easier for informants to withdraw if they wished. Briefings and de‐briefings were used to prepare informants and conduct follow‐ups on interview experiences. A set of mutual social ground rules was agreed upon in the briefing session, including expectations to allow others time to speak individually and not speak over each other, respect others' opinions, acknowledge different experiences, and keep insights confidential. Autonomy was emphasised by assuring the participants of their right to refuse to answer questions and giving them the opportunity to take a break or opt out at any time if they changed their minds about participating. We also emphasised that there were no right or wrong answers regarding their experiences. The informants were prepared for the FGI by being told about the duration, procedures, and planned questions/activities, and they were asked to consider their narratives beforehand. They were encouraged to share their concerns and ask questions. The researcher's role as a moderator was clarified to include distributing the speaking time, facilitating the discussion, and posing follow‐up questions in addition to taking notes on the dialogue patterns. Participants were asked for their consent to use audio and video recording, and confidentiality and privacy procedures were explained to help them feel more comfortable with this [1]. A paper on the de‐briefing and the ethics of these lifeworld interviews was published, describing the experiences of the informants interviewed as part of the PhD [16].

In our analysis, terms relating to experience (‘address’) and speech (‘talk’) with personal knowledge based on experience (‘refer’) were combined to achieve the optimal benefit from the dialogue's contents in relation to sensitive topics. These three steps form the basis for coding meaning units that relate to the research questions. We expand on these steps below (see Table3).

Three‐step analysis: ‘address’, ‘talk’ and ‘refer’, revised table [16].

With some thought, an understanding of coherence and meaning can be constructed from the participants' explanation [8]. From Heidegger, we borrow the concepts of facticity and coherence. An individual's facticity belongs to a context, meaning a person's life is situated in concrete and inescapable realities and with limitations related to historical, social and physical conditions, which we are born into and are, hence, outside our own control. The study of facticity is about respectfully finding the authentic perspective within which a person addresses themself. The themes addressed are communicated at a specific time, but they exist earlier, and continue to be addressed over a certain period. Temporality is therefore important in the dialogue as experiences change over time and repeated interviews contribute to capturing these changes. Without a view of the connection with the informant's choice of subject, that is the context in which the narrative is described and the time period in which it occurs, the participants become too anonymous, representing everyone and no one. Therefore, both the context and the temporal meaning must be included in the dialogue with the informant [14].

The term ‘talk’ refers to the language directly used by the participant and explicit expressions that can be rendered as quotes. Relationships between human individuals and the world are reflected in the language they use [17]. Therefore, language is more than the spoken word; it embodies underlying worldviews. An individual's spoken expression can thus be used to enrich and illustrate the mutual understanding of the individual as part of the whole. It is here, through the individual's thoughts, that an interviewer can challenge the informant and gain understanding through dialogue.

According to Gadamer, quotes from a dialogue can never be said to have a final interpretation; they will, through dialogue with others with different understanding horizons or perspectives, always be subject to further interpretation, revealing new truths [8]. Our perception of the world and ourselves is both preserved and changed through the dialogue and reflections made afterwards. Changes appear and can be traced in the use of language, leading to new insights and a broader perspective. Informants engage with the interviewer by talking about their experiences, while the interviewer puts themselves in play in the dialogue, enabling a mutual understanding. Informants use their everyday language and may even be surprised by their own statements since the language is simultaneously an expression of the thought process. It is these utterances about experiences that can reveal hidden or pre‐reflective meanings, which can be used as data in research [8].

The term ‘refer’ denotes expressions of experiences useful for an experiential and knowledge‐based analysis of one's own or others' preconceptions. An informant may share experiences and refer to feelings or emotional situations.

This way of talking—referring to sensitive matters and at the same time listening to these personal words—may be experienced as a confrontation with oneself [14]. With the researcher's professional background in mind during the interview, what is said must be treated with situational sensitivity. Simultaneously, immediately interpreted contexts must be brought into the dialogue with the informant.

Following this interpretation, the dialogue can be conducted as a circular movement between parts and wholes towards the establishment of new knowledge [8]. The researcher can use the opportunity to ask the informant to share relevant considerations and observations about the importance of temporal conditions and the influence of context, environment, mood, and bodily situation. They may be inspired to ask more about the connection with the experience of self, identity and relationships with other people. In addition, it may be important to ask about the simultaneous experiences of well‐being, vulnerability or suffering. The researcher interprets the dialogue twice: first in dialogue with the informant and then with the text/transcription generated from the interview. As illustrated in Table2, we introduce a link between hermeneutic ontology, methodological considerations and the analytical terms address, talk and refer. Table4presents selected quotes to show connections between the analytical perspective, the ontological facticity, the research methodology and caring theory. The quotes illustrate the exact wording of Heidegger's and, later, Galvin and Todres' descriptions of how thefusion of horizonsoccurs in understanding through language when the subject matter is placed in‐between people—when ‘something is placed in the center’ and the subject matter is understood in the form of language ([8]: 386).

Selected philosophical justification for usingaddress,talk, andreferas an analytical approach in qualitative data collection within caring theory.

In this paper, we present an ontological strategy for hermeneutic data analysis through three steps closely representing the patients' experiences of their situations. This is a value‐based approach rooted in German existential philosophy and further considered in relation to Galvin and Todres' caring theory, based on six existential domains and the phenomena of well‐being, vulnerability, and suffering. A re‐reading of our philosophical basis led to an expansion of our existing methodology using a three‐step hermeneutic data analysis (address, talk, refer). Although Gadamer claims that hermeneutic interpretation does not have a method, our hermeneutically inspired method of data collection and data analysis was developed with an ontological basis in mind. Hereby, we contribute to recent studies on understanding and interpretation through so‐called lifeworld hermeneutics in caring science [19].

Understanding a person's experiences involves the ‘insider perspective’, that is. understanding ‘what it is like for the patient’ from within their lifeworld [12]. Understanding has an existential character and is concerned with well‐being. Hence, researchers who take a humanised approach should cultivate awareness, sensitivity and openness towards the other and their experiences [20]. A researcher's choice of perspective and knowledge influences data collection and the inclusion of informants from healthcare practices. To be able to understand a usually hidden insider perspective, one must attune oneself to experiences from the others' lifeworld, understanding what they imply [21]. Understanding will always recede from the view of the other and some parts will always stay hidden as another human's lifeworld can never be grasped fully. Striving to understand the patient's lifeworld and reaching for the inside experience of another can only occur through the complex fusion of one's own perspectives and experiences, which requires a certain emotional and embodied capacity. The interview situation can be a vulnerable moment for both the informant and the interviewer, where facial expressions and bodily expressions are important [12].

Aiming to understand the ‘insider perspective’ is a way of humanising care as it is considered one of eight philosophically informed dimensions (insiderness, agency, uniqueness, togetherness, sense‐making, personal journey, sense of place and embodiment) of humanisation. Insiderness is the opposite of objectification, and is highly compatible with a phenomenological reflective approach in research for exploring another person's lifeworld and experiences [11]. In an objectifying perspective, a person is made into an object that must fit into a diagnostic system without taking account of their internal experience, for example the meaning of the treatment for them. Our approach is a contribution to the opposite, a reach for the subjective lifeworld experience as told by an informant through an interview, providing us a glimpse inside of a personal world of mood and emotion.

Knowledge of a person's lifeworld can be considered an interpretive touchstone to sense their vulnerability in the moment. However, there is an epistemological limit to what we can know about another person. Thus, caring does not depend on a detailed understanding of the person's situation or world but rather on a non‐judgemental, general ‘reaching out’ to them [12].

Foregrounding Heidegger's ontology as a philosophical perspective invites the informant to an equal interpersonal dialogue that reduces the risk of doing harm, in line with the ethical principle of non‐maleficence towards vulnerable individuals or groups in health research [22].

Silverio et al. [9] describe how the qualitative researcher is challenged by meeting informants who talk about emotionally demanding situations, thereby representing a particular tradition in examining the situation of the qualitative researcher. In contrast, our article contributes to the challenges the researcher meets through the preparatory choices they make regarding philosophical perspective, research methodology, and data collection method prior to the meeting with informant(s) in order to create coherence between data collection and data analysis in a sensitive manner.

A limitation may be that the authors' pre‐existing understanding is built specifically on caring theory [3]. However, we argue that this is a strength based on our professional background combining healthcare professional experience/training and knowledge from caring theory. It enables sensitivity when in dialogue with vulnerable people by providing skills and awareness to address and respond to their individual existential and emotional experiences. This forms the basis for reflection and reflexivity on what was addressed and talked about during the dialogue, what it actually meant, and what the informants' lifeworld consists of, including existential aspects, which are often overlooked in healthcare research [3]. Another limitation arises in cases where a person lacks words for their experiences and existential dilemmas, when the language is lacking, and the dialogue consists mostly of pauses, non‐verbal signs and body movements. We consider this a topic for another research article.

We have explored the intersection of hermeneutic ontology and methodology within the context of person‐centred care in healthcare research. In addition, we consider how this approach and a three‐stem analysis method can contribute to enacting a specific, person‐centred, caring dialogue that prioritises the individual's engagement and dignity, with attention to individual suffering and well‐being. The alignment between the chosen philosophical framework and methodology and the researcher's pre‐understanding is critical prior to data collection and the ongoing and final analyses. This congruity ensures that the researcher is adequately prepared to engage in a meaningful and respectful dialogue with potentially vulnerable patients as they address, talk about, and refer to their lifeworld experiences. By grounding our approach in hermeneutic methodology, we highlight the importance of language and human experience in the exploration of healthcare phenomena. The concepts of address, talk, and refer can serve as methodological components in both individual and focus group interviews, allowing for a nuanced examination of informants' lifeworld experiences in an ethical manner. The integration of caring theory into the interview process can significantly enhance the interviewer's capacity for empathy and sensitivity towards individual suffering, contributing to a more humanistic approach and to patient well‐being. A humanised approach is crucial for exploring a phenomenon of interest in a moral manner and requires the researcher to exhibit sensitivity and reflexivity in the dialogue.