The prevalence of fungal infections and contamination
has increased
alarmingly over the past decade, posing a significant threat to human
health and the food supply and negatively affecting welfare. This
escalating concern is primarily attributed to the lack of safe, effective,
and widely available antifungal agents; the increasing spread of (multi)­drug
resistance to conventional antifungal treatments; and substantial
epidemiological shifts in fungal pathogens. Decision-making bodies
have recognized the urgency of this situation and prioritized efforts
to address and mitigate the spread of drug-resistant fungal infections
by developing and implementing innovative antifungal strategies, including
using drug combinations, designing fundamentally new antifungal compounds
with fungus-specific mechanisms of action and a minimal risk of resistance
development, drug repurposing, and exploring alternative approaches,
such as biomolecules, nanotechnology, and biological control. This
review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the current challenges
associated with fungal infections in medicine and agriculture as well
as the latest advancements and potential solutions.

The incidence of fungal
infections and damage caused by fungi has
recently reached alarming levels, and it has become evident that fundamentally
different treatment and preventive strategies from those currently
in use are necessary for both medicine and agriculture.

Preventing and treating fungal infections poses a
tremendous challenge
not only for healthcare but also for
agriculture. The amount of pre- (in-field) and postharvest (under
storage) damage caused by plant pathogenic fungi has shown a steady
global increase in recent years, resulting in losses of billions of
dollars. Surveys have reported that 10–23% of annual crop yields
are lost in the field, while an additional 10–20% is wasted
due to fungal damage during storage. The economic losses pale in comparison
with their impact on ensuring a food supply for the growing global
population. If this loss is considered in relation to the five most
important crops for human nutrition (i.e., rice, wheat, maize, soybean,
and potato), it could otherwise feed 600 million to 4 billion people
annually, providing 2000 calories per person per day. The global population is estimated to reach 10 billion
by 2050, requiring at least a 60% increase from the current food produced
annually. Reducing the amount of food
damaged by fungi is one aspect of the solution to overcome the global
food problem and can be achieved by implementing appropriate and novel
preventive and management strategies.,However, the
current chemical fungicide-based approaches are inadequate because
plant pathogenic fungi have developed resistance, facilitating global
spread. Besides monoculture farming,
another reason for the spread of resistance is climate change, which
results in the emergence of pesticide-resistant plant pathogenic fungi
in agricultural areas, where they were previously absent. The spread
is further accelerated by global trade expansion and intensification,
facilitating the introduction of resistant plant pathogenic fungal
strains to new agricultural areas. The
problem has been further compounded in Europe by withdrawing and banning
effective chemical fungicides from commercial use under the current
European Union (EU) legislation on plant protection products. Moreover, the EU’s action plan (Toward
Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil), aimed at reducing the environmental
burden of chemical pesticides, mandates a 50% reduction in chemical
pesticides in Europe by 2030. Collectively,
these factors warrant the development of fungicides with a low environmental
impact and minimal risk of resistance development in plant pathogenic
fungi.

This review provides a comprehensive
picture of the current state
and challenges of antifungal therapies and agricultural fungal pest
management of the above-mentioned aspects, with a particular focus
on insights gained over the past 5 years. Furthermore, it discusses
novel developments and solutions to overcome these recently emerging
antifungal issues.

The treatment of fungal infections in humans currently relies
on
five antifungal drug classes (polyenes, azoles, allylamines, echinocandins,
and others), each possessing different mechanisms of action, with
the majority directly or indirectly targeting the cell membrane or
cell wall (Table). For the treatment of non-life-threatening superficial
skin and toenail fungal infections that do not pose a significant
risk to healthy individuals, nearly all classes of antifungal drugs
are effective. Terbinafine, an allylamine antifungal, is widely used;
however, it is not employed for systemic infections as it primarily
accumulates in nails and hair. However,
in severe, life-threatening invasive mycoses, where fungal infections
affect the entire body, only azoles, polyenes, echinocandins, and
flucytosine remain suitable and are currently widely used. A significant limitation of flucytosine is the
high prevalence of resistance development, necessitating its use exclusively
in combination therapy with other antifungal agents rather than as
monotherapy.

From the 1950s to date, almost exclusively the same
early antifungal
drug groups (or modified versions) have been used in clinical practice
(Figure).,Furthermore, over the past decade, only four new antifungal agents
(2018, superbioavailable itraconazole; 2021, ibrexafungerp; 2022, oteseconazole; and 2023, rezafungin) have been approved for therapeutic use. However, their mechanisms
of action and targets are the same as or similar to those of existing
antifungal agents, despite the continuously increasing incidence of
infections caused by fungal strains exhibiting resistance to such
mechanisms.Tablesummarizes these newly introduced antifungal
agents and their mechanisms of action.Figurepresents the chemical structures of commonly
used antifungal drugs.

Timeline of antifungal agents approved by the United States
Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for general therapeutic use and still
in use (up to March 2025). Since the 1950s, antifungal therapies have
mainly relied on early drug classes, such as azoles and polyenes or
their modified derivatives. Starting from the millennium, echinocandins
and ibrexafungerp have emerged as novel antifungal drug classes.,However, over the past decade, only four new antifungal agents (superbioavailable
itraconazole, ibrexafungerp, oteseconazole, and rezafungin) have been
introduced into therapeutic use. This appears counterproductive, because
these agents share similar mechanisms of action and targets, such
as the fungal cell membrane and cell wall, with existing therapies,
despite the increasing prevalence of fungal infections caused by strains
resistant to these mechanisms. 5FC: flucytosine,
AMB: amphotericin B, AMF: amorolfine, AFG: anidulafungin, BTF: butenafine,
CAS: caspofungin, CLT: clotrimazole, CPX: ciclopirox, EFI: efinaconazole,
FLC: fluconazole, GRF: griseofulvin, IBX: ibrexafungerp, ISA: isavuconazole,
ITC: itraconazole, KTC: ketoconazole, LUL: luliconazole, MFG: micafungin,
NFT: naftifine, NAT: natamycin, NYT: nystatin, OTE: oteseconazole,
POS: posaconazole, RZF: rezafungin, SUBA-ITC: superbioavailable itraconazole,
TRB: terbinafine, VRC: voriconazole. The figure is compiled using
information presented in Houšt’ et al., Carmo et al., and Zobi and
Algul and updated with the original literature
findings.

Chemical structures of commonly used antifungal drugs.
Asterisks
indicate antifungal agents that have been approved for therapeutic
use in the past decade.

On one hand, the limited number of safe and effective
antifungal
agents with new mechanisms of action can be attributed to the lack
of interest from pharmaceutical companies. On the other hand, antifungal
drug development faces far more challenges than antibacterial drugs,
primarily due to the similarities in cell structure, function, and
metabolism between fungal and mammalian cells, making it extremely
challenging to identify fungal-specific targets.,Additionally, developing a new and effective antifungal therapeutic
agent must overcome numerous other challenges.

Recent epidemiological studies have demonstrated that the effective
treatment of fungal infections can only be achieved by employing fundamentally
different strategies from those currently used. Such new antifungal therapeutic strategies must align with
the susceptibility profiles of newly emerging pathogens, resulting
from epidemiological changes. Thus, antifungal agents with novel mechanisms
of action must be effective against fungal biofilms, have a low risk
of resistance development, and possess fungal-specific mechanisms
to avoid severe side effects. Furthermore, these agents must exhibit
appropriate pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties to ensure
their suitability for treating invasive fungal infections. Other critical
requirements are relatively low production costs and accessibility
in the regions most affected by fungal infections, often the world’s
poorer countries.

The substantial
changes in the epidemiology of fungal infections in recent years are
complex and involve numerous underlying causes, such as climate change,
the prophylactic and improper use of antifungal agents, and the coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Changes in weather due to climate
change in recent years are some of the most striking manifestations
of global warming. Fungi are highly adaptable to gradually increasing
environmental temperatures, leading to the development of a thermotolerant
phenotype. Thermotolerance higher than that of the environment is
a virulence factor that renders previously nonpathogenic fungal species
infectious. Thus, changing environmental conditions may lead to the
spread of fungal species or their vectors to areas where they were
previously absent. Extreme weather associated with climate change
(i.e., flooding, storms, and hurricanes) significantly promotes the
emergence and spread of previously rare fungal infections. Examples
of newly emerging and more widely distributed fungal pathogens include ,Blastomycesspp., (formerly ), , ,Histoplasmaspp.,Paracoccidioidesspp.,
and .

The increasing use of prophylactic antifungal
treatments due to the growing number of immunocompromised and immunosuppressed
patients, combined with inadequate or unavailable identification techniques
and the agricultural use of antifungal agents that are also used in
medicine (such as triazoles), has disrupted the normal human mycoflora
and exerted selective pressure, resulting in the emergence of multidrug-resistant
strains. Consequently, the epidemiology of common fungal infections,
such as candidiasis and aspergillosis, has significantly changed over
the past 2 decades, with drug-resistant infections caused by non-albicansCandidaspecies and crypticAspergillusspecies becoming increasingly common.

The COVID-19 pandemic further amplified the above-mentioned
phenomena,
primarily due to the immunosuppressive effects of systemic corticosteroid
therapy in the treatment of COVID-19. During and after the pandemic,
there was a dramatic increase in infections caused by azole-resistant
crypticAspergillusstrains, alongside a continued
rise in infections caused by non-albicansCandidaspecies and a resurgence of . Some Asian countries, particularly India, reported a drastic increase
in mucormycosis (>47,500 cases), which is caused by members of
the
order Mucorales, most of which were linked to COVID-19 infection and
systemic corticosteroid therapy.

Combating the newly emerging fungal infections resulting from epidemiological
changes requires the development of effective antifungal therapies,
regular epidemiological surveys, resistance studies, and diagnostic
techniques capable of rapidly and effectively identifying newly emerging
species.

Resistance to an antifungal agent can be either innate or acquired.
Innate resistance is associated with the general physiological characteristics
of the fungus, which may render it resistant to the mechanism of action
of a specific class of antifungal agents. Thus, even without any acquired
resistance mechanism, the sensitivity of individual fungal species
(or even different isolates of the same species) to specific antifungal
agents may vary. Acquired resistance is caused by epigenetic changes
or genomic mutations that alter a property compared with the wild
type, making it resistant to the mechanism of action of an antifungal
agent. Common causes of resistance development
include prolonged exposure to a suboptimal application of an antifungal
agent during clinical therapy or the
agricultural use of antifungal agents (such as triazoles) also used
in human medicine.

It has been
established that infections caused by fungi resistant to one or more
antifungal agents are rapidly increasing.,However, recent studies have highlighted a significant rise in the
incidence of infections caused by triazole (fluconazole, itraconazole,
and voriconazole)-resistant , multidrug (amphotericin B, echinocandin, fluconazole, and flucytosine)-resistant (formerly ), and , and terbinafine-resistant dermatophytes (Trichophytonspp.,Microsporumspp., andEpidermophytonspp.).,Acquired resistance to one antifungal agent
often leads to resistance to another, a phenomenon known as multidrug
resistance. A good recent example is the emergence of azole/echinocandin-resistant strains.Figuresummarizes
the observed resistance mechanisms.

Mechanisms of action of antifungal drug
classes and the associated
principal forms of acquired resistance. (a) Polyene resistance: (1)
altered cell membrane permeability, (2) loss-of-function mutations
in ergosterol biosynthesis genes, (3) changes in membrane sterol composition,
and (4) induction of genes promoting tolerance and stress response
pathways. Mechanism of action (MA): formation of a polyene-ergosterol
complex, decreasing the protein gradient and resulting in osmotic
lysis. (b) Azole resistance: (1) point
mutations in the gene encoding the target (lanosterol 14α-demethylase),
(2) target overproduction, (3) efflux pump overproduction or hyperactivity,
(4) hypermutation in the target and housekeeping genes, and (5) heteroresistance
and aneuploidy. MA: lanosterol 14α-demethylase inhibition. (c) Pyrimidine analog resistance: (1) target
gene (cytosine deaminase and flucytosine resistance) mutations. MA:
RNA and DNA synthesis inhibition. (d)
Allylamine resistance: (1) target gene (squalene epoxidase) mutations,
(2) antifungal compound degradation, (3) efflux pump overproduction
or hyperactivity, and (4) induction of stress response pathways. MA:
squalene epoxidase inhibition. (e) Echinocandin
resistance: (1) point mutations in the gene encoding the target (1,3-β-glucan
synthase subunit [FKS1]) and (2) cell wall stress
response pathway activation. MA: 1,3-β-glucan synthase inhibition. (f) Triterpenoid resistance: (1) point mutations
in the gene encoding the target (1,3-β-glucan synthase subunit
[FKS2]) and (2) unknown responses to cell wall stress.
MA: 1,3-β-glucan synthase inhibition. 5-FU: 5-fluorouridine, CYP51A/ERG11: lanosterol 14α-demethylase,ERG: ergosterol biosynthesis genes,FCY: cytosine deaminase gene,FCA: flucytosine resistance
gene, FdUMP: 5′-fluoro deoxyuridine monophosphate, Fks1p and
Fks2p: 3-β-glucan synthase subunits,FUR1:
uracil phosphoribosyltransferase gene,hsp: heat
shock protein gene, Hsp90: heat shock protein 90,MSH2: azole resistance gene,salA: salicylate 1-monooxygenase
gene SalA: salicylate 1-monooxygenase,sqle: squalene
epoxidase gene. Asterisks indicate mutations. The figure is adapted
from Fisher et al. and updated using
information presented in Martinez-Rossi et al., and with the original literature findings. Panels (a)–(f)
are adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: NATURE REVIEWS
MICROBIOLOGY Fisher, M.C. et al. Tackling the emerging threat of antifungal
resistance to human health.Nat.Rev.Microbiol.2022, 20(9), 557–571,
copyright 2022.

Azoles inhibit ergosterol biosynthesis by targeting lanosterol
14α-demethylase (ERG11), disrupting cell membrane
formation. Azole resistance is typically caused by efflux pump overexpression
inCandidaspecies or lanosterol 14α-demethylase
mutations and promoter insertions affecting the sterol biosynthesis
pathway inAspergillusspecies. In other species
such as , lanosterol
14α-demethylase overproduction, efflux pump overexpression,
and hypermutations are responsible for azole resistance. Additionally,
heteroresistance and aneuploidy further facilitate azole resistance
(Figureb).

Byproducts of pyrimidine analogue metabolism
inhibit DNA and RNA
synthesis. Resistance to these agents (e.g., flucytosine) mainly arises
from point mutations in the target gene cytosine deaminase (FCY1), particularly inCandidaspecies,
and hypermutation is a frequent resistance mechanism inCryptococcusspecies (Figurec).

Allylamines inhibit squalene
epoxidase, a key enzyme in the ergosterol
biosynthesis pathway, disrupting cell membrane formation. The inhibition
of squalene epoxidase leads to the accumulation of toxic squalene
byproducts that compromise organelle membrane integrity and ultimately
impair fungal viability, which is the primary antifungal mechanism
of allylamines. Resistance mechanisms (especially inTrichophytonspp.) include mutations in the squalene epoxidase gene, overproduction
of salicylate 1-monooxygenase capable of degrading allylamine, efflux
pump overexpression, and induction of membrane and stress response
pathways (Figured).

Echinocandins and triterpenoids inhibit
1,3-β-glucan synthase,
preventing the synthesis of 1,3-β-d-glucan, a cell
wall component.,Echinocandin resistance typically
results from mutations in 1,3-β-glucan synthase (FKS1), particularly inCandidaandFusariumspecies (Figuree). Triterpenoid resistance is also
associated with mutations in 1,3-β-glucan synthase, specifically
impactingFKS2in (Figuref). Stress response pathways, such as those involving
heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), Ca2+/calcineurin signaling,
Ras GTPase-linked mechanisms, and the unfolded protein response, have
been implicated in echinocandin resistance (Figuree). However,
the role of these pathways in triterpenoid resistance mechanisms has
yet to be fully elucidated (Figuref).

A notable factor
contributing to antifungal resistance is the biofilm-forming
properties of fungi. Most human pathogenic fungi form biofilms within
the human body or on medical devices and instruments. These comprise
a mass of fungal cells adhered to a surface and embedded in an extracellular
matrix of polymer compounds secreted by the fungi. Biofilm formation
begins with fungal cells or spores adhering to a living or inorganic
surface, followed by filamentous growth, interconnection, and secretion
of extracellular matrix materials, forming a protective barrier. This
matrix masks the fungal cells, providing extensive protection against
the host’s immune system and antifungal agents. This is further enhanced by increased efflux
pump activity within the biofilm, changes in antifungal targets within
fungal cells, and the effects of proteins associated with filamentation. In biofilm form, fungi sensitive in the planktonic
(yeast-like) state may become resistant to antifungal agents.

These observations indicate the urgent
need for novel antifungal
agents with minimal risk of resistance development (or at least very
slow resistance development) and effectiveness against fungal biofilms.

Recent studies have shown that in addition to genetic resistance,
phenotypic resistance (antifungal drug tolerance) also affects the
therapeutic efficacy of antifungal drugs. Antifungal drug tolerance,
distinct from resistance, is characterized by the slow proliferation
of subpopulations that efficiently overcome antifungal stress. In , tolerance exhibits an inverse correlation
with intracellular drug accumulation and is mitigated by adjuvant
compounds administered alongside fluconazole, thereby enhancing therapeutic
efficacy in highly tolerant isolates. In , brain glucose induces
tolerance to amphotericin B via the glucose repression activator Mig1,
ultimately reducing treatment effectiveness in cryptococcal meningitis.
Mig1-driven tolerance mechanisms involve suppression of ergosterol
synthesis and augmented production of inositolphosphorylceramide,
which competes with amphotericin B for ergosterol binding. Co-administration
of amphotericin B with aureobasidin A, a fungal-specific inositolphosphorylceramide
synthase inhibitor, significantly enhances antifungal efficacy. Additionally, the develops fungicide-tolerant persisters in pulmonary infections enriched
in cells with high stationary-phase molecule production. The antioxidant
ergothioneine plays a crucial role in amphotericin B persistence,
indicating a conserved tolerance mechanism across diverse fungal species.
Sertraline demonstrates selective antifungal activity against amphotericin
B-tolerant persisters, suggesting a promising therapeutic avenue for
cryptococcosis. Understanding fungal
tolerance mechanisms can improve antifungal therapy strategies by
identifying new drug targets and optimizing combination treatments.

Compiled based on tables from Mazzei
and Novelli, Lepak and Andes, Carmo et al., and
Ashley.

The effective treatment of central nervous system
fungal infections
is exceptionally challenging, mainly due to the limited penetration
of currently available antifungal agents across the blood–brain
barrier, which can be significantly improved using liposomal formulations
(e.g., amphotericin B) (Table). However, therapy remains unsuccessful in most cases, even
when the theoretically effective dose of the antifungal agent is predicted
to enter the central nervous system because traditional pharmacokinetic
principles are not universally applicable to the central nervous system.
Furthermore, altered physiology in immunosuppressed patients and the
use of other medications influence the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of antifungal drugs.,Consequently, central nervous
system fungal infections are associated with high mortality rates
regardless of the pathogen, reaching 90–100% in immunosuppressed
patients.

One of the causes of
the development of severe side effects is
the similarity in cell structure, function, and metabolism between
fungi and human hosts. Thus, the development of exclusively fungus-specific
antifungal agents is challenging. However, this problem could be solved
by identifying fungus-specific molecular targets. Some fungi enter
host cells, where they are less exposed to the effects of antifungal
agents and the immune system. Therefore, effective antifungal agents
or therapeutic approaches must have good cell penetration properties. These observations emphasize the urgent need
to develop small-molecule antifungal compounds capable of penetrating
the blood–brain barrier, ensuring both safe application and
predictable therapeutic efficacy.

The availability, cost, and therapy expenses of different
antifungal agents vary across countries. This disparity significantly affects the ability of middle- and,
most notably, low-income countries, which are the most heavily affected
regions in terms of life-threatening fungal infections, to effectively
combat fungal infections. A prime example
is the prohibitive cost and limited availability of liposomal amphotericin
B and flucytosine therapies in these countries. Furthermore, the lack of proper diagnostic knowledge and
tools, as well as mitigating surveys, contribute to the exceptionally
high number of fatal mycoses in these regions.,To alleviate this problem, policies must be implemented to ensure
that regardless of cost, the most effective antifungal agents and
diagnostic techniques are globally accessible. Moreover, strict guidelines
for effectively using antifungal agents must be established, requiring
a well-trained workforce of specialists.

A potential solution to the antifungal problems is the combined use
of antifungal drugs using the simultaneous or sequential application
of two antifungal agents with distinct mechanisms of action and targets.
This approach reduces the risks of resistance development and side
effects, while synergistically enhancing each other’s efficacy
and broadening the antifungal spectrum. Over the past 3 decades, numerous drugs used to treat different
diseases have been shown to possess secondary antifungal effects beyond
their original indication, making them potentially useful as either
independent or adjuvant treatments. Repurposing such drugs for antifungal
application is cheaper and quicker than developing an entirely new
agent. Using drug databases to identify
targets suitable for fungus-specific antifungal therapy enables the
design of new drug molecules or drug repurposing, laying the groundwork
for safe, side-effect-free antifungal therapies in the future. Several promising candidate molecules possessing
novel antifungal mechanisms of action have already reached various
stages of clinical testing. However, they have yet to be introduced
for therapeutic use.

The
interaction between two combined antifungal agents is either synergistic
(mutually enhancing each other’s efficacy), additive (equaling
the sum of their individual efficacies), or antagonistic (mutually
reducing each other’s efficacy). Synergy is favorable for achieving
a more effective antifungal treatment than monotherapy, but antagonism
should be avoided. Notably, the efficacy of an antifungal agent can
be enhanced not only by another antifungal drug but also by a drug
not known for its antifungal properties. Such an example is ibuprofen,
a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, which, despite lacking inherent
antifungal activity, synergistically increases the efficacy of fluconazole
againstCandidainfections by efflux pump inhibition.
A synergistic antifungal drug combination involves one of the following
underlying mechanisms: (1) one agent increases the biological availability
of the other, (2) the agents target different components of the same
biological pathway or different but interrelated pathways, or (3)
one agent suppresses the stress response induced by the other. An
example of the first mechanism is the interaction between amphotericin
B and flucytosine, where amphotericin B enhances membrane permeability,
facilitating the intracellular uptake of flucytosine. An example of
the second mechanism is the interaction between terbinafine and azoles,
where both target the ergosterol biosynthesis pathway but at different
points (Figureb,d).
An example of the third mechanism is the combined application of Hsp90
inhibitors, which block the stress response to azoles. Because these
synergistic antifungal combinations, often only observedin
vitro, have the potential for therapeutic success, many new
methods have recently been developed to identify synergistic antifungal
drug combinations. In clinical practice,
the most frequently used drug combinations for therapeutic purposes
include amphotericin B + flucytosine/azoles or echinocandin + azoles
for invasive candidiasis, azoles/amphotericin B + echinocandin or
voriconazole + anidulafungin for invasive aspergillosis, and amphotericin
B + posaconazole/caspofungin for mucormycosis.

Drug repurposing
involves identifying new therapeutic applications for commercially
available drugs beyond their original use. Such an approach offers
numerous advantages and may be the basis for a novel antifungal strategy.
Including commercial market authorization, this process only takes
3–12 years and costs approximately $50 million, a fraction
of the outlay required to develop an entirely new drug. Variousin vitroandin silicotechniques have identified numerous candidate
antifungal drug molecules from drug molecule databases, primarily
againstCandidaspecies.,,Potential candidates for repurposed antifungal
agents include various antibiotics, immunosuppressive drugs, cholesterol-lowering
statins, antiarrhythmic drugs, antipsychotics, antidepressants, and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. However, repurposed antifungal agents have several drawbacks: (1)in vitroantifungal activity does not guaranteein vivoefficacy, (2) therapeutically effective antifungal
doses may cause severe side effects, (3) low concentrations may lead
to resistance development, and (4) the exact mechanism of their antifungal
action is not always fully understood, hindering therapeutic applications.,,Nevertheless, even in unsuccessful
applications, these drugs may serve as templates for developing new
antifungal agents.

The first step in developing an entirely new antifungal drug involves
screening a broad molecular library forin vitroantifungal
activity followed by identifying its target fungal component. Then,
the molecule’s structure may be optimized to enhance its efficacy,
and it is tested in mammalian infection models. If proven effective
in these models, the drug undergoes phases of clinical testing, followed
by commercialization if it passes the trials.Tableprovides
an overview of the antifungal agents developed to target components
of old and newly targeted biological pathways, which were still undergoing
clinical testing at the time of writing of this review (March 2025).
Thus, it is likely that many of these agents have now passed the final
clinical test phase and been approved and commercially launched, especially
those that are in the third phase of clinical trials focusing on the
effectiveness against existing treatments and monitoring the adverse
reactions. Entirely new antifungal agents in the third phase of clinical
trials include fosmanogepix, olorofim, chelated amphotericin B, albaconazole,
iodiconazole, and opelconazole. Fosmanogepix
inhibits glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked cell wall transfer protein
1 (Gwt1), preventing essential changes required for cell survival.
This mechanism differs entirely from the previous antifungal drugs
used in clinical settings. Olorofim,
a dihydroorotate dehydrogenase inhibitor, disrupts pyrimidine biosynthesis
but is ineffective againstCandidaspecies. This
mechanism is also completely different from those of currently used
antifungal agents. Chelated amphotericin
B removes ergosterol from the cell membrane by binding to it and forming
aggregates. This formulation differs from existing amphotericin B
preparations because it achieves high bioavailability, even with oral
administration. Albaconazole, iodiconazole,
and opelconazole are new triazoles with a broader spectrum of antifungal
activity and stronger binding to lanosterol 14α-demethylase
than existing triazoles.,Figurepresents the chemical structures of the
antifungal drugs under development.

ATP: adenosine triphosphate, FPPL:
fungal priority pathogens list, GPI:
glycosylphosphatidylinositol, Hsp90: heat shock protein 90, nd: no
data available. Compiled based on tables from Pfaller et al., Bouz and Doležal, Puumala et al., and Zobi and
Algul.

Chemical structures of antifungal drugs
under development.

Other antifungal therapeutic
options include those based on biopharmacological products (e.g.,
monoclonal antibodies, cytokines, vaccines, or antifungal peptides)
or nanoparticles. Because monoclonal
antibodies are highly target-specific, their use as antifungal therapeutics
offers a significant advantage, making them a potentially safe option
with minimal side effects. Examples of effective monoclonal antibodies
include efungumab and 18B7. However, despite several other monoclonal
antibodies showing bothin vitroandin vivoefficacy, no such products are currently under development for clinical
use, which may be due to the high cost of production technology.

Cytokines (e.g., recombinant macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, interferon-γ) or other proteins may
be used in immunotherapeutic antifungal strategies. Cytokines stimulate
the host’s immune system, enhancing defense against fungal
infections. However, more extensive and complex clinical trials are
necessary to understand their mechanisms of action and ensure safe
application for treating fungal infections. Recombinant macrophage
colony-stimulating factor is a promising candidate that has long been
used for the clinical treatment of neutropenia.

Vaccination is another encouraging option to prevent
fungal infections
and spread, particularly in regions where pathogenic fungi pose a
significant issue and hospital treatment is either prohibitively expensive
or unavailable (typically low-income countries). Because it is challenging
to enhance immune defense in immunosuppressed patients through vaccination,
vaccines are primarily envisioned as prophylactic agents for use in
immunocompetent populations. No commercially
available antifungal vaccines exist, but two are under development
and have shown promising results in clinical trials. The NDV-3A vaccine
comprises the N-terminal domain of a protein with agglutinin-like
sequences (Als3) combined with an aluminum hydroxide adjuvant. Als3
is an immunodominant cell wall protein of that functions as a virulence factor. NDV-3A has demonstrated effectiveness
in phase II clinical trials for treating infections caused by variousCandidaspecies. Its mechanism of action is based on reducing
pathogenic virulence, while enhancing the production and activation
of phagocyte effectors. The recombinant NXT-2 vaccine is based on
a modified Kex1 protein (serine-type carboxypeptidase) designed to
achieve protection against a broad antifungal spectrum by stimulating
the production of anti-NXT-2 antibodies, which bind to fungal cells
and promote phagocytosis. Additional advantages include inhibiting
biofilm formation and cost-effective production, and tests indicate
that it may be effective against , , , and infections.
It is currently undergoing phase I clinical trials.

Antifungal peptides offer several advantages over
traditional antifungal
agents. They are naturally derived, making them potential biopharmacological
products. They act across a broad spectrum, enabling their effectiveness
against various fungal infections. Furthermore, their selective mode
of action targets fungi, while minimizing the risk of side effects.
Moreover, the risk of resistance development is minimal because they
typically have a rapid mode of action and are fungicidal, attacking
multiple fungal-specific targets using diverse mechanisms.−Generally, the mechanism of action is dependent on the peptide concentration.
At relatively high concentrations, antifungal peptides directly disrupt
the cell membrane, causing rapid cell death. They exert various effects
at lower concentrations, including directly or indirectly inhibiting
cell wall synthesis, binding to nucleic acids to cause degradation,
suppressing transcription, disrupting organelle function (e.g., mitochondria
and vacuoles), inducing reactive oxygen species accumulation, triggering
programmed cell death and autophagy, disturbing ion homeostasis, altering
fungal metabolism, activating signal transduction pathways, and interfering
with the cell cycle.,Despite their many advantages,
antifungal peptides also have several drawbacks that significantly
affect their practical applicability, including high instability within
the host organism (mainly due to enzymatic degradation), host cell
lysis when applied at high concentrations, unresolved drug delivery
and targeting, low yield, and high production cost. Due to their unfavorable
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties, the medical application
of antifungal peptides is currently envisioned in the form of topical
agents for the treatment of various types of candidiasis, either as
a stand-alone therapy or in combination with traditional antifungal
agents.−Several such peptides have reached various stages
of clinical trials, but only a few have been commercialized as therapeutic
agents. For instance, the peptide P113 demonstrated effectiveness
against oral, vaginal, and ocular candidiasis, and NP213 showed promise
for treating onychomycosis, although it failed placebo-controlled
tests. Regarding systemic applications
for treating invasive mycoses, hLF(1–11) and CZEN-002 are promising
candidates. hLF(1–11) directly destroys pathogens, while CZEN-002
enhances the host’s immune defense. Despite promising clinical
trials, neither has been commercialized to date. The previously mentioned and development-stage agents,
such as nikkomycin Z, aureobasidin A, and VL-2397, are broadly effective
in treating fungal infections of diverse origins and types. Additional promising candidates for treatingCandidainfections include cathelicidins (e.g., LL-5, LL-37,
omiganan, and iseganan), histatins (e.g., histatin 5), mucins (e.g.,
PAC113), and other peptides (e.g., lactoferrin, WLBU2, and XF-73),
many of which have already reached various stages of clinical trials.,Two lactoferrin-derived peptides (i.e., Lf(1–11) and bLfcin)
are notable as potential adjuvants because they exhibit synergistic
effects againstCandidaspecies when combined with
azoles or amphotericin B70. Moreover, many antifungal peptides have
shown effectiveness in preventing biofilm formation and destroying
already existing biofilms. This is mainly achieved by inhibiting surface
adhesion and negatively regulating genes involved in the complex processes
of biofilm formation, such as those regulating the transition from
planktonic cells to pseudohyphae to hyphae. Such peptides include
certain defensins, cathelicidins, histatins, andde novo-designed peptides.

The application
of nanotechnology in treating fungal infections
has emerged in recent years. This involves binding antifungal agents
to nanoparticles or packaging in nanocapsules to improve their pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic properties. Examples include lipid nanoparticles,
such as amphotericin B in liposomal bilayers (AmBisome), or nanopolymers.
Metallic nanoparticles (e.g., silver, gold, and magnetite) have also
demonstrated effective antifungal activity, although their clinical
application remains unelucidated.

These days, artificial intelligence (AI)
is revolutionizing antifungal drug development and therapies, reducing
time and costs while enhancing predictive models for efficacy and
safety. Additionally, AI facilitates biomarker identification and
personalized treatment strategies, leading to more effective and tailored
antifungal therapies. Machine learning models surpass traditional
screening methods by processing genomic, proteomic, and metabolomic
data to identify promising drug candidates. AI-driven predictive modeling
assesses drug interactions, toxicity profiles, and pharmacokinetic
properties, optimizing development processes.,AI also aids in identifying resistance patterns in fungal pathogens,
enabling the design of targeted therapies for multidrug-resistant
strains, accelerating the discovery of novel treatments. AI plays a key role in drug repurposing for
antifungal applications by analyzing molecular structures and predicting
efficacy. Leveraging clinical data sets and natural language processing,
AI discovers new therapeutic indications for existing antifungal agents.,Advanced techniques, such as reinforcement learning and generative
adversarial networks, further refine drug effectiveness and enhance
therapeutic potential, improving accessibility, efficacy, and affordability.
AI-driven screening methods identify agents with improved efficacy
and lower toxicity while optimizing formulations and refining safety
models. Machine learning algorithms contribute to streamlining clinical
trials, improving therapeutic strategies, and increasing treatment
success rates. Personalized antifungal treatment is enhanced by AI
through analyzing individual patient data, optimizing therapeutic
efficacy, and minimizing adverse effects. By integrating genomic information,
microbiome composition, and treatment history, AI-driven models assist
clinicians in selecting the most effective therapies and improving
treatment precision, patient adherence, and clinical outcomes. AI
further enables real-time monitoring of patient responses, allowing
timely therapeutic adjustments.,Despite its transformative
potential, AI integration in antifungal drug development faces challenges,
including limited high-quality data sets, regulatory hurdles, and
ethical concerns regarding data privacy and accessibility. Addressing
these challenges through interdisciplinary collaboration, standardized
data collection, and clear validation guidelines will improve the
reliability of AI and its impact on antifungal therapy.

The most widely used chemical fungicides worldwide can be classified
into 15 major groups, according to their chemical properties and modes
of action (Table).Figurepresents the chemical
structures of representative fungicides from the 15 major groups.
These fungicides are categorized as either contact or systemic. Contact
fungicides provide surface protection against pathogenic fungi and
do not penetrate plant tissues. In contrast, systemic fungicides enter
the plant and are distributed evenly through the vascular system,
offering protection against pathogens capable of penetrating the plant.

ATP: adenosine triphosphate, MAP:
mitogen-activated protein. Compiled based on tables edited by Gikas
et al. and Corkley et al.

Chemical
structures of representative fungicides from the 15 major
groups of chemical fungicides.

Tableshows only
a few selected examples because the number of chemical fungicides
continuously increases with newer ones being brought to market, mainly
in the United States.,The opposite trend is observed
in the EU, where an increasing number of fungicides are being (temporarily
or permanently) withdrawn from the market and banned under the Toward
Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil action plan and other regulations.,,Some withdrawn fungicides may
be temporarily reauthorized by the EU in emergencies. The list of
currently authorized fungicides is continuously monitored and can
be found on the relevant EU web portals.

The protection of plants against fungal pathogens continues to
face new challenges in pre- and postharvest conditions.,−Among the most significant challenges are (1) the
emergence of new fungal species in agricultural areas where they were
previously unknown (due to climate change), (2) the continuous spread
of fungicidal resistance, and (3) the harmful effects of chemical
fungicides on the environment and human health.

It has been established that due to climate change,
the incidence and impact of fungal infections on plants and crops
are continuously increasing in pre- and postharvest conditions. Additionally, a further significant increase
is expected in the near future, resulting
from direct and indirect causes. Direct causes include the emergence
of plant pathogenic fungal species, such as , , species complex, , , ,Pythiumspp., and f. sp.tritici, in agricultural areas, where they
were previously unknown. Additional direct causes include higher average
temperatures, which can, for instance, shorten pathogen generation
times; elevated CO2levels, which either increase or decrease
infection severity; and increased humidity or prolonged droughts,
which enhance fungal pathogen virulence. These factors also influence the nature and extent of mycotoxin
contamination under storage conditions such as the appearance of and species complex. Indirect causes include
reduced levels of plant resistance and changes in the rhizobiome,
which may reduce the number of beneficial competitor microorganisms
in the soil surrounding the roots, thereby diminishing the plant’s
defense capabilities against pathogenic fungi.

Over the past 2 decades,
the widespread improper use of chemical fungicides (i.e., incorrect
fungicide selection, inappropriate timing and concentration, and neglecting
rainy weather periods) has caused the emergence of an increasing number
of resistant plant pathogenic fungal strains. This phenomenon is primarily attributed to the genomic plasticity
of fungi and their broad genetic toolkit, equipping them with excellent
adaptive and resistance capabilities against fungicides.,Figurecomprehensively
summarizes the resistance mechanisms developed against the chemical
fungicides. The underlying resistance mechanisms most commonly involve
one or more of the following mechanisms: (1) target gene mutation,
(2) target overproduction, (3) reduction of fungicide concentration
within the cell through efflux processes, and (4) detoxification via
metabolic breakdown of the fungicide.

Mechanisms of action of chemical fungicide
classes and the associated
principal forms of acquired resistance. (a) Aniline pyrimidine resistance:
(1) target gene (methionine biosynthesis enzyme genes) mutations,
(2) efflux pump hyperactivity, and (3) adenosine triphosphate-binding
cassette transporter overexpression. Mechanism of action (MA): inhibition
of methionine biosynthesis and hydrolytic enzyme secretion. (b) Demethylation
inhibitor resistance: (1) target gene (lanosterol 14α-demethylase)
point mutations, (2) target overproduction, (3) efflux pump overproduction
or hyperactivity, (4) hypermutation in the target and housekeeping
genes, (5) heteroresistance and aneuploidy, and (6) metabolic changes
and degradation. MA: lanosterol 14α-demethylase inhibition.
(c) Dicarboximide and phenylpyrrole inhibitor resistance: (1) target
gene (mitogen-activated protein kinase/histidine kinase) mutations,
(2) efflux pump hyperactivity, and (3) adenosine triphosphate-binding
cassette transporter overexpression. MA: signal transduction blocking.
(d) Quinone inhibitor resistance: (1) target gene (cytochromeb/c) mutations, (2) efflux pump hyperactivity,
and (3) metabolic changes and degradation. MA: cellular respiration
inhibition. (e) Methylbenzimidazole carbamate resistance: (1) target
gene (β-tubulin) mutations and (2) target overproduction. MA:
mitosis and cell division inhibition. (f) Morpholine/amine resistance:
(1) unknown. MA: Δ8−Δ7-sterol isomerase/Δ14-sterol
reductase inhibition. (g) Succinate dehydrogenase inhibitor resistance:
(1) target gene (succinate dehydrogenase/complex II) mutations and
(2) efflux pump hyperactivity. MA: succinate dehydrogenase inhibition
and mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate production blocking. CBL:
cystathionine-β-lyase, CBS: cystathionine-β-synthase,
CYP51A/ERG11: lanosterol 14α-demethylase, CYT B/C: cytochromeb/c, ERG2: Δ8−Δ7-sterol
isomerase, ERG24: Δ14-sterol reductase, HK: histidine kinase,
MAP: mitogen-activated protein kinase,MSH2: azole
resistance gene, SDH: succinate dehydrogenase, TUB2: β-tubulin.
Asterisks indicate mutations. The figure is compiled using information
presented in Hawkins and Fraaije, and
Brauer et al. and updated with the original
literature findings.

The most common resistance mechanism against aniline
pyrimidines
is the overproduction of energy-dependent efflux pumps (adenosine
triphosphate-binding cassette transporters), thereby reducing the
intracellular concentration of the fungicide to ineffective levels.
The increased activity of alternative efflux pumps and mutations in
genes associated with methionine biosynthesis also contribute to resistance
(Figurea). At least
one of these resistance mechanisms has been identified in ,Oculimaculaspp., and .

Resistance to demethylation inhibitors is mainly due to point
mutations
in the gene encoding the target enzyme (i.e., mutations in lanosterol
14α-demethylase, resulting in the inability or reduced ability
of azoles to inhibit enzymatic activity) or enzyme overproduction
(i.e., increased enzyme production compensates for the inhibitory
effect of the intracellular azole concentration). Other mechanisms
contributing to resistance against demethylation inhibitors include
hypermutations in both the target and housekeeping genes, heteroresistance,
aneuploidy, metabolic adaptations, and fungicide degradation (Figureb). One or more of
these resistance mechanisms have been observed in , , , , and , , and .

Resistance to dicarboximide and phenylpyrrole fungicides was
established
in and is mainly attributed
to mutations in the gene encoding histidine kinase, thereby preventing
the fungicide from binding to the enzyme and inhibiting its function
(Figurec).

Besides efflux pump hyperactivity, resistance
to quinone inhibitors
is caused by point mutations in the mitochondrial cytochromebandcgenes, preventing the fungicide
from binding to its target site and inhibiting cellular respiration.
These resistance mechanisms have been well characterized in , , , , ,-repentis, and (Figured).

To date, approximately 115 fungal species have developed resistance
to methylbenzimidazole carbamates, and the mechanism has been well
characterized in and . Resistance is mainly due to point
mutations in the β-tubulin gene, reducing or preventing the
fungicide from binding to and inhibiting β-tubulin function
(Figuree).

Resistance to morpholine and amine fungicides
has been reported
inErysiphespp.,Microsphaeraspp.,Phyllactiniaspp.,Podosphaeraspp.,Sphaerothecaspp., andUncinulaspp. However,
the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unknown (Figuref).

The extensive and widespread use of succinate dehydrogenase
inhibitors
rapidly led to the emergence of resistant fungal strains due to an
amino acid substitution in histidine at position 257 of the enzyme,
preventing fungicide binding. Efflux pump hyperactivity was also implicated
in the resistance mechanism. Resistance to succinate dehydrogenase
inhibitors has been reported in , , , , and (Figureg).

Any discussion of fungicide resistance must address
the widespread
and intensive use of azole-based fungicides in agricultural areas.
This significantly promotes the development of human pathogenic strains resistant to clinically used
triazoles.

The direct toxic effects of chemical fungicides largely depend
on their fungal-specific modes of action, and fungicides targeting
nonfungal-specific sites may also harm other organisms. Although inorganic
fungicides (e.g., copper- and sulfur-based) pose the lowest toxicological
risk, they accumulate in aquatic organisms (e.g., algae, fish, and
crustaceans), impact food quality upon consumption, and alter soil
microbiome composition. Among chemical
fungicides, demethylation inhibitors mainly harm non-plant pathogenic
fungi. Although their toxicity to aquatic plants, invertebrates, and
vertebrates is low, they disrupt sex steroid production in fish and
amphibians, causing imbalanced gender ratios. Methylbenzimidazole
carbamates exhibit low toxicity to aquatic microorganisms, plants,
and vertebrates; moderate toxicity to non-plant pathogenic fungi;
and low to moderate toxicity to algae, bacteria, and crustaceans.
Quinone inhibitors harm aquatic invertebrates and amphibians to a
low or moderate extent. Carbamates are low or moderately toxic to
algae, bacteria, and crustaceans. A
direct correlation exists between intensive agricultural use of fungicides
and declining populations of honeybees and other critical pollinators.
Some fungicides disrupt the microbiome of the digestive system of
bees, resulting in metabolic imbalances and mortality.

The indirect harmful effects of chemical
fungicides are primarily
manifested through ecotoxicological processes. Inorganic fungicides
(e.g., copper- and sulfur-based) influence the quantity and quality
of nutrients available to plants by altering the soil structure and
microbiome composition, reducing the resistance of plants to pathogens. High levels of fungicide accumulation promote
biofilm formation by pathogenic microorganisms, enhancing their resistance
and virulence. Additionally, the significant toxic effects of fungicides
on certain organisms disrupt predator–prey and host–pathogen
balances. Mass bee mortality caused
by the intensive application of fungicides causes ecological disasters
and negatively impacts agricultural food production.

Regarding human health, the intensive application
of chemical fungicides
is likely linked to various chronic illnesses (e.g., cancer and cardiovascular,
respiratory, and neurological diseases). A recent extensive survey
of five European countries detected the presence of at least two pesticides
(including fungicides) in 84% of participants. The effects of fungicides
on human health are not yet fully elucidated and warrant further investigation.

The challenges discussed above may be
mitigated by the previously
mentioned EU action plan (Toward Zero Pollution for Air, Water and
Soil), which advocates for developing
novel antifungal agricultural strategies with a low environmental
impact.

The expectations for a new type of fungicide are similar to those
discussed for antifungal drugs used in human medicine, with the most
critical criteria being a broad antifungal spectrum, minimal risk
of resistance development, and a fungus-specific mode of action. The
first two ensure long-term and effective application, while the latter
ensures safe use with minimal environmental impact. Such approaches may include developing chemical fungicides
with novel modes of action, using biocontrol agents and naturally
occurring biomolecules, or creating new and more effective formulations
and targeted delivery methods.

The currently available or recently under development
fungicidal arsenal eliminates plant pathogenic fungi through approximately
52 different mechanisms targeting major physiological processes, such
as nucleic acid metabolism, cytoskeleton and motor proteins, cell
respiration, amino acid and protein synthesis, signal transduction,
lipid biosynthesis, transport processes, membrane integrity, melanin
synthesis, cell membrane components, and cell wall biosynthesis. Some of the components involved in these processes
may be potential targets for developing new fungus-specific chemical
fungicidal molecules with novel modes of action and can be identified
from molecule libraries using laboratory-based orin silicohigh-throughput screening techniques. Such molecules can be specifically
modified for improved fungal specificity. Chemical fungicides with novel modes of action identified and modified
using these techniques include dihydroorotate dehydrogenase inhibitors,
oxysterol-binding protein inhibitors, melanin biosynthesis inhibitors,
and Gwt1 protein inhibitors.

Dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase inhibitors (e.g., ipflufenoquin and quinofumelin) bind
to the enzyme to block pyrimidine-based nucleotide biosynthesis. They
have demonstrated their effectiveness against and fungi, causing gray mold disease and powdery mildew, and there
are no reports of cross-resistance. Olorofim, a similar antifungal
molecule developed for human therapeutic use (Table), has demonstrated efficacy against , , and .

Oxysterol-binding protein inhibitors
(e.g., oxathiapiprolin and
fluoxapiprolin) block lipid transfer. They act on a narrow spectrum
and are effective against members of the class Oomycetes. Laboratory
tests suggest a moderate to high risk of resistance development and
potential cross-resistance.

Melanin
biosynthesis inhibitors, such as tricyclazole, suppress
melanin biosynthesis, which is essential for infection via the appressorium
by inhibiting hydroxy-naphthalene reductase or trihydroxy-dihydronaphthalene
dehydratase. However, there is a high risk of resistance and cross-resistance.
Tolprocarb is another melanin biosynthesis inhibitor, but it inhibits
polyketide synthase. Tolprocarb resistance has been observed but not
cross-resistance. These compounds are primarily effective against , which causes rice blast.

Gwt1 protein inhibitors, such as aminopyrifen,
were developed as
human therapeutics that prevent the incorporation of mannoprotein
into the cell wall (Table). They are effective against both ascomycetous and basidiomycetous
phytopathogenic fungi including , f. sp.tritici, , and . However, resistance and cross-resistance
may develop.

Due to the aforementioned
high-throughput screening techniques,
fungicidal candidate molecules with novel, previously unknown mechanisms
of action have been identified, such as tebufloquin against and ; picarbutrazox againstPythiumspp.,Fusariumspp., andRhizopusspp.; and dipymetitrone againstPhytophthoraspp.,Botrytisspp., and powdery
mildew.

The application of biocontrol agents or biomolecules derived from
various organisms as pesticides has a lower environmental impact and
ecological risk compared with chemical fungicides.

Several fungicidal biocontrol agents have been identified
in recent years. These agents are typically antagonistic microorganisms
that effectively suppress or eliminate pathogens from their environment
via competition, mycoparasitism, or antibiosis, without harming the
host or the rhizobiome. They may also
release molecules into the environment that enhance plant defense
mechanisms. For soilborne plant pathogenic fungi (Fusariumspp.,Pythiumspp.,Phytophthoraspp., ,Sclerotiniaspp., , and ),Trichodermaspecies (such as , , , and ) are particularly
effective, along with various bacterial species (Bacillusspp.,Burkholderiaspp.,Pseudomonasspp., andStreptomycesspp.). Topically applied
biocontrol agents are effective against airborne fungal pathogens,
such asChaetomiumspp. against and , againstMoniliniaspp., and against . Additionally,Bacillusspp. effectively inhibit the growth of , whereas inhibits the growth of , , , , , , and . Under storage conditions, proved to be effective against and , whereas mitigated
the damage caused by and . Currently approved biocontrol
products include those based onBacillusspp., ,Streptomycesspp., , , , , , , ,Trichodermaspp., and-atrum.

Biomolecules
derived from plants or other organisms can also effectively
protect plants against fungi by destroying fungal pathogens and stimulating
the defense system, growth, and biotic stress resistance of plant
hosts. Examples include plant probiotics, phytochemicals, and short double-stranded RNA molecules and antifungal peptides.

Plant probiotics exert a multifaceted
effect, promoting plant growth
(e.g., stimulating auxin, ethylene, gibberellin, and cytokinin production),
making nutrients accessible (e.g., bacterial siderophores), and increasing
resistance to stress factors, including biotic factors (e.g., antifungal
compounds and pathogen inhibitors). Phytochemicals
include raw plant extracts or secondary metabolites derived from plants.
Many plant extracts have effectively mitigated fungal infections and
damaged fungal pathogens. Due to their fungal selectivity, they pose
a minimal risk of resistance development and environmental harm. However,
challenges such as large-scale, cost-effective production, and field-effective
formulations must be overcome. Currently, seven phytochemical products
from plants (e.g., , , , and ) are commercially available, mainly effective
againstBotrytis,Fusarium, and
powdery mildew infections.

Plant
protection strategies based on short double-stranded RNA
molecules and peptides are available at various stages of technological
advancement. Double-stranded RNA molecules primarily exert their antifungal
effects through RNA interference, targeting genes essential for fungal
cellular structure or metabolism. Numerous
antifungal peptides, originating from various organisms or synthesizedde novo, have effectively inhibited the growth of field
crop pathogens and storage pest fungi.,,Their advantageous properties for specific agricultural
applications include fungicidal activity at relatively low concentrations,
low risk of resistance development, synergistic interactions with
some chemical fungicides and plant defense systems against pathogens,
and potential plant growth stimulation by influencing symbiosis. However,
their disadvantage is the relatively high production cost. As previously
discussed, antifungal peptides and proteins inhibit the growth of
plant pathogenic fungi or kill them through distinct mechanisms (e.g.,
cell membrane disruption, inducing apoptosis).,Two approaches can be used to integrate antifungal peptides/proteins
into plant and crop protection: (1) development of cisgenic or transgenic
plants that express large amounts of self-derived or foreign antifungal
peptides/proteins, thereby enhancing their resistance to fungal pathogens,
and (2) applying antifungal peptides/proteins as biofungicides in
spray formulations. The first approach faces significant challenges
due to current regulations on genetically modified plants and consumer aversion toward foods derived
from genetically modified organisms. Thaumatin­(-like) proteins, thionins, defensins, hevein-like proteins,
knottin-like proteins, lipid transfer proteins, and snakin are suitable
candidates for creating antifungal peptide/protein-overproducing cisgenic
and transgenic plants. A practical example is an alfalfa antifungal
peptide-overproducing potato plant, which showed increased resistance
against and infections under field conditions. High
production costs, poor solubility, instability under environmental
conditions, and unresolved formulation and delivery technology hamper
the application of surface spray formulations of antifungal peptides/proteins
in fields.−Thus, only a few antifungal peptide- and
protein-based sprays have advanced beyond laboratory or greenhouse
trials. For example, under field conditions, NmDef02 from showed efficacy against ; trichogin fromTrichodermaagainst ; synthetic
body protection compound peptides against , , and , , and ; and
ϵ-PL against . Some antifungal peptides/proteins of various
origins inhibit the proliferation of mycotoxigenic fungi (primarilyAspergillusspp.,Fusariumspp., andPenicilliumspp.) or reduce their mycotoxin production when
sprayed onto crops in storage conditions by inducing oxidative stress
and inhibiting specific enzymatic components of biosynthetic pathways.

Issues such as safe and effective application and resistance development
arising with currently used and newly introduced chemical fungicides
may be overcome by using novel formulations and delivery techniques.
A new formulation must meet the following requirements: environmentally
friendly, resistant to extreme environmental conditions (e.g., UV
radiation, pH, temperature, evaporation, oxidation, etc.), favorable
physicochemical properties for targeted delivery, controllable and
precise application, and efficacy at low concentrations. Currently,
nanotechnology, which involves encapsulating existing chemical fungicides
or biomolecules (e.g., dsRNA, peptides, and plant metabolites) in
nanoparticles or binding them to nanoparticles,,or the utilization of specific nanoparticles as pesticides, provides
an excellent solution to these challenges.

Experiments have shown that nanoparticle use reduces the environmental
impact and risk of resistance development, makes fungicides more resistant
to extreme environmental conditions, enables faster and more efficient
delivery, and is effective at lower doses than previously used. However,
the disadvantages of nanofungicides, such as complex production technologies,
high costs, and unclear effects on human health, hinder their application.,Nanomaterials used as fungicide carriers and packaging include carbon-based
materials (e.g., graphene and graphene oxide), synthetic anionic substances
(e.g., layered double hydroxides), silica nanoparticles, various polymers,
and metal nanoparticles. Iron­(II) oxide,
copper oxide, and titanium dioxide may be considered as stand-alone
nanofungicides. Many nanofungicides are
under development, but to date, none have been approved for agricultural
use in the EU due to the unclear long-term effects on animal and human
health.

Despite the
efforts of decision-making bodies and the promising
solutions discussed, fungal infections continue to show a concerning
and rising trend. Although accelerating the implementation of the
action plans outlined in the WHO fungal priority pathogens list may
provide an effective solution for mitigating this issue, it requires significantly more financial support
and heightened public attention. The chronic underfunding of mycological
research must be addressed, with support
and substantial investment directed toward studies focused on improving
human welfare in the areas of healthcare, food supply, and food security.
Public awareness of global fungal-related challenges must also be
raised, urging communities to unite to address these problems. A potential
approach is the introduction of new initiatives involving civilian
participation in research efforts, such as sample collection for antifungal
drug resistance surveys,,monitoring the spread
of fungicide resistance, or even engaging
farmers in testing new agricultural antifungal strategies in the field. Increased public attention and societal collaboration
are expected to influence local political leaders and decision-making
bodies, driving antifungal problem-solving at the regional level,
eventually expanding to global-scale solutions.

The present work of L.G. was financed
by the Hungarian National
Research, Development and Innovation Office-NKFIH, FK 134343 and K
146131 projects. University of Szeged Open Access Fund, Grant ID:
7710. This article/publication is based upon work from COST Action
EURESTOP, CA21145, supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science
and Technology).

CRediT:László Galgóczyconceptualization, funding
acquisition, visualization, writing - original draft, writing - review
& editing.

The author declares no
competing financial interest.