CO2reduction catalyst corrosion and H2evolution remain challenging under the strongly acidic electrolyte. Here, Ga-modulated SnOxwas investigated to achieve a good Snδ+oxidation state stability for durable (> 4000 hours) acidic CO2reduction to HCOOH. Under pH 1.7, catalysts achieved a partial current density of 440 mA cm−2at −1.63 VRHEand the highest single-pass conversion efficiency (SPCE) of 91.9%. In a 10 cm2electrolyzer, a total current of ~986.3 milliampere is exhibited for more than 4000 hours with Faradaic efficiency of HCOOH (FEHCOOH) higher than 82% and SPCE higher than 50%. Mechanism study indicates that lattice oxygen anchoring effect of Ga due to its strong oxygen affinity establishes a stable framework, reinforcing interface Sn─O bonds and protecting the Snδ+from the heavy self-reduction process. The robust structure of catalyst and modulated active Snδ+sites elevate the CO2reduction activity. The durable and highly efficient catalytic system exhibits the potential for industrial applications of the Ga-modulated SnOx.

Lattice oxygen anchoring effect of Ga establishes a stable framework, protecting the Snδ+from the heavy self-reduction process.

CO2electroreduction technology is expected to aid the target of global carbon neutrality (1). Among many CO2reduction products, formic acid (HCOOH) exhibits the highest added value per electrical energy input (2,3). The CO2electroreduction to HCOOH has a good industrialization prospect as numerous main group metals, including Sn, Pb, In, and Bi, and their derived materials have been widely reported with high activity (catalytic current density > 500 mA cm−2) and high selectivity (Faradaic efficiency >90%) for formate (HCOO−) synthesis under neutral and alkaline conditions (4–6). However, the neutral/alkaline CO2electroreduction has not become commercially successful because common carbonate accumulation on the gas diffusion layer from excessive CO2dissolution leads to severe stability issues in the neutral/alkaline system and confines their further development (7–9).

By contrast, the acidic medium with abundant protons (H+) can eliminate the carbonate precipitation to obtain high CO2conversion efficiency and high stability (7,10,11). The electroreduction of CO2under acidic conditions is also essential to get HCOOH as product rather than HCOO−. However, hydrogen (H2) evolution suppression and catalyst stability issues are more serious in the strong-acidic electrolyte. It is of great challenge to develop electrocatalysts for durable acidic CO2electroreduction (10,12,13). It has been proven that the oxide layers on the surface of the main group metals due to their high oxophilicity are essential to suppress H2evolution and thermodynamically favor the adsorption of *OCHO (14–16). However, the dissolution and heavy self-reduction of catalysts in the strong acidic electrolyte promote the competitive H2evolution reaction and result in the duration working time less than 100 hours. To minimize the catalyst corrosion and reconstruction, several studies designed a specific micro-array (17) or functionalized protection layer (18–20), concentrating native OH−and elevating local pH to improve CO2reduction activity. Acid stable matrix design containing active sites (12), phase engineering to strengthen metal-ligand interaction (13), and alloy design (21) to promote electrons transfer are also proven as effective strategies to prevent catalysts corrosion.

According to the above strategies, robust armor to protect active oxide sites in the acidic electrolyte enables durable electrolysis. Gallium (Ga) has been studied for CO2electroreduction with good oxidation state stability (22). The high oxygen affinity enables Ga to stabilize oxygen-containing species/lattices. This lattice oxygen anchoring effect of Ga maintains the active oxide sites for efficient CO2reduction (23–26). SnO2-based catalysts have intrinsic acid stability (7,27,28) and good HCOOH selectivity while suffer from heavy self-reduction to zero-valence metals during CO2reduction reactions. Hence, Ga3+doping, which established oxide sites protection frameworks, offer SnO2-based catalysts access to durable acidic electrolysis. Here, based on the lattice oxygen anchoring effect of Ga, we developed the in situ Ga-doped SnOxcatalysts that achieve durable acidic CO2reduction to pure HCOOH solution for more than 4000 hours. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations claimed that Ga doping strengthens interface Sn─O bonds and improves Snδ+sites activity. The catalytic current density achieves more than 440 mA cm−2for HCOOH at −1.63VRHEand pH 1.7. The determined highest single-pass conversion efficiency (SPCE) reaches 91.9%. No visible self-reduction of Snδ+was observed after bulk electrolysis at ∼135.2 mA cm−2for 1087 hours. An amplified electrolyzer (10 cm2) attained a total current of ~986.3 mA for more than 4000 hours with the FEHCOOHreaching ∼82.9% and SPCE of 52.1% and produced more than 50 liters of 1.2 M pure HCOOH solution.

The synthetic process of Ga-doped SnOxwas performed through hydrolysis (Fig. 1A). The detailed steps are included in Materials and Methods part. In brief, the SnCl4and Ga(NO3)3were dissolved in a glycol solution with carbon spheres as carriers. The hydrolysis reactions were applied in an autoclave, which was followed by pyrolysis to remove organic impurities. The hydrolysis obtained doping catalysts (fig. S1) and pure SnOxis both highly dispersed on carbon (fig. S2). After pyrolysis, the powder x-ray diffractometry (XRD) patterns of prepared SnOxand the Ga-doped SnOxcorrespond to tetragonal phase SnO2(JCPDS no. 41-1445;Fig. 1B). The main diffraction peaks at 26.6°, 33.9°, and 51.8° are ascribed to (110), (101), and (211) crystal planes, respectively. The XRD pattern of synthetic Ga2O3is indexed to the trigonal phase (JCPDS no. 06-0503), and the phase of Ga2O3is supported by the Raman spectrum (fig. S3) (29). The structural imaging of Ga-doped SnOx, shown inFig. 1Cusing transmission electron microscopy (TEM), depicts nanocrystal morphology with the size ~10 nm on the labeled carbon spheres. The lattice fringes of 0.34 and 0.27 nm are assigned to the (110) and (101) facets of SnO2, while 0.36 nm corresponds to the interlayer distance of the carbon layer. Uniform elemental distributions of Ga, Sn, and O inFig. 1Dfrom energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping show the homogeneous Ga doping without phase separation or heavy agglomeration.

(A) Synthetic process and (C) HR-TEM image of Ga0.85SnOx. The inset in (C) is the schematic illustration of Ga0.85SnOxnanocrystals on carbon spheres. (B) XRD patterns of SnOx, Ga2O3, and Ga0.85SnOx. (D) EDS mapping of Ga0.85SnOx. Scale bars, 20 nm. (E) Sn and (F) Ga FT-EXAFS fitting curves of Ga0.85SnOx. The insets in (E) and (F) are the schematic illustrations of Ga-doped SnOxwith unsaturated Sn sites and saturated Ga sites. a.u., arbitrary unit.

The active mass ratio of the catalysts is around 47% (fig. S4), while the real Ga:Sn ratio varies from 0.36 to 0.62 (table S1). The main peaks of Fourier transform extended x-ray absorption fine structure (FT-EXAFS) curves inFig. 1 (E and F)are attributed to the Sn-O and Ga-O distances of 2.04 and 1.88 Å in the Ga-doped SnOx(table S2), respectively. The Sn-O (5.69) and Ga-O (5.94) coordination numbers determined through FT-EXAFS fitting illustrate the existence of oxygen vacancies (Ovs) around the Sn sites and strong oxygen affinity of Ga with a nearly full coordination environment. The Ovs of the catalysts were also detected through electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) in fig. S5. The characteristic peaks are identified as bound single electron Ovs (g= 1.999) (30,31). Hence, the superior activity of Ga-doped catalysts can be expected because their higher Ovconcentration than the pristine SnOxmay result in more active sites for CO2reduction.

The catalytic activity of Ga-doped SnOxwas evaluated by a three-electrode flow cell system (fig. S6) in a 0.5 M K2SO4and H2SO4aqueous solution at pH 1.7 (Fig. 2and figs. S7 and S8). For comparison, SnOxnanocrystals with a similar size, loading mass, and Brunauer-Emmett-Teller surface area (fig. S9) were synthesized and measured using the same system. As depicted by the FEHCOOHcurves at different current densities from 100 to 500 mA cm−2(Fig. 2B), the Ga-doped catalysts exhibit higher selectivity for HCOOH, especially at high current density. The heavy self-reduction to Sn0issues of SnOxresult in improved H2evolution (fig. S8D). Ga2O3shows partial HCOOH selectivity at 100 mA cm−2and negligible FEHCOOH(<10%) with the increase of current density (fig. S8C), indicating the main active sites from Snδ+. Among various catalysts with different Ga:Sn ratio, Ga0.85SnOxachieves highest FEHCOOHand remarkable H2suppression (Fig. 2A) at all current densities from 100 to 500 mA cm−2. A partial current density (jHCOOH) of 442 mA cm−2was obtained at −1.63 VRHEwith maximal FEHCOOHreaching ~91.7%. In contrast, FEHCOOHover SnOxonly reaches ~70% and is consistent with the reported SnO2/C performance (7). Hence, Ga doping elevates the CO2electroreduction to the HCOOH activity of SnOx. The SPCE demonstrates CO2utilization efficiency during the reactions and is the key to scale-up production. Various CO2flow rates were accordingly adopted to evaluate the SPCE of Ga0.85SnOxinFig. 2C. Around 91.9% of SPCE is achieved during the strong acidic CO2reduction at 3 standard cubic centimeter per minute (sccm) of flow rate, indicating its great industrial application potential.

(A) FE for various products and potentials over Ga0.85SnOxand (B) FEHCOOHover different catalysts at different current density. (C) FE for various products and SPCE over Ga0.85SnOxat 400 mA cm−2with different CO2flow rate. (D) Schematic illustrations of a solid-state CO2reduction electrolyzer using solid-state electrolyte (SSE) and (E) an anion-exchange membrane (AEM) promoted H2evolution suppression process. Cation-exchange membrane (CEM). (F) Comparison of current density, SPCEHCOOH, and duration time of Ga0.85SnOxwith recently reported catalysts. The time axis was set from 0 to 4200 hours with a break from 1200 to 3800 hours. Detailed performance comparisons are summarized in table S4. Pure HCOOH solution production performance of Ga0.85SnOxin a solid-state electrolyzer at (G) 1 cm2and (H) 10 cm2.

The bulk electrolysis was conducted at −200 mA cm−2in the flow cell shown in fig. S10. Ga0.85SnOxmaintains at −1.3VRHEwith an average FEHCOOHof ~82.4% and an SPCE of about 31.5% for 52 hours. In contrast, the stability of SnOxwas also evaluated through similar electrolysis. In fig. S11, the FEHCOOHdecays to 60% after less than 5 hours and to 30% after 15 hours. The gradually improved H2evolution claims the instability of SnOx. To identify the carbon source for HCOOH product, isotopic labeling experiments using13CO2were performed (fig. S12). The products detected by1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) comprise an H13COOH content higher than 97.5%, indicating that formic acid is produced from CO2reduction rather than the decomposition of carbon. The achieved activity, selectivity, stability, and SPCE declare that Ga0.85SnOxis one of the best acidic CO2electroreduction catalysts for HCOOH production (table S3).

The conventional acidic CO2electroreduction system achieves efficient HCOOH production with K2SO4and H2SO4. Purification through distillation is necessary to obtain pure HCOOH for fuel cells or industrial production. In addition, the pH of the catholyte increases, and the pH of the anolyte decreases over time by using K2SO4(20), undermining the system stability. Thus, a solid-state electrolyzer (Fig. 2D) using solid-state electrolyte (SSE) instead of K2SO4and H2SO4was adopted to overcome the purity of products and stability issues (32–35). Protons transfer across the cation-exchange membrane (CEM) and approach the cathode through the cation exchange resin. HCOO−are synthesized in the cathode from humidified CO2and delivered through the anion-exchange membrane (AEM) to combine with H+. The obtained HCOOH is finally pumped out by the pure water in the SSE layer and achieves the pure HCOOH solution. Positively charged AEM establishes a local electric field to hinder H+attacking the cathode and protect it from dissolution (Fig. 2E). Notably, the Ga0.85SnOx-assembled solid-state electrolyzer facilitates pure HCOOH production with a current density of ~−135.2 mA cm−2at ∼−3.2 V for ~1087 hours (Fig. 2G). It achieves an average FEHCOOHof 80.2% and SPCE of 27.7% during the durable electrolysis. Then, a magnified electrolyzer (10 cm2) was also assembled to explore its industrial potential (Fig. 2H). To further improve the SPCE, we spray the catalysts on the AEM and strengthen the interaction between the catalysts and the AEM through the hot pressing method to elevate the H+diffusion. A total current of 986.3 mA was obtained with an average FEHCOOHof 82.9% and SPCE of 52.1%. The notable stability was exhibited through the 4076-hour duration working time and produced 1.2 M pure HCOOH solution (fig. S13). In addition, HCOOH can crossover through CEM and lead to the loss of partial products. To further improve the FEHCOOHof the obtained pure products, refreshing the solution with a shorter interval or reducing the concentration of the obtained HCOOH solution are good strategies. The above stability and CO2utilization efficiency far exceeds the recently reported acidic catalysts in a similar electrolyzer (Fig. 2Fand table S4), indicating the durable performance of Ga-doped SnOxand broad application prospect. However, there is still partial CO2reacting with the generated OH−, forming CO32−/HCO3−, migrating across AEM, and leading to partial carbon loss. To improve the CO2utilization efficiency, the reconverted CO2from CO32−/HCO3−in the acidic SSE chamber can be collected and flow through the cathode to join the reactions again.

Then, the HCOOH production electrolyzer was directly powered by a solar cell (fig. S14) to evaluate the energy conversion efficiency of this light-driven CO2electroreduction system. According to thei-Vcurve of the GaAs triple-junction solar cell, the assembled electrolyzer achieved an average current of 37.1 mA for 1200 s with an average FEHCOOHof 79.1%. Thus, the solar energy to chemicals (HCOOH) conversion efficiency was determined as 10.5%, indicating the industrial application potential of this system.

The post-electrolysis characterization is performed to explore the stability mechanism. After the bulk electrolysis in the flow cell, the ex situ Raman spectra (Fig. 3A) were used to determine the structure of catalysts. The peaks at ~468, ~620, and ~ 750 cm−1corresponds toEg,A1g, andB2gmodes of tetragonal rutile SnO2(36,37), respectively. The peaks that appeared at ~248, ~496, and ~682 cm−1are assigned toEu(TO),A2u(TO), andA2u(LO) modes, where TO is transverse-optical vibration and LO is longitudinal-optical vibration (38). Notably, the peak around 560 cm−1may relate to theA2gmode originates from the surface in-plane oxygen vacancies (37,39). The retained characteristic peaks of SnO2claim good stability of Ga-doped catalysts after reaction.

(A) Ex situ Raman spectra of pristine SnOx, Ga0.85SnOx, and Ga0.85SnOxafter electrolysis. Sn 3d XPS spectra of Ga0.85SnOx(B) at different reaction time in the flow cell and (C) after bulk electrolysis in the solid-state electrolyzer with different etching time. (D) Sn 3d XPS spectra of SnOxafter electrolysis in the flow cell. (E) Ex situ XANES and (F) EXAFS spectra at the Sn K-edge of Ga0.85SnOxbefore and after catalytic reactions and pristine SnOx.

The high stability of Ga0.85SnOxcatalysts were also demonstrated via x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). After CO2reduction at 200 mA cm−2for 8 hours, the Sn 3d peaks at 486.5 and 495 eV corresponding to Sn (IV) (40,41) show no lower binding energy shift (Fig. 3B) and no obvious Sn0peaks. Only 7.5% Sn0at characteristic 485 and 493.4 eV are obtained after 52-hour catalysis. In contrast, 11.5% Sn0appears in the Sn 3d peaks for SnOx(Fig. 3D) only after 7-hour reaction and the ratio increase to 14.4% after 15-hour electrolysis. The existence of Sn0declares the self-reduction of catalysts. The XRD of catalysts after bulk electrolysis was also performed (fig. S15). Only metallic Sn is shown for SnOxowing to the heavy reconstruction from self-reduction. The Ga-doped catalysts exhibit characteristic diffraction peaks of SnO2without obvious metallic Sn and are supported by HR-TEM image (fig. S16) with lattice features of SnO2after catalysis. To further evaluate the stability of the catalysts, the dissolution of metal ions in the electrolyte was detected (table S5). The dissolution mass of Sn for pure SnOxis much higher than that of Ga-doped SnOxcatalysts. It indicates that Ga doping created stable frameworks that suppress the dissolution of Sn and improve the stability of the catalysts. To further elevate the catalytic stability, the AEM used in the solid-state electrolyzer enables dissolution suppression of Ga in the catalysts owing to the electrostatic repulsion from the positively charged AEM skeleton. As shown in table S5, Ga continuously dissolved in the electrolyte in the conventional catalytic system, while it was suppressed in the SSE system even after more than 600-hour reaction. The retained Ga in the catalysts frameworks further protect active Snδ+from self-reduction or serious dissolution even after bulk electrolysis, with no observation of Sn0peaks in the XPS Sn 3d curve (Fig. 3C). The shift of XPS Sn 3d peaks to a higher binding energy might result from the oxygen coordination of CO2intermediates during catalysis. Similar Sn 3d peaks at different etching times demonstrate the durable catalytic system.

The absorption edge of the Sn K-edge XAS spectrum of Ga-doped catalysts (Fig. 3E) after bulk electrolysis overlaps with that of pristine SnOxand is close to the pristine Ga0.85SnOx. The R-spaces from the ex situ EXAFS (Fig. 3F) exhibit negligible peaks of typical Sn-Sn distances for metallic Sn. These results illustrate the self-reduction with the heavy reconstruction of catalysts is remarkably hindered by Ga doping.

Furthermore, we investigated the underlying promoting role of Ga dopant using DFT calculations.Figure 4Apresents the atomic structures of SnOxand Ga-doped SnOxfor examining the surface stability and reaction mechanisms. More details about the choices of models can be found in fig. S17. The crystal orbital Hamilton population (COHP) analysis of the interface Sn─O bond (Fig. 4Band fig. S18) shows the enhanced bond strength after Ga doping with a more negative value of the integrated COHP (ICOHP). Also, the binding of oxygen within the Ga doping surface is found to be stronger compared to the pure SnOxsystem (fig. S19). The above DFT results indicate the enhanced surface stability for Ga-doped SnOx, which is consistent with the experimental observations from cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves under the Ar atmosphere (Fig. 4C). No notable redox peaks appear in the CV of Ga0.85SnOx, whereas a distinct reduction peak at −0.29 V emerges for SnOx, corresponding to the reduction of Sn (IV). The absence of apparent reduction peaks indicates high oxidation state stability of Ga0.85SnOxowing to the Ga-stabilized oxygen frameworks. Further operando Raman spectra in the strong acidic electrolyte were used to investigate the stability of the Ga-doped catalysts (Fig. 4Dand figs. S20 to S22). After 40-min even 4-hour bulk electrolysis at −1.3VRHE, Ga-doped SnOxmaintains characteristic peaks of SnO2, while these peaks decay obviously for SnOxonly after 30 min. The gradual attenuation ofA1gpeaks of SnOxindicates its heavy structure reconstruction (42,43) owing to the self-reduction under CO2electroreduction.

(A) Schematic illustrations of SnOxand Ga-doped SnOxstructures for DFT calculations. (B) COHP plot of (110) surfaces for Sn4c─O3cbonds, and the corresponding ICOHP values over different catalysts. (C) CV curves for SnOxand Ga0.85SnOxunder Ar atmosphere with acidic electrolyte in a flow cell. (D) Two-dimensional heatmaps of operando Raman spectra over Ga0.85SnOxunder CO2at −1.3 VRHE. Free energy diagrams of (E) CO2electroreduction and (F) H2evolution reduction over different catalysts at 0 VRHE.

Then, we further calculated the reaction mechanism of CO2electroreduction on pristine SnOxand Ga-doped systems, while the free energy diagrams were summarized inFig. 4Eand figs. S23 to S25. Clearly, the overbinding of *OCHO intermediate (−1.06 eV) can be observed on pristine SnOxat 0 VRHE, which makes the formation of *HCOOH energetically difficult with the most positive free energy change (ΔGmax= 0.97 eV). In sharp contrast, Ga-doped SnOxcan weaken the binding of *OCHO intermediate (Fig. 4E), leading to better catalytic performance for CO2conversion (see fig. S17 for model construction). Specifically, the adsorption free energy of *OCHO is calculated to be −0.18 and 0.10 eV for two cases of Ga doped with different surface oxygen vacancies, respectively. Note that the binding of *OCHO intermediate (although weakened) is stronger than *COOH intermediate, which ensures a high product selectivity toward HCOOH. Furthermore, the kinetic processes of *OCHO hydrogenation via the Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism were shown in fig. S26, where Ga-doped SnOxsystems show significantly lower energy barriers compared to the pristine SnOxsystem. Subsequently, *HCOOH can be feasibly produced via the protonation of *OCHO without uphill free energy changes, thus ensuring high-performance HCOOH production. Also, other Sn sites exposed due to Ga introduction also exhibited good catalytic performance of CO2electroreduction to HCOOH (fig. S23). Therefore, our systematic DFT results revealed that the Ga-doped system can properly bind the *OCHO intermediate, thereby showing enhanced catalytic performance. Besides, a weaker H adsorption was observed on Ga-doped SnOx(Fig. 4F), which shows the ability to suppress competitive H2evolution.

In summary, Ga-doped SnOxwas developed to achieve durable and efficient acidic CO2electroreduction to HCOOH. A partial current density of more than 440 mA cm−2at −1.63 VRHEwas obtained, and the highest SPCE of 91.9% was achieved. The solid-state electrolysis system ensured an outstanding duration time of 4076 hours at ~986.3 mA, indicating the potential for industrial applications. The high oxygen affinity of Ga plays an anchoring role for lattice oxygen. The enhanced interface Sn─O bonds from Ga doping enable effective self-reduction suppression. The elevated activity from Ovand suitable *OCHO adsorption energy accelerates local protons consumption on the catalyst surface. These together enable the durable acidic CO2electroreduction process. This study provides a simple strategy to protect the oxidation state from self-reduction through active cations doping. To avoid invalid heteroatoms doping in bulk structures, more precise regulation should be performed to improve the mass activity and is currently under investigation.

Tin tetrachloride (98%, SnCl4) and ethylene glycol (EG, >99%) were purchased from Macklin. Carbon spheres (XC-72) were purchased from Shanghai Yuanye Biotechnology. Gallium nitrate hydrate [99.99%, Ga(NO3)3] was purchased from Adamas.

Ga-doped SnOxwas synthesized through a hydrolysis process. The typical route started from a dissolution of 5 mmol of SnCl4into 20 ml of H2O. Then, 40 ml of EG was added into a flask to dilute the SnCl4solution. A 100-mg carbon spheres and 4.25 mmol of Ga(NO3)3hydrate were dispersed and dissolved in the EG solution. After stirring at 80°C for 30 min, the uniform dispersions were poured into an autoclave and reacted for 3 hours at 160°C. The obtained products were washed with ethanol and dried in a vacuum oven at 60°C. Last, the products were annealed at 450°C under the Ar atmosphere for 4 hours to remove the organic residuals and labeled as Ga0.85SnOx. The SnOx, Ga0.7SnOx, and GaSnOxcatalysts were prepared in a similar strategy except that the Ga(NO3)3hydrate was added with 0, 3.5, and 5 mmol, respectively.

X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was tested on a Bruker D8 ADVANCE diffractometer with Cu Kα irradiation (λ = 1.5406 Å, 10° to 80°) to analyze the phase and crystallinity of nanocrystals. TEM, HR-TEM, HAADF, and EDS mapping images were taken on a Talos F200X G2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, FEI) transmission electron microscope under an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. The metal oxidation states of the catalysts were analyzed by XPS on the Nexsa G2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Al Kα radiation. The chemical compositions of the catalysts were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer on an ICAP PRO XP from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The specific surface area and N2adsorption/desorption curves were detected by a 3FLEX at 77 K from Micromeritics. The EPR spectra were collected through an X band pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance spectrometer at 25°C. The Raman spectra were taken on an Alpha300R (WITec) microscope with a laser of 532 nm. The Raman spectra of Ga2O3were obtained using Horiba LabRAM Odyssey with a laser of 325 nm. The XANES spectra (Ga and Sn K-edge) were measured at the BL11B beamlines at the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (Shanghai, China). The XAFS spectra were recorded at room temperature using a four-channel silicon drift detector Bruker 5040 in a transmission mode. The XAFS spectra of these standard samples (Sn foil, SnO2, and Ga2O3) were recorded in a transmission mode. The spectra were processed and analyzed by the software codes Athena and Artemis.

For the ex situ XRD, XPS, XAS, Raman spectra, and TEM measurements, the electrodes after catalytic reactions were taken from the electrolyzer in a glove box with an Ar atmosphere and were stored in the sealed boxes with the Ar protection before tests. The electrodes were sealed through the amorphous Kapton tape on the holders in an Ar atmosphere for the XRD characterization. The XPS and TEM measurements were applied under an ultrahigh vacuum environment, while the samples were processed in the glove box with the Ar protection. The XAS measurements and the sample pretreatment were all performed in the Ar atmosphere. The Raman spectra were characterized in a transparent box that was filled with Ar. All these treatments protected the catalysts after reactions from oxidation.

These were carried out in a three-electrode flow cell (fig. S21) with 2.5 mg of catalysts sprayed on the gas diffusion layers (1 cm by 1 cm) as the working electrode. The compositions of inks were listed in the electrochemical measurements. The flow rate of the electrolyte was about 5 ml min−1for the cathode and anode chamber. The CO2flow rate was 10 sccm. The spectra were recorded at −1.3 VRHEwith the manual compensation (R= 10 ohm) in 0.5 M K2SO4and H2SO4(pH 1.7).

All electrochemical experiments were performed on CHI workstations at room temperature. The three-electrode measurements were conducted in a flow cell while two-electrode measurements for the solid-state electrolyzer. The inks were composed of 0.8 ml of ethanol, 2.5 mg of catalysts, and 3.2 mg of PiperION ionomer (Versogen). Working electrodes were prepared by spraying catalyst inks onto gas diffusion layers (1.0 cm2). In a flow cell, a Ti mesh coated by IrO2was used as the counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl) electrode was used as the reference electrode. The reference electrode was converted to reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) using the expressionERHE=EAg/AgCl+ 0.197 + 0.0592 × pH + 0.85 iR. In the flow cell, the flow rate of the cathode electrolyte was about 5.0 ml min−1while 10 ml min−1for the anode electrolyte. K2SO4and H2SO4(0.5 M; pH 1.7) were used as the electrolyte for both chambers. The CO2was supplied by a mass flow controller before flowing into the flow cell. The residual gas flowing rate was also detected. The Nafion 115 film was used to separate two chambers and avoided oxidation of HCOOH at the anode. The cathode electrolyte was regenerated frequently to maintain the acidic system.

In the solid-state electrolyzer, the anion exchange membrane (PiperION) with a thickness of 40 μm was used to hinder H+and conduct HCOO−at the cathode. The H+was transferred from the anode through the IrO2-coated Nafion 115 film with a loading mass of 2 mg cm−2. Ga0.85SnOxsprayed on the carbon cloth (1 cm2) works as the cathode. A 0.5 M H2SO4solution was circulated through the anode side with a speed of 10 ml min−1. CO2was humidified by flowing across 100 ml of pure H2O and supplied at a rate of 3 sccm. Cation exchange resin (Amberlite IR-120) was filled in the chamber between the AEM and the Nafion film with a thickness of 0.8 mm for the formation of HCOOH from the HCOO−and H+combination. Pure water was pumped through the chamber with a rate of 0.8 ml min−1to remove the HCOOH products. To further illustrate the industrial application potential of this system, an electrolyzer with a working area of 10 cm2was also assembled. Ga0.85SnOxwere sprayed on the AEM, and the carbon clothes were used as the gas diffusion layer. The supplied CO2was at a rate of 12 sccm, while the rate of pure water was 1.0 ml min−1with a 1.0-mm-thick chamber. The solution flowing across the SSE chamber was recycled and was refreshed with 5 liters of pure water every 2 weeks.

where ν is the flowing rate of the outlet gas;tis the reaction time;mis the volume concentration of H2, CO in the gas;Fis the Faraday constant (96,485 C mol−1);P0is the atmospheric pressure (1.01 × 105Pa);Tis the room temperature (298.15 K);Ris the gas constant (8.314 J mol−1K−1); andQis the charge passed through the cathode catalyst.

whereVis the volume of the electrolyte,Fis the Faraday constant (96,485 C mol−1),Qis the charge, andCis the concentration of HCOOH in the electrolyte.

whereVis the volume of the electrolyte,Cis the concentration of HCOOH in the electrolyte,Tis the room temperature (298.15 K),Ris the gas constant (8.314 J mol−1K−1),P0is the atmospheric pressure (1.01 × 105Pa), ν is the flowing rate of the outlet gas,tis the reaction time,mCOis the volume concentration of CO in the gas, and νCO2is the flowing rate of the inlet CO2.

All the theoretical calculations with spin polarization were performed with the DFT method as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (44). The electron-ion interaction was described with the projector augmented wave method (45), while the electron exchange and correlation energy were solved within the generalized gradient approximation with the revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof exchange-correlation functional (46,47). The kinetic energy cutoff of plane wave was set to be 400 eV, and the convergence criterion for the residual forces and total energies were set to be 0.05 eV/Å and 10−5eV, respectively. The empirical correction in Grimme’s method (DFT + D3) was adopted to describe the van der Waals interaction (48). The 5 by 5 by 1 Monkhorst-Packk-point mesh was used to sample the Brillouin zone, and dipole correction was used to correct potential spurious terms arising from the asymmetry of the slabs (49). The SnOxand Ga-doped catalysts were simulated on the basis of the SnO2(110) surface with a 2 by 1 supercell as shown in fig. S17, where the bottom three atomic layers were frozen during the structural relaxation. The lattice parameters were calculated asa= 6.44 Å andb= 6.74 Å, and the vacuum space in thecdirection was set to be 25 Å to minimize the interaction between periodic images.

The Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) of each elementary step during the CO2electroreduction was calculated by using the computational hydrogen electrode model proposed by Nørskovet al.(50). In this model, the chemical potential of the proton-electron pair in the aqueous solution is related to that of one-half of the chemical potential of an isolated hydrogen molecule. The ΔGvalue can be obtained by the formula: ΔG= ΔE+ ΔZPE−TΔS, where ΔEis the reaction energy of reactant and product species adsorbed on the catalyst directly obtained from DFT calculations; ΔZPEand ΔSare the changes between the adsorbed species and the gas phase molecules in zero-point energies and entropy at 298.15 K, which can be calculated from the vibrational frequencies. A corrected energy of +0.45 eV was added to the calculated total energy of isolated CO2molecule (51). The transition state with only one imaginary frequency was identified by the climbing image nudged elastic band method (52).

Funding:This work is supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFA0911900), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22279105), the starting-up package from Westlake University and the Kunpeng research fund from Zhejiang Province, and the Research Center for Industries of The Future at Westlake University. We thank Westlake University HPC Center for computation support. We thank the Instrumentation and Service Center for Molecular Sciences and the Instrumentation and Service Center for Physical Sciences at Westlake University for the facility support and technical assistance. We thank D. Gu, X. Li, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, and Yuan Cheng from the Instrumentation and Service Center for Molecular Sciences at Westlake University for the EPR, inductively coupled plasma, and Raman experiments.

Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.