Fetal growth assessment is essential for obstetric management and the use of appropriate reference or standard for fetal biometry is necessary. Large-scale international studies, such as the World Health Organization (WHO)1and INTERGROWTH-21 studies2–4have been published and widely used. However, the application of universal standard values requires careful consideration since fetal biometry is influenced by ethnic, regional and temporal differences. Asians tend to have smaller fetal biometry than other races5. This suggests that fetal biometry in Japanese population should be assessed using their own biometric charts. We in Japan have employed standard values published by the Japan Society of Ultrasonics in Medicine (JSUM) in 20036, which was based on data from 1985 to 19957. On the other hand, birthweights at term have increased globally8but, in Japan over the past 30 years birthweights have declined and the proportion of low birthweights were increasing for the last 30 years9–11. Furthermore, there have also been considerable advancements in ultrasound technology in few decades. Thus, reassessment of fetal biometry charts might be needed. With this background, we reestablished new percentile chart for ultrasound fetal biometry using a cross-sectional study in a Japanese population. While the debate on whether reference or standard charts are more appropriate for fetal growth assessment remains ongoing12,13, many national or local charts have adopted the reference approach, whereas broader international projects such as INTERGROWTH-21st and WHO have used standard-based methods. Based on this context, we adopted the reference approach in the present study to reflect fetal growth patterns in the general Japanese population. Additionally, we compared our results with other globally published studies.

This cross-sectional prospective study involved singleton pregnancies who underwent prenatal checkups at obstetric facilities across Japan. In this study, ultrasound data were collected as part of a research-specific protocol designed to ensure high data quality. We obtained the data of fetal biometry and perinatal outcomes from each participant. Regarding fetal biometry, one measurement for each patient was used for the analysis during the index pregnancy. Maternal background (age at delivery, pre-pregnancy weight, height, conception method, the presence of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (HDP), and hyperglycemic disorders in pregnancy (HIP)) and information on newborns (gestational age at delivery, sex, and birthweight) were collected. HDP and HIP were diagnosed using the Guideline for Obstetrical Practice in Japan14. Specifically, HDP were classified into the four categories: preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, superimposed preeclampsia, and chronic hypertension. HIP include diabetes before pregnancy, overt diabetes in pregnancy and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Obstetrical management for pregnancy-related complications including HDP and HIP was conducted based on the clinical guideline from Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecolog14.

For building a reference from unselected populations, participating facilities across Japan were publicly recruited through the JSUM’s mailing list (The number of facilities registered on the mailing list was 134). The enrollment period was from August 2022 to September 2022. Data collection was carried out from March 2023 through September 2024. The ultrasound devices used in this study were those manufactured by GE HealthCare (Chicago, IL, USA), Canon Medical Systems (Tochigi, Japan), Philips Healthcare (Eindhoven, Netherlands), Samsung Medison (Seoul, South Korea), and Hitachi (FUJIFILM) (Tokyo, Japan), which are commonly used in Japan. Transvaginal or convex probes with transmitting frequency of 1-10MHz were used in each facility. This study was registered with the University Hospital Medical Information Network (UMIN) (UMIN Study ID: UMIN000050614).

We included singleton pregnancies who were taken care at participating facilities during the study period. In Japan, there are no recommended gestational ages for systematic ultrasound examinations during pregnancy, allowing measurements to be performed at any gestational age. In this study, pregnant women were recruited at the time of their routine prenatal check-ups after the initiation of the study. Eligibility criteria for participants were presence of the cross-section of ultrasound images enabling the measurement of biparietal diameter (BPD), head circumference (HC), abdominal circumference (AC), and femur length (FL). We did not exclude cases who met the eligibility criteria at the time of ultrasound measurement even if structural abnormalities were found after birth.

Gestational age was calculated based on the date of embryo transfer for pregnancies conceived by embryo transfer. For other pregnancies, gestational age was calculated from the last menstrual period (LMP) and confirmed by an accurately measured crown-rump length (CRL) during the first trimester. If there was a discrepancy of more than seven days between the LMP-based and ultrasound-based estimates, gestational age was adjusted according to the CRL measurement14. Ultrasound measurements of fetal biometry were conducted according to established standard techniques7,15. Ultrasound measurements of BPD were performed from 11 to 41 weeks of gestation, while HC, AC, and FL were measured from 16 to 41 weeks of gestation.

Sample size was set at 3000 cases with reference to the study by Altman et al.16Therefore, the target number of cases to be collected per facility was set at about 60.

To minimize bias in this study, we referred to the systematic review by loannou et al17. To avoid including an excessive number of high-risk pregnancies and to approximate a population-based study, we excluded women who were transferred to tertiary care center unit for medical reasons after the first trimester, as well as those deemed unsuitable for enrollment for non-medical reasons. Furthermore, to ensure the quality of ultrasound measurements, participating facilities were limited to those staffed by board-certified fellows of the JSUM, ensuring that ultrasound examination was performed under the guidance of the specialists. Ultrasound measurements were taken consecutively and non-selectively after the start of the study.

We analyzed BPD, HC, AC, FL and EFW calculated using BPD, HC, AC, and FL. EFW was calculated using formulas proposed by Shinozuka18–20and Hadlock21. The actual formula used in this study were follows; Shinozuka formula, which is mainly used in Japan: EFW = 1.07 × BPD3+ 0.3 × AC2× FL” and Hadlock-3 formula, which is commonly used other countries: log10(EFW) = 1.326 - 0.00326 × AC × FL + 0.0107 × HC + 0.0438 × AC + 0.158 × FL” which is commonly used other countries. Statistical analysis was conducted according to previous reports on fetal biometry measured using ultrasound during pregnancy22–26. A regression model was built, where BPD, HC, AC, FL or EFW were determined to be the response variable (Y) and gestational age to be the predictor variable (X). We calculated the 3rd, 10th, 50th, 90th, and 97th percentiles, as well as the SD value on this regression model. First, we described the correlation plots of the gestational age and the endpoints and checked the symmetry of marginal distribution of each gestational age. The symmetry of distribution enabled us to assume the marginal distribution was normal. Second, a fractional polynomial regression was applied to describe the relationship between gestational age and each fetal biometry. For likelihood ratio tests, the best-fit model for each measurement was selected. Since the residual was dependent on gestational age, a polynomial regression was performed between the absolute residual and gestational age, and the fitted value of the model was multiplied by(approximately 1.253) to yield gestational age-specific SD. This is because the parametric method of deriving a reference range assumes that the variable follows a normal distribution at all gestational age. Consequently, the residuals at each gestational age should also follow a normal distribution, and their absolute values should follow a half-normal distribution. The mean of a half standard normal distribution is known to be. Thus, the mean of the absolute residuals multiplied byan estimate of the SD of the residuals27. Finally, the 10thand 90thpercentiles were calculated as mean ± 1.28 × SD, and the 3rdand 97thpercentiles were calculated as mean ± 1.88 × SD.

The comparison with large-scale international standards was performed using the mean EFW calculated by the Hadlock formula. The formula to calculate Z-scores for the comparisons with other Asian countries28–36was as follows:, where XGAis the data from other populations at a known gestational age, MGAis the mean value of this study, and SDGAis the SD of this study. Z-score close to zero indicated that there was no difference in values between the two populations, and Z-score greater than zero indicated that the mean value of the Japanese population data in this study was smaller than the mean value of the other Asian populations. Z-score in the range of ± 1 indicated a difference of ± 1 SD. All analyses were performed using STATA version 18.0 (Stata Corp. TX, USA).

This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Toho University Faculty of Medicine (Approval Nos. A23056_A23026_A22069). The requirement for written informed consent was formally waived by the Ethics Committee of Toho University Faculty of Medicine, as the study used only patients’ data. An opt-out process was employed, and information about the study was made available at each participating institution to allow patients the opportunity to decline participation. The study was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.

Fifty-four facilities in all seven regions across Japan (Hokkaido, Tohoku, Kanto, Chubu, Kinki, Chugoku, and Kyushu/Okinawa) participated in this study. The number of measurements per facility was 61(IQR 57—62). Overall, 3,753 participants, including 1,369 from primary medical care facilities and 2,384 from tertiary perinatal centers were included.

A total of 3,753 measurements were available for BPD, 2,787 for HC, 2,939 for AC, and 2,947 for FL. EFW was calculated for 2,939 cases using the Shinozuka formula and for 2,779 cases using the Hadlock formula. Table1showed the Maternal characteristics and pregnancy and neonatal outcomes in study population. The median maternal age at delivery was 34years. The maternal height was 158 cm, and the maternal weight before pregnancy was 53.0kg. The gestational age at delivery was 39.1weeks, and the birthweight was 3,000g. The proportion of HDP and HIP was 6.3% and 7.5%, respectively.

Data are provided as median (interquartile range) or n (%).

ART, assisted reproductive technology; BW, body weight.

Table2showed the corresponding values of EFW at each gestational age. After 20 weeks of gestation, EFW calculated using the Shinozuka’s formula tended to be larger than that calculated using the Hadlock-3 formula. Figure1a-e showed the 3rd, 10th, 50th, 90th, and 97th percentiles at each gestational age of BPD, HC, AC, FL and EFW(Shinozuka) respectively. Table S1-S4 (Supplementary Information 1) showed the corresponding values and their SD of the BPD, HC, AC, FL at each gestational age. Table3showed the formulas for estimating the mean and SD of EFW, BPD, HC, AC, and FL from each gestational age.

Mean and SD of the 3rd, 10th, 90th, and 97th percentiles of EFW calculated using the Shinozuka’s and Hadlock-3 formulas.

EFW, estimated fetal weight; SD, standard deviation.

Smoothed centile curve and scatter plot for fetal biometry according to gestational age. The following fitted centiles according to gestational age are presented from bottom to top at 3rd, 10th, 50th, 90th,97th. biparietal diameter (a); head circumference (b); abdominal circumference (c); femur length (d); estimate fetal weight (e).

Equation and Adjusted R2for Standard Deviations and mean of estimated fetal weight according to gestational age.

AC, Abdominal circumference; BPD, Biparietal diameter; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FL, Femur length; fetal weight; GA, gestational age; HC, Head circumference; SD, standard deviation.

Compared to the JSUM 2003 data, EFW in our study showed a tendency to be smaller, especially after 30 weeks of gestation (Fig.2). And, the mean EFW calculated by Hadlock-3 formula tended to be smaller at all gestational age compared with the mean EFW reported in large scaled international WHO1and INTERGROWTH-214studies (Fig.3). Additionally, Ultrasound fetal biometry obtained in this study was also compared with published reference data from other Asian countries28–36(Figs.4a–d). The Z-scores for BPD, HC (excluding Taiwan due to lack of data), AC, and FL exceeded zero at almost all gestational ages, indicating that the dimensions of Japanese population tended to be smaller than those of other Asian populations.

Comparison of the mean and SD of EFW between this study and JSUM2003.

Comparison of the mean EFW between this study and international studies, including the INTERGROWTH-21 and WHO studies. Mean of EFW in WHO (dotted line); Mean of EFW in INTERGROWTH-21 (dashed line); Mean of EFW (continuous). EFW, estimated fetal weight; WHO, World Health Organization.

Comparison of Z-scores for biometric ultrasound parameters between Japan and other Asian countries. Comparison of Z-scores for biparietal diameter (a); Comparison of Z-scores for Head circumference (b); Comparison of Z-scores for Abdominal circumference (c); Comparison of Z-scores for Femur length (d). Z-scores for each parameter were calculated using reference values in other Asian countries. Korea (rhombus); China (square); Taiwan (triangle); Thai (cross); Turkey (asterisk); Saudi Arabia (circle).

We established new reference values for ultrasound fetal biometry in Japanese population using a prospective design with minimal bias, and compared these values with those reported in international studies. Furthermore, this is the first report to compare fetal ultrasound biometry among Asian countries. Although it is generally known that Asian populations tend to have smaller biometric measurements than Caucasians, our findings revealed that fetal biometry in Japan was smaller than that in other Asian countries.

In Japan, the decline in birthweight has been reported over the past 30 years. Our findings are consistent with this trend, as EFW in our study population tend to be smaller than that reported in the JSUM 2003, particularly after 30 weeks of gestation (Fig.2). Moreover, it has been previously reported5that Asians are characterized by having small fetal biometric dimensions, the mean EFW calculated by Hadlock-3 formula in this study was smaller than that reported in the INTERGROWTH-21 [2] and WHO studies1(Fig.3). The INTERGROWTH-21 standards2were developed based on data from Brazil, Italy, Oman, UK, USA, China, India, and Kenya, and the WHO standards were developed based on data from Argentina, Brazil, DR Congo, Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, India, Norway, and Thailand. Furthermore, this study showed that fetuses in Japan were smaller than those in other Asian countries (Fig.4a–d). A study using data on newborns in the USA reported that the birthweights of Japanese newborns were approximately 300 g lower than that of Caucasian newborns and approximately 150—170g lower than that of South Korean or Chinese newborns37. Based on these findings and in line with International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology (ISUOG) recommendations, the creation of local charts and comparing them with other reference charts is considered meaningful.

Fetal growth has been reported to be generally similar across geographically diverse settings, as shown in studies related to the INTERGROWTH-21st Project38. Although the authors concluded that ethnic differences could be disregarded, their analysis of standardized site discrepancies (SSD) revealed that HC values were approximately 0.5 SD smaller in Asian countries and approximately 0.5 SD larger in European and North American populations. These differences may be clinically significant, as the universal application of global standards could lead to overdiagnosis or underdiagnosis of growth abnormalities. Our findings, which show that fetal biometric measurements and EFW in the Japanese population are smaller than those reported in both international and other Asian studies, highlight the necessity for population-specific reference values in the assessment of fetal growth.

While various methods have been reported to establish reference values for fetal biometric parameters, a prospective, population-based study design is recommended17,39. A systematic review recommended the use of a checklist and reported a positive correlation between quality score and publication year17. To minimize bias, this study was designed with reference to the checklist. Finally, this manuscript was prepared in accordance with the STROBE checklist40. The representativeness of our study population is supported by national statistics and large-scale reports from Japan. According to national data, the mean maternal age in Japan is 32.3 years, the average pre-pregnancy maternal weight is 53.1 kg, and the mean birthweight is approximately 3.0 kg41. These values are comparable to those observed in our study cohort. Furthermore, the prevalence of HDP and GDM in our cohort aligns with findings from previous large-scale Japanese studies42,43. Taken together, these findings indicate that our study cohort is reflective of the general obstetric population in Japan and supports the generalizability of our results to contemporary Japanese obstetric practice at all.

ISUOG also recommends that regional standards should be considered in fetal assessment, and indeed, the use of local data may reduce false-positives diagnosis of FGR. In line with this recommendation, the new fetal growth reference charts developed in this study are expected to improve the accuracy of fetal growth assessment in clinical practice in a Japanese population. Furthermore, these findings contribute not only to the refinement of fetal growth assessment in Asia but also to the broader goal of establishing standardized international criteria for fetal growth evaluation across diverse populations.

The strength of this study lies in its high-quality, prospective, multicenter design, which ensured measurement accuracy by limiting participation to facilities staffed by fellows certified by the JSUM. As a result, fetal biometric data were collected from many participants (n = 3,753) across over 50 facilities distributed throughout Japan. This wide geographical distribution enhances the generalizability of the reference charts to the Japanese population. This study has also limitation. We did not assess the external validity of the newly developed fetal biometry and estimated fetal weight (EFW) reference charts. The clinical validity and usefulness of these charts, including the cut-off values used for fetal growth assessment, should be carefully evaluated in future studies.

This study successfully established high-quality, population-based reference values for fetal ultrasound biometry in Japan. Our findings demonstrated that fetal biometric measurements in the Japanese population are consistently lower than those reported in international studies, and are also smaller than those in other Asian populations.

We thank all participants and participating facilities for their cooperation in this study. We also acknowledge the physicians, technicians, and staff at each facility for their assistance in data collection. The collaborators for data collection are listed as Study Group on New Reference Values for Fetal Biometry in Japan.