This paper reviews the methods used in research for co‐designing health innovations with and for older adults.

A rapid review was performed following the Cochrane Rapid Review Methods Group recommendations and reported using the PRISMA statement. A keyword search was conducted in CINAHL, PsychINFO and Medline databases.

Selection criteria yielded 13 peer‐reviewed articles that reported on a total of 33 different co‐design activities. Discussions and individual interviews were the most frequently reported activities in the selected articles and were used at each stage of the co‐design process.

To avoid the appearance of tokenism and to promote transparency, researchers need to provide more details about the involvement of older adults in the co‐design process and the co‐design activities performed. Health and design scientists should strive towards a meaningful involvement of older adults throughout the co‐designing process and need to develop knowledge about the added value of co‐design to support the use of such methods.

Researchers wishing to conduct a co‐design study with older adults could use the present review to learn about different co‐design activities, think creatively about how to adapt their activities, or gain inspiration from other studies.

New health programs and medical innovations can only be developed once knowledge about the specific needs and challenges of different populations, and the characteristics of their life context has been collected. With the ageing of the global population,1finding ways to better assess these is becoming critical. This population is more likely to experience health issues such as hearing and vision impairment, physical pain, diabetes, depression and neurocognitive disorders.1Differences in cultural, social, economic and environmental backgrounds also give each individual a unique perspective on life and the way they wish to live it. Researchers, innovators and designers should identify and take into account, without bias, the differing needs, issues and worldviews of older adults. It is therefore crucial to adapt research approaches and to provide researchers with tools to comprehensively grasp the various characteristics that define older adults.

A rapid review was conducted to address the research questions. According to Grant18, p. 5a rapid review consists of ‘assess[ing] what is already known about […] a practice issue, by using […] methods to search and appraise existing research’. While systematic reviews are exhaustive and therefore longer, rapid reviews are an alternative in which information is provided in a synthesised and time‐efficient way.19Resorting to this type of review was deemed necessary because the project had to be carried out within a 2‐month time frame to inform an ongoing research project using co‐design with and for older adults.

The first inclusion criterion was that the publication does not predate 2010, considering the rapid review's short time frame; this was also reasonable giving the scarcity of published literature on co‐design with older adults in health research prior to that year. The journal article needed to be published in English or French and had to explain the co‐design process in detail (e.g. activity, equipment and location). The study had to be conducted in the field of health research, which includes—but is not limited to—health promotion, prevention, rehabilitation, organisational health, physical, mental or social health research. The health innovation(s) mentioned had to be co‐designed to serve older adults (aged 55 or older). While the literature often defines older adults as being aged 60–65 and older, no consensus exists. In the context of our study, setting the age criterion at 55 years old would help include more relevant articles and a wider variety of people. Indeed, people ageing with specific health related needs or disabilities might report ageing more quickly or feel like being ‘old’ from a younger age.22Older adults may or may not have been involved at each stage of the iterative co‐design process. Participation from other stakeholders such as family members, health‐care professionals or community members still qualifies as co‐design. In terms of exclusion criteria, the decision was made to focus on journal articles, which excluded grey literature, conference abstracts and poster abstracts. Literature reviews were also excluded, insofar as the details about methods and activities that were of interest may not be covered.

Advanced keyword searches were conducted in the CINAHL, PsychINFO and Medline databases. It was decided to limit searches to three databases, as recommended for rapid reviews by Garrity et al.20The choice of these databases was made with the help of a librarian specialised in health research. The searches were carried out between January and February 2021. A search strategy was developed and validated with the same librarian. Key terms used to perform the search stemmed mainly from the following four concepts: Co‐design, Health, Older Adults and Methods. The search entry for the three databases is available in AppendixS1. The key terms were searched respectively in the Abstract, Keyword/Abstract and Title/Abstract fields of the three databases.

After completing the literature search, 778 documents were uploaded in Zotero (version 5), a reference management software. From there, duplicates were removed, leaving 566 documents. As part of the selection process, after verifying the inclusion and exclusion criteria validity by screening 30 randomly chosen articles (the first 30 articles in alphabetical order), criteria were applied to screen the titles and abstracts of the 566 papers. Three co‐authors (LBG., ST., RDL) participated independently in this screening test to single out articles that corresponded to the criteria. Since there were no differences of opinion between co‐authors, only one of them (LBG) completed the rest of the initial selection process. Only 52 articles remained after this first phase of eligibility screening. The second part of the selection process involved applying the criteria to the full text of these articles. First, a selection test was performed on 10 randomly chosen articles (the first 10 articles in alphabetical order) by the same three co‐authors independently, and since no differences of opinion emerged, the second part of the selection was completed by one of the co‐authors (LBG). This narrowed down the number of studies to 13. The following flow chart was created according to the PRISMA statement21See Figure1.

An extraction table was created in Excel through an iterative process involving four co‐authors (LBG, ST, RDL, NB), leading to the identification of the extraction table content and the definition of each category. Thus, when available, the following information was extracted: year of publication, country of origin, aim of study, purpose of co‐design process, level of collaboration of older adults in the co‐design process and results of study. In addition, for each of the activities carried out within the co‐design process, the following information was extracted where available: characteristics of people involved in the co‐design activity (e.g. age, biological sex, occupation, level of education), nature of co‐design activity, aim of co‐design activity, length of activity and participants' compensation for their contribution. Data from the 13 articles were extracted by one of the co‐authors (LBG). A second author checked for correctness and completeness of extracted data against the included articles.

The studies reported in the 13 articles selected for analysis were conducted in different countries around the world. Eleven articles of 13 were published between 2016 and 2020; the other two were published in 2010 and 2012. The purposes of the co‐design processes according to each study were divided into five categories: (1) understanding the needs, lived experiences and problems of older adults; (2) thinking about and developing possible solutions or services; (3) testing solutions or services; (4) supporting the adoption of technologies; and (5) creating a user network. Every study specified that understanding the needs, lived experiences and problems of older adults was the purpose of adopting a co‐designing approach. In addition, every study, except for one,23stated that the co‐design process is intended to think about and develop possible solutions or services. The exception, Lu et al.,23might be explained by the fact that the aim of that study was to determine the contribution of a co‐creation process to the adoption of technologies. Therefore, the purpose of the co‐design for that study was focussed on supporting the adoption of technologies. The study by Righi et al.24was the only one in which the co‐design process was designed to create a user network. Other characteristics such as the description of participants, the co‐design activities and the results of the studies are presented in Table1.

Data were also gathered on when the older adults were involved during the co‐design process. Table2presents the level of collaboration of older adults at each stage of the co‐design process according to Brown's Design Thinking framework.12The levels of collaboration of older adults fell into three categories: (1) With; (2) Together; and (3) Without (see legend in Table2). In short, the levels ‘With’ and ‘Together’ both involve the collaboration of older adult participants, while ‘Without’ involved other stakeholders only. Older adult participants almost always collaborated in the stages of empathising and defining, and ideating. The stages of prototyping and testing were the least documented, and when they were, older adult participants collaborated in less than half.

Note: ‘With’ represents stages that were performed with older adults' participation. ‘Without’ represents stages that were performed by the research team and other stakeholders without older adults' participation. ‘Together’ represents stages where, depending on the activity, older adults and other stakeholders might have collaborated at different times. For example, a study could have used two co‐design activities at its ideating stage. The first activity might have involved both older adults and other stakeholders, while the second activity might have only included other stakeholders. These two activities then fall under the level of collaboration known as ‘Together’ since they have both been used at the stage of ideating.

At the time of publication, this study was in its initial phase and only the ‘Empathising and defining’ co‐design stage had been completed. This explains why the other three stages are marked ‘Not applicable’.

The objective of this paper was to critically assess eight activities. Older adults' collaboration was only required to test the activities and provide feedback on them. Therefore, the first three stages are marked ‘Not applicable’.

The articles analysed revealed a total of 33 different co‐design activities, not counting the activities that repeated themselves across the studies. The number of activities mentioned per article ranged from one to 12, for an average of about four different activities per article. Persona‐scenarios (n= 523,24,29,32,34), focus groups (n= 624,25,26,27,29,33), individual interviews (n= 424,29,33,35) and discussions (n= 423,24,27,31) were the most frequently cited activities. Other activities were single examples, such as creating a human tableau30and think‐aloud sessions.29One of the studies mentioned activities that had never been undertaken before, as they were crafted by the participants and the research team. These included the neighbourhood memories game, the trivia quiz about a book and the quiz about Spanish folk parties.24Detailed descriptions of the activities are provided in AppendixS2. Figure2shows the frequency of occurrence of each activity across the included studies.

Frequency of occurrence of the co‐design activities across the included studies.

This paper was also intended to explore which activities were involved at each of the co‐design stages, as suggested by Brown's Design Thinking framework.12Figure3shows the different activities carried out during each stage of the co‐design process: empathising and defining (n= 10), ideating (n= 14), prototyping (n= 12) and testing (n= 13). Discussions and individual interviews were each used by at least one study at every step of the co‐design process.

This rapid review synthesises the methods for co‐designing health innovations with and for older adults. More precisely, it describes the purposes of using co‐design processes, shows how and when older adults collaborated in the process and maps the activities used.

Results suggest that co‐design processes can be used for a broad range of purposes. All the studies included in this review sought to understand the needs, lived experiences and problems of older adults. Perhaps, this is indicative of its importance, and it could be considered foundational since other purposes, if applicable, could be built on the knowledge collected. Understanding the needs and lived experiences of older adults is also central to conducting health research projects with HCD methods.

The centrality of collaboration in co‐design supports the transversal participation of older adults in the planning and development of innovations for them. However, as seen in Table2, some of the studies did not involve older adults at all stages. In fact, some of the stages were carried out by the researchers and other stakeholders. Older adults' participation was the least documented at the prototyping and testing stages, and more detailed for empathising, defining and ideating. One explanation for the lack of information on the participation of older adults in prototyping and testing may be the fact that certain studies were still underway and had only produced preliminary data. It may also be that older adults were absent during design because of disengagement along the co‐design process. Many factors can influence older adults' engagement in a co‐design process, such as the loss of interest of participants, the lack of clarity in the instructions given during the activities, various mental and physical ailments, the maladaptation of the activities to such ailments, not having attendance facilitated (transportation and associated costs) and language barriers.22,36Thus, to ensure full participation of older adults along the co‐design process, they should be involved as early as possible, that is, during the planning of the study, to ensure that the co‐design activities will correspond to their needs and specific context. Finally, although most authors specified whether older adults were engaged in the different co‐design stages, the actual degree of involvement (how and how much older adults were involved) was often not mentioned. The scarcity of such data precludes evaluating the actual impact of older adults' involvement in the co‐design process and may raise questions as to the presence of tokenism, defined as ‘making perfunctory or symbolic efforts to engage communities or patients’.37Not including older adults at all stages of the co‐design process could produce an innovation that is not adapted to their diverse realities and needs. Furthermore, not properly collaborating with older adults in the design process could increase the risks of basing design decisions on ageism or other societal stereotypes.38However, involvement of older adults at all stages of the process and reflecting on the possible contribution of biases and stereotypes does not solve all issues. It cannot be assumed that a better understanding of potential stakeholders will translate automatically into better design decisions.39In addition, the Co‐Constitution of Ageing and Technology (CAT) model38points out that ‘needs and requirements are not stable or fixed “entities”’ but that they are subject to change as people or health innovations and technologies evolve.

The included studies demonstrated that co‐design activities often involve creativity. Among the creativity‐based activities reported were the creation of art installations30and photo‐elicitation.26Some studies opted for more common health research methods that seek an in‐depth individual perspective, such as interviews and focus groups. It can be argued that these techniques are less compatible with the principles of co‐design, in which creativity plays a major role.8However, such forms of investigation may prove necessary or simply appropriate according to the type of data that are sought. This can depend on the nature and the depth of information researchers are looking for (personal opinions or information vs. formulating a problem or generating ideas for innovation), as well as the co‐design stage of the study involved. The choice of more common research methods might have been made because researchers were more familiar with them or simply because they had found that their participants were responding particularly well. Regardless of the presence or absence of creativity in the activities, what might be more important is making an effort to find out how older adults might have felt about their participation in the activities. Making them feel seen and heard, while giving them a space, within a collaborative context, to tell the research teams and other stakeholders about their lived experiences could be a lever in better understanding their needs and requirements than the nature of the activity.

The greatest number of different activities was used at the stages of ideating, prototyping and testing. This could indicate that these stages require numerous activities, and thus, a lot of collaboration and time from the participants.

One avenue for future research is to evaluate the added value of co‐design processes in health research and potentially support their use. In fact, we found no comparative studies on the topic. More precisely, it would be relevant to seek out the potential benefits, or perhaps the disadvantages of using a co‐design process, and how they might influence the outcomes of the studies. Similarly, the added value (if any) of introducing more creative activities within co‐design processes in health research (compared to focus groups and individual interviews) also merits future research to support the choice of certain methods over others. More standardised reporting on the application of co‐design processes by experts in innovation, design and health could improve transparency and reproducibility.

One of the strengths of this rapid review is the delivery of rigorous data produced by a limited in‐depth research process. However, the shorter duration of a rapid review increases the risk of selection bias and of overlooking important information, as it is extremely specific. The research strategy, study selection process and screening process were all done by three of the co‐authors. As recommended by Garrity et al.,20a single reviewer extracted the data, but a second reviewer checked for correctness and completeness of extracted data.

Although Brown's Design Thinking framework12was helpful in organising the data collected in this rapid review, the challenge of using a conceptual framework is that it forces co‐design activities that are not completely mutually exclusive into distinct boxes. Finally, although this is a recommended approach when conducting rapid reviews, keyword searches were run in a limited number of databases and did not cover the entirety of the literature. Nonetheless, these three databases were selected based on the stated research questions and recommendations offered by a university librarian.

The objective of this rapid review was to synthesise the methods used in health research for co‐designing innovations with and for older adults. This review reported on 33 different co‐design activities. Discussions and individual interviews were the most frequently reported activities and were used at every stage of the co‐design process. The level of collaboration of older adults was more documented at the stages of empathising, defining and ideating. With increased use of co‐design processes, more data will become available, and future literature reviews may enable the development of guidelines for the use of co‐design with and for older adults. Our findings will be of interest to researchers currently using or contemplating the use of co‐design methods with this population by providing ideas and leads on research design and objectives. Ultimately, health and design scientists should work towards creating a true involvement of older adults by addressing issues that may cause the disengagement of older adults in the co‐design process.

Fonds de recherche du Québec—Santé, Living Lab platform [grant no 279512, 2020–2023]. Samuel Turcotte is a postdoctoral fellow from the Canadian Strategy for Patient‐Oriented Research and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (SPOR‐CIHR) (POR Award—Transition to Leadership Stream, 2020–2023). Roxane DeBroux Leduc holds a scholarship award from theFonds de recherche du Québec—Santé and Fonds de recherche du Québec—Société et culture. Nathalie Bier currently holds a junior 2 Research Scholar Award from theFonds de recherche du Québec‐Santé.

Université de Montréal is situated on land where, long before the arrival of the French, people of many Indigenous nations came together and interacted. We wish to acknowledge these nations, their descendants and the spirit of fraternity that presided over the signing in 1701 of the Great Peace of Montreal, a treaty that fostered peaceful relationships between France, its Indigenous allies, and the Haudenosaunee federation (pronunciation: O‐di‐no‐sho‐ni). The spirit of fraternity that inspired this treaty serves as a model for our own university community.