Completion of the newborn and infant healthcare practices across the continuum of care, including essential newborn care, exclusive breastfeeding from birth to 6 months of age and immunisation, remains low in Ethiopia. Therefore, this study aimed to determine the impact of maternal pregnancy intention on the newborn and infant continuum of care in Ethiopia.

The analysis used data from the Performance Monitoring for Action Ethiopia longitudinal survey. This nationally representative survey was conducted from 2019 to 2021. The impact of maternal pregnancy intention on the newborn and infant continuum of care was assessed using propensity score methods. Essential newborn and infant care practices were examined as outcome variables, with pregnancy intention as the exposure variable. Adjusting for potential covariates, the impact of exposure on outcomes was determined using a logistic regression model with an odds ratio at 95% CI based on the inverse probability of treatment weights.

Women with intended pregnancies had 28% higher odds of early initiation of breastfeeding (AOR = 1.28, 95% CI: 1.03–1.59) and 34% higher odds of exclusive breastfeeding from birth to 6 months of age (AOR = 1.34, 95% CI: 1.08–1.66) compared with women with unintended pregnancies. Similarly, the odds of full infant immunisation were 39% higher among women with intended pregnancies compared with women with unintended pregnancies (AOR = 1.39, 95% CI: 1.03–1.87). However, there was no statistically significant difference in the odds of essential newborn care practices between women with intended and unintended pregnancies (AOR = 0.83, 95% CI: 0.53–1.31).

Pregnancy intention significantly impacts the newborn and infant healthcare practices across the continuum of care. Therefore, prioritising interventions for preventing unintended pregnancies by providing family planning services, early identification of women with unintended pregnancies and ensuring they receive appropriate healthcare services is essential.

Despite global reductions in child mortality, progress remains slower in sub‐Saharan Africa, where mortality rates are highest.

Reducing neonatal and infant mortality requires integrated interventions across the continuum of care, including newborn care, prompt breastfeeding and immunisation.

High rates of unintended pregnancies continue to negatively impact maternal and child health and are believed to affect newborn and infant care.

This study found that intended pregnancy significantly increases the likelihood of early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding and full infant immunisation.

Interventions should prioritise preventing unintended pregnancies and early identification of women with unintended pregnancies to ensure they receive care and support.

Despite the reduction in child mortality across the globe, progress remains slower for neonates, particularly in sub‐Saharan Africa (SSA) and South Asia (Paulson et al.2021). In 2022, 4.9 million children under the age of 5 years died, with nearly half of these deaths occurring in the first month of life, mainly due to preventable causes (UNICEF2023). SSA has the highest neonatal mortality rate, with 27 deaths per 1000 livebirths in 2022 (World Health Organization2024). In 2019, findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study have shown that the overall neonatal mortality rate, infant mortality rate and under‐5 mortality rate in Ethiopia were estimated to be 26.6, 41.5 and 52.4 deaths per 1000 live births, respectively (Tessema et al.2023).

Reducing neonatal and infant mortality requires a comprehensive set of interventions across the continuum of care. The World Health Organisation (WHO) strongly advocates essential newborn care practices, including optimal thermal care (immediate drying and wrapping of the newborn, skin‐to‐skin contact and delayed bathing), safe cord care and prompt breastfeeding to be consistently practised because they reduce the risk of major causes of neonatal death (Wojcieszek et al.2023; Clark et al.2020). Completion of essential newborn care practices is challenging in settings where many births occur in the home. Therefore, Ethiopia has implemented community‐based essential newborn care that can be provided at health posts or at the household level (Mathewos et al.2019). In Ethiopia, health extension workers (community health workers who provide services within the community) can provide essential newborn care for both mother and baby at health posts if the woman visits a health facility, or at home if they are informed that the woman is birthing (Tesfau et al.2020; Miller et al.2021). Health posts are the lowest level of care in the Ethiopian healthcare system, where health extension workers provide basic health services such as essential maternal and child health services, including the promotion of newborn and infant healthcare practices (Assefa et al.2019; Annis and Ratcliffe2019). Furthermore, receiving the recommended infant immunisations could reduce child morbidity and mortality related to infectious diseases (Boyce et al.2019; Bustreo et al.2015). The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) intensively encourages efforts to end preventable maternal, newborn and child deaths by ensuring access to affordable, quality healthcare, optimal feeding and immunisation, especially in low‐income countries where the problem remains a major public health concern (UNICEF2023; Clark et al.2020).

Despite the known advantages of newborn and infant health continuum of care completion, intervention rates remain unacceptably low, especially in Ethiopia. Recent data from Ethiopia have shown that only 41.49% of women practised essential newborn care for their babies (Ayele et al.2022), and 61.4% of newborns were breastfed within 1 h following birth (Alebel et al.2017). Similarly, studies in Ethiopia have shown that 60.42% of infants were exclusively breastfed until 6 months of age (Wake and Mittiku2021), and only 58.92% of infants were fully immunised (Eshete et al.2020). The causes for low completion of the newborn and infant continuum of care are multifaceted and have been related to individual‐level factors, such as maternal age, educational level or household wealth status, and community‐level factors, including place of residence and region (Mohammed et al.2023; Alemu and Eshete2020; Teshale and Tesema2021; Jackson et al.2019; Mebrate et al.2022; Fenta and Fenta2021). High rates of unintended pregnancies continue to pose adverse maternal and child health outcomes, and maternal pregnancy intention is believed to impact the completion of the newborn and infant continuum of care (Saptarini and Setyonaluri2018; Chowdhury et al.2021a; Mekonnen et al.2024). In Ethiopia, results of a meta‐analysis have shown that about 30% of women experienced unintended pregnancy (Kebede et al.2021), which potentially leads to poor maternal and child health outcomes.

Few studies in low‐ and middle‐income countries (LMICs) have examined the associations between pregnancy intention and aspects of newborn and infant continuum of care completion. Studies have shown that intended pregnancy is positively associated with better essential newborn care practices by mothers (Alemu and Eshete2020; Chichiabellu et al.2018; Habte et al.2022). Similarly, intended pregnancy has been found to be positively associated with early initiation of breastfeeding (Yılmaz et al.2016; Apanga and Kumbeni2021) and exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months after birth (Mamo et al.2020). In contrast, unintended pregnancies have been associated with lower odds of early initiation of breastfeeding (Jackson et al.2019; Balogun et al.2016; Gebremeskel et al.2019; Ahmed et al.2019), exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months after birth (Chowdhury et al.2021b) and higher odds of late initiation of breastfeeding (Gedefaw et al.2020).

Inconsistent findings have been reported regarding the association between pregnancy intention and completion of the recommended infant immunisation schedule. For instance, studies have reported that intended pregnancy was positively associated with receiving the complete infant immunisation schedule in Ethiopia (Mebrate et al.2022; Fenta and Fenta2021; Gualu and Dilie2017). Similarly, a study conducted in India has shown that children born from unintended pregnancies were less likely to receive the complete immunisation schedule (Chowdhury et al.2021a). However, a study in Indonesia showed that no significant difference was found in the odds of completing the recommended child immunisation schedule between women who had intended and unintended pregnancies (Saptarini and Setyonaluri2018).

Given that reliable evidence on how pregnancy intention impacts newborn and infant continuum of care completion is limited, particularly in Ethiopia, it is crucial to investigate the impact of pregnancy intention on these outcomes using robust study designs. Therefore, this study aimed to determine the impact of maternal pregnancy intention on newborn and infant continuum of care in Ethiopia using a national longitudinal data.

This study used data from the Performance Monitoring for Action (PMA) Ethiopia, a national cohort study conducted in collaboration between Addis Ababa University (AAU), the Ethiopia Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) and the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health (JHSPH) from October 2019 to August 2021 (Zimmerman et al.2020). The PMA Ethiopia study was conducted in six regions of Ethiopia, namely, Afar, Tigray, Amhara, Oromia, Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples' (SNNP) regions (currently split into four regions namely: South Ethiopia Regional State, Southwest Ethiopia Peoples' Regional State, Central Ethiopia Regional State and Sidama Regional State) and Addis Ababa city administration. The multistage sample selection process involved 217 data collection areas across six regions, representing 90% of the Ethiopian population. Women aged 15–49 were screened, and those who were pregnant or within 6 weeks postpartum at screening were eligible for the study. In total, 2855 consenting women were enrolled in the baseline interview out of 2889 identified women, resulting in a response rate of 98.8% (Ahmed et al.2019). The detailed description of the PMA Ethiopia survey can be found elsewhere (Zimmerman et al.2020).

In this study, women who completed the 6‐week, 6‐month and 1‐year postpartum interviews in the PMA Ethiopia survey were included as study participants. To assess the impact of pregnancy intention on essential newborn care practices, women who completed the 6‐week postpartum interview and gave birth at home were included in the study. To assess the impact of pregnancy intention on early initiation of breastfeeding, women who completed the 6‐week postpartum interview were eligible participants. Finally, women who completed the 6‐week and 1‐year postpartum interviews were included in the study for assessing the impact of pregnancy intention on exclusive breastfeeding and immunisation, respectively. The sample sizes used in this analysis varied across outcomes due to differences in the number of live births at the time of interviews, place of birth, loss to follow‐up and missing data (see Figure1).

Flowchart of participant's progress through the PMA cohort study.

We used the baseline and 6‐week postpartum interview data to assess the impact of pregnancy intention on essential newborn care practices (home birth only) and early initiation of breastfeeding (total sample). Out of the 2664 participants who completed the 6‐week postpartum interviews, 950 women who gave birth at home were included in the analyses of the effects of pregnancy intention on completion of essential newborn practices, whereas 2517 of the overall sample were included in the analysis of the impact of pregnancy intention on early initiation of breastfeeding. In this study, we assessed essential newborn care practices for women who gave birth at home only, as those who give birth in a facility receive essential newborn care from healthcare providers according to hospital guidelines, and thus, pregnancy intention is unlikely to have an influence on these practices.

The baseline and 6‐month linked postpartum interview data were used to assess the impact of pregnancy intention on exclusive breastfeeding. Out of the 2414 women who completed the 6‐month postpartum interview, a total of 2328 women were included in the analysis. The baseline and 1‐year linked postpartum interview data were used to assess the impact of pregnancy intention on full infant immunisation. Out of the 2094 women who completed the 1‐year postpartum interview, a total of 2020 women were included in the analysis.

The outcome variables in the current study were newborn and infant healthcare practices across the continuum of care. These included essential newborn care practices, early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding in the first 6 months of life and full immunisation status to 1 year of life.

Essential newborn care practices were assessed based on a composite score of three components: optimal thermal care, safe cord care and optimal feeding (Mohammed et al.2023; Alemu and Eshete2020; Efa et al.2020). Mothers who adhered to all three components were classified as having ‘practised optimal essential newborn care’, whereas those who did not practice any or practised only one or two components were classified as ‘practised suboptimal essential newborn care’. Optimal thermal care practice was scored as 1 if the mother or birth attendant wrapped the baby in clothes after birth and delayed baby bathing for 24 h of birth, or as 0 otherwise (Mohammed et al.2023; Efa et al.2020). Safe cord care practice was scored as 1 if the mother or birth attendant tied and cut the cord with a new or boiled blade and applied nothing to the cord stump except medically indicated medications like chlorhexidine, or as 0 otherwise (Mohammed et al.2023; Efa et al.2020). Optimal feeding practice was scored as 1 if the mother started breastfeeding within an hour after birth and did not give any additional feeding other than breast milk, or as 0 otherwise (Mohammed et al.2023; Efa et al.2020).

Early initiation of breastfeeding was assessed based on the mother's responses to the question ‘How long after birth did you first put the baby to the breast?’ with the time recorded in minutes, hours or days. It was scored as 1 if the newborn was breastfed within 1 h after birth and as 0 if breastfeeding occurred after 1 h (Wojcieszek et al.2023).

Exclusive breastfeeding was defined as an infant receiving only breast milk from birth until 6 months of age, with no other liquids or solids added, except for mineral supplements, vitamins, immunisations or prescribed medicines (Wojcieszek et al.2023). This variable was represented dichotomously, with a score of 1 indicating exclusive breastfeeding and 0 indicating non‐exclusive breastfeeding.

Children were considered fully immunised if they had received a single dose of Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) vaccine, three doses of oral poliomyelitis vaccine (OPV), three doses of pentavalent vaccine (diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, hepatitis B andHaemophilus influenzaetype B), three doses of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV), one dose of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV), two doses of rotavirus vaccine and one dose of measles vaccine before their first birthday (Nigatu et al.2024; Worku et al.2022). Full immunisation was scored 1 if an infant received all the above‐mentioned doses of vaccines, or 0 if not.

Pregnancy intention was the exposure variable and was obtained from women's self‐reported data. Their intention to become pregnant before their most recent pregnancy was recorded during the baseline PMA survey. Women were asked ‘At the time you became pregnant, did you want to become pregnant?’ Then, they were asked ‘Did you want to wait until later, or did you not want to have any/any more children at all?’ Responses indicating ‘Then/Now’ at the time were categorised as intended pregnancy, whereas responses indicating ‘Later’ were categorised as mistimed pregnancy, and responses indicating ‘Not at all’ were categorised as unwanted pregnancy. Mistimed and unwanted pregnancies were considered unintended pregnancies in this study.

All available covariates that were theoretically and empirically related to both the outcomes and the exposure variables were included. Adjusting for these confounders is necessary to estimate the unbiased impact of maternal pregnancy intention on the newborn and infant healthcare practices across the continuum of care. Control variables included maternal age, marital status, religion, educational level, household wealth quintile, location of residence, region, parity and history of contraceptive use.

Descriptive analysis was conducted to summarise participants' characteristics using weighted frequencies and percentages for the four outcome variables: essential newborn care practices, early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding and full immunisation. In addition, participants' characteristics were described for the exposure variable using weighted frequencies and percentages.

Propensity score methods were used to examine the impact of pregnancy intentions on newborn and infant healthcare practices after accounting for variations in the sociodemographic backgrounds of participants. Propensity score methods are employed to control for confounding effects when estimating the impact of treatment/exposure on outcomes (Austin2011). In observational studies, exposure selection is based on participant self‐selection, meaning individuals with specific characteristics may be more likely to be exposed than others (Morgan2018). However, nonrandomised self‐selection in exposure can be subject to bias from various socioeconomic factors, potentially confounding the measure of association between the exposures and the outcomes (Austin2011; Morgan2018). To mitigate such bias, propensity score methods are employed to control for confounding effects when estimating the impact of exposure on outcomes (Austin2011). Inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) using the propensity score was employed for this analysis. The IPTW constructs weights for each observation based on the propensity score to balance the distribution of covariates between the exposed and unexposed groups. A propensity score is the likelihood of receiving a treatment (probability of having an intended pregnancy) based on all the observed covariates (Haukoos and Lewis2015; Pattanayak et al.2011).

The propensity scores were calculated using a logistic regression model with pregnancy intention status (intended vs. unintended) as the dependent variable, accounting for potential confounders. All available covariates that were known to be associated with both the exposure variable and the outcome variables were included in the model. Subsequently, IPTW was computed as 1/propensity score for individuals with intended pregnancies and 1/(1 − propensity score) for those with unintended pregnancies. The IPTW enables the accurate estimation of the main effect's variance while preserving the original sample size (Xu et al.2010). The IPTW reduces bias by balancing the distribution of covariates between the exposed and unexposed groups and assigning weights based on the conditional probability of exposure (Austin and Stuart2015). Weight stabilisation was performed to retain the original sample size, reduce the influence of extreme weights on subjects with low propensity scores in the exposed group or high propensity scores in the unexposed group and improve the precision of variance estimates and confidence intervals (CIs) for the exposure effect (Xu et al.2010; Austin and Stuart2015). The balance of covariates between the exposed group (women with intended pregnancies) and the unexposed group (women with unintended pregnancies) was assessed using the standardised mean difference. A good balance was considered achieved when the standardised mean difference was less than or equal to 0.1 (10%) (Austin2009). Additionally, the balance in propensity scores between the exposed and unexposed groups was visually illustrated using kernel density plots. The closer proximity of the kernel density lines for the exposed and unexposed groups indicated that balance in propensity scores was achieved (Austin2009).

The effects of pregnancy intention on each outcome were estimated using a logistic regression model. Effects were expressed in adjusted odds ratios (AOR) with their 95% CI. Survey weights were applied in all analyses to adjust for the nonproportional allocation of sample participants to different regions and to account for non‐responses. The grand weight, calculated as the product of the IPTW and survey weight, was used to estimate the effects of exposure on the outcome variables (DuGoff et al.2014). All analysis processes were conducted separately for the samples related to the outcomes of newborn care practices, early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding and full immunisation. Stata 18 was used for all analyses (StataCorp2023).

The characteristics of study participants, based on the distribution of pregnancy intention by each outcome, are provided in Table1. Of the study participants for essential newborn care practices, 411 (43.3%) experienced unintended pregnancy. The prevalence of unintended pregnancy among participants for early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding and full infant immunisation was 929 (36.9%), 852 (36.6) and 737 (36.5%), respectively. For each outcome, the prevalence of unintended pregnancy was higher among women aged 25–34 years and those with no education.

The weighted distribution of pregnancy intention for each outcome by characteristics of postpartum women in Ethiopia, 2019–2021.

Catholic, Wakefeta, traditional, no religion/non‐believer, and other nonidentified.

SNNP: Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples.

The overall proportions of newborns and infants receiving essential newborn care practices, early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding and full immunisation were 148 (15.6%), 1660 (66%), 1278 (54.9%) and 584 (28.9%), respectively. The distribution of newborn and infant continuum of care by maternal background characteristics is presented in Table2.

The weighted distribution of newborn and infant continuum of care by characteristics of postpartum women in Ethiopia, 2019–2021.

Catholic, Wakefeta, traditional, no religion/non‐believer and other nonidentified.

SNNP: Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples.

The propensity score for each outcome was estimated separately using a logit model. The mean propensity scores for essential newborn care practices, early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding and full infant immunisation were 0.64, 0.68, 0.69 and 0.68, with standard deviations of 0.12, 0.15, 0.15 and 0.11, respectively. The distributions of characteristics for intended and unintended pregnancies are almost the same for all outcomes after weighting on propensity scores. The significant overlap in the characteristics of women with intended and unintended pregnancies for all outcomes, as shown in the kernel density graph, indicates sufficient balance in the propensity score distribution. Figures2,3,4and5present the density plots of women with intended pregnancies and unintended pregnancies before and after weighting for all outcomes.

Balance of propensity score before and after weighting across intended and unintended pregnancies (essential newborn care practices).

Balance of propensity score before and after weighting across intended and unintended pregnancies (early initiation of breastfeeding).

Balance of propensity score before and after weighting across intended and unintended pregnancies (exclusive breastfeeding).

Balance of propensity score before and after weighting across intended and unintended pregnancies (full infant immunisation).

After weighting adjustment, all standardised differences of covariates were less than 0.1 (10%) across all outcomes, indicating good balance and comparability between women with intended and unintended pregnancies (Table3).

Standardised difference of covariates before and after weighting the propensity score.

After adjusting the weighted sample for covariates, the impact of maternal pregnancy intention on the newborn and infant continuum of care was estimated using a logistic regression model. The odds of early initiation of breastfeeding were 28% higher among women with intended pregnancies compared to women with unintended pregnancies (AOR = 1.28, 95% CI: 1.03–1.59). Similarly, the odds of exclusive breastfeeding were 34% higher among women with intended pregnancies compared with those with unintended pregnancies (AOR = 1.34, 95% CI: 1.08–1.66). Likewise, the odds of complete infant immunisation were 39% higher among women with intended pregnancies compared with those with unintended pregnancies (AOR = 1.39, 95% CI: 1.03–1.87). However, there was no statistical difference in the odds of essential newborn care practices among women with intended pregnancies and unintended pregnancies (AOR = 0.83, 95% CI: 0.53–1.31) (Table4).

The impact of maternal pregnancy intention on newborn and infant continuum of care in Ethiopia, 2019–2021.

This study presents the impact of maternal pregnancy intention on newborn and infant continuum of care completion, adjusting for various confounders using propensity score methods. The findings revealed that there were statistically significant associations between pregnancy intention and early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding and completion of the recommended infant immunisation schedule to 1 year of age in Ethiopia. However, no statistically significant association was found between pregnancy intention and essential newborn care practices.

The current study showed that the odds of practising early initiation of breastfeeding and exclusive breastfeeding were increased among women with intended pregnancies compared with those with unintended pregnancies. This could be attributed to the fact that intended pregnancies are often associated with better access to healthcare services and better health‐seeking behaviours (Saptarini and Setyonaluri2018; Islam et al.2023; Khan et al.2020), which might have encouraged women to breastfeed compared to women with unintended pregnancies. Previous studies have reported similar findings, in that women with intended pregnancies were more likely to initiate breastfeeding within 1 h of birth (Teshale and Tesema2021; Apanga and Kumbeni2021; Gedefaw et al.2020) and exclusively breastfed their babies for the first 6 weeks following birth (Jackson et al.2019; Mamo et al.2020; Duarte Lopes et al.2022) compared with women with unintended pregnancies. However, the analytical methods used in these studies differed from the current study, which employed propensity score methods.

The present study revealed that the odds of complete infant immunisation were higher among women with intended pregnancies compared with women with unintended pregnancies. This finding could be explained by that women with intended pregnancies may have more consistent engagement with healthcare providers throughout their pregnancy and postpartum period (Rahman et al.2016; Bagambe et al.2021; Khan et al.2022). During this consistent engagement, women can get better information regarding the importance of infant immunisation, which might help women adhere to the immunisation schedule better than women with unintended pregnancies. The association between intended pregnancy and complete infant immunisation is consistent with findings from previous studies (Fenta and Fenta2021; Gualu and Dilie2017), although the analytical methods used were different. Although logistic regression can adjust for confounders, as used in previous studies, the current study used propensity score methods to more intuitively balance covariates between exposed and unexposed groups, thereby reducing bias from confounding variables (Austin2011; Stuart2010).

In this study, no statistical difference was found in the odds of home‐based essential newborn care practices between women with intended and unintended pregnancies. This finding may be explained because essential newborn care practices are often carried out by health extension workers or other individuals assisting the mother during childbirth rather than solely by the mother herself. In Ethiopia, traditional birth attendants, neighbours, relatives and other elderly women from the community support mothers who give birth at home, although they often lack the necessary skills or knowledge to provide the recommended care practices (Kaba et al.2016). Literature has indicated that home‐based newborn care is effective in reducing neonatal and infant mortality rates (Rasaily et al.2020).

Intended pregnancy has a significant and positive impact on newborn and infant continuum of care completion, including early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding and full infant immunisation, as found by this study. This implies that women with intended pregnancies may be more likely to prioritise their child's health and well‐being than women with unintended pregnancies. Furthermore, women with intended pregnancies may be more concerned and proactive in learning about their newborn's health status and understanding the risk factors that could lead to ill health (Shreffler et al.2021). Moreover, women with intended pregnancies might have better access to maternal healthcare services such as antenatal care (Khan et al.2020). Evidence has indicated that women who attend antenatal care have better opportunities to receive counselling on the importance of giving birth in a health facility assisted by skilled birth attendants, as well as information on the benefits of optimal child feeding and immunisation (Fekadu et al.2018; Usman et al.2021; Owili et al.2016; Pratista et al.2023). This increases the likelihood of early initiation and exclusive breastfeeding, and complete infant immunisation. Conversely, women with unintended pregnancies may feel less prepared for motherhood, receive less support from partners or families and exhibit lower health‐seeking behaviour for themselves and their infants (Barton et al.2017; Khan et al.2019). Consequently, they may receive limited information and counselling on the benefits of proper newborn and infant feeding practices (Khan et al.2019; Amo‐Adjei and Anamaale2016), which could contribute to reduced engagement with healthcare practices for their infants.

The findings of this study imply that women with unintended pregnancies are less likely to practice optimal newborn and infant care, even at the early stages of the infant's life. This may be due to the lower emotional attachment between mothers and their children resulting from their unintended pregnancy (Shreffler et al.2021; Barton et al.2017; Eslaminia et al.2022). Furthermore, women who experience unintended pregnancies might lack support from their families, partners and communities, leading to inadequate healthcare‐seeking behaviours for their children (Barton et al.2017; Sumankuuro et al.2019). This can result in a lack of information regarding appropriate breastfeeding practices and the benefits of infant immunisation.

This research underscores the need to improve newborn and infant continuum of care completion, especially for those born from unintended pregnancies in Ethiopia. This could be achieved through a collaborative effort involving policymakers, healthcare providers, maternal and child health programme managers, stakeholders and researchers. Policymakers, maternal and child health programme managers and stakeholders can strengthen current strategies for preventing unintended pregnancies through enhancing sexual and reproductive health services, such as family planning (Hindin et al.2016). Additionally, they can develop additional strategies to identify and ensure healthcare access for women with unintended pregnancies and their babies. Healthcare providers, including health extension workers, can identify women with unintended pregnancies at the community level and link them to health facilities. They can also provide counselling services and maternal healthcare to these women, as well as appropriate newborn and infant healthcare services for their children once identified. Counselling and support positively contribute to improving maternal‐foetal attachment and help women with unintended pregnancies develop coping strategies (Ekrami et al.2020; Bakhtari‐Aghdam et al.2023). Furthermore, strengthening health education within communities through health extension workers may help prevent unintended pregnancies and promote health‐seeking behaviour among women with unintended pregnancies for both themselves and their children. Moreover, additional longitudinal cohort and qualitative research may be needed to identify the specific pathways linking pregnancy intention to maternal behaviours during pregnancy, childbirth and postpartum, as well as newborn and infant health outcomes.

The following limitations should be noted when interpreting the findings of this study. The study did not assess the impact of pregnancy intention on infant growth and development and care of sick newborns and infants. Furthermore, since all outcomes and exposure measures are self‐reported, responses may be influenced by social desirability bias, leading to underreporting of negative health behaviours or overreporting of positive behaviours. Additionally, the available covariates that potentially have associations with both the exposure and the outcomes in the PMA Ethiopia survey are limited, and the findings might differ with the inclusion of additional covariates. Moreover, propensity score methods may not entirely mitigate the impact of residual confounding, as they cannot address unobserved variables as effectively as a randomised trial. Nevertheless, employing propensity score methods using IPTW can help reduce bias by balancing the exposed and unexposed groups based on the conditional probability of receiving the exposure given a set of covariates. Despite the limitations mentioned above, the findings of this study could inform maternal and child health policy and practice in Ethiopia and other LMICs to prioritise the prevention of unintended pregnancies and ensure access to maternal healthcare for women with unintended pregnancies when designing and implementing newborn and child health programmes. An additional strength of this study was using a robust analysis method to adjust for potential confounders using the propensity‐based IPTW approach and the use of nationally representative data.

The study showed that intended pregnancy has a significant impact on the early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding and full infant immunisation in Ethiopia. Therefore, interventions should prioritise the prevention of unintended pregnancies through sexual and reproductive health services, particularly by providing family planning services and information on the consequences of unintended pregnancies and their prevention. In addition, early identification of women with unintended pregnancies is essential, as it enables the provision of care and support, ensuring they receive appropriate information regarding their own health and that of their babies. After identifying women with unintended pregnancies, special attention should be given to children born to these women to ensure they receive recommended healthcare to reduce associated morbidity and mortality. Further qualitative research may be necessary to investigate why women with unintended pregnancies are less likely to initiate breastfeeding early, continue exclusive breastfeeding in the first 6 months of life and complete the recommended immunisation of their babies.