Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the head and neck includes the pulmonary apices, a common location for pulmonary nodules. Computer-aided detection (CAD) is an adjunctive tool for the detection of lung nodules and is widely used in standard chest CT scans. We evaluated whether the available software can be applied to CTA head and neck examinations, which include the lung apices, resulting in improved accuracy for lung nodule detection.

In this retrospective single-center study, 191 previously reported head and neck CTA scans were re-evaluated for apical pulmonary nodules by 2 radiologists. Subsequently, CAD software (Syngo.via, Siemens Healthiness AG) was applied to the lung apices and the results were compared between CAD and research radiologists (first reading) or clinical radiologist (null reading). In addition, the CAD performance in limited lung fields was compared with the accepted CAD assessment applied to whole lungs.

Of the 191 patients, 110 (57.6%) were men, with a mean age of 68 years. In the 24 CT scans, the research radiologists detected 40 nodules. In the 180 scans evaluated by CAD, the software detected 39 nodules in 22 examinations, with a sensitivity of 60.8% and a PPV of 63.6%. In the remaining 158 examinations in which CAD did not detect nodules, the radiologists concurred in 149 scans, with a specificity of 94.9%, NPV of 94.3%, and accuracy of 90.6%.

The study results indicate that CAD is an unexpected quick supportive tool for nodule detection, particularly for excluding clinically significant nodules in lung apices on CTA head and neck, showing similar results for partial and full lung fields.

Emphasis on responsible software use: Responsible and effective utilization of available diagnostic software, maximizing the value of technology investments.

Challenges in detecting lung nodules: Lung nodules often remain undetected during the initial neurocentric review of CTA scans of the head and neck.

Optimizing CAD for partial lung assessment: CAD software previously used exclusively for whole lung assessments should be effectively utilized on the lung apices included in CT scans of the head and neck.

Comparable CAD performance across different lung sections: The performance of CAD in assessing lung apices is comparable to that of whole lung evaluations, demonstrating a strong ability to detect or rule out pulmonary nodules in lung apices.

Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the head and neck is performed for a variety of traumatic and nontraumatic neuro-radiological assessments. The radiologist’s report generally focuses on neuro-vascular findings, including but not limited to the assessment of the brain parenchyma, vascular patency, vascular abnormalities, traumatic injuries, planning of possible therapeutic procedures, and assessment of bones and soft tissues. An ancillary component of these reports relates to lung apices and the detection of incidental lung nodules or masses. Computer-aided detection (CAD) is an established tool for chest CT lung nodule identification, providing confirmatory assessment of the entire lung field. These programs are currently employed worldwide for chest CT scans, which include the entire lungs from the apex to the base. To the best of our knowledge, no prior studies have applied existing CAD to the limited portions of the lungs included in neck CT examinations. We investigated the value and accuracy of expanding the use of CAD for the limited volume of lung apices included in standard CTA examination of the head and neck. We also compared the results of this limited CAD application to the CAD performance in dedicated chest CT scans.

Case—CTA of the head and neck, where one or more lung nodules might be detected.

Null report—original report signed by the attending radiologist after CTA head and neck was performed in clinical settings.

First reading—re-reading of the original report by 2 research radiologists with expertise in chest radiology.

Second reading—final interpretation after incorporating CAD results and reassessment by 2 chest radiologists.

After obtaining approval from the institutional review board (IRB), a retrospective review was performed of our hospital radiologic information system (RIS) for head and neck CTA obtained between March 1, 2019, and July 1, 2019. As per the IRB, no written formal consent was required (under number 0172-19-ASF from September 23, 2019) for this observational study, in which the collected data and images were anonymized.

Our RIS review yielded 197 consecutive head and neck CTAs (SOMATOM Definition Edge or Somatom Drive, Siemens Healthineers AG) performed for various reasons, most commonly for stroke evaluation and trauma.

Imaging was conducted with a collimation of 64 * 0.6 mm, utilizing both twin beam dual energy (TBDE) on the Somatom Definition Edge and Dual Source Dual Energy (DSDE) on the Somatom Drive. Scans were performed at 120 kV and 350 mAs on the Definition Edge system and 100 kV/140Sn kV and Q.REF mAs of 140 on the Drive System, with all patients receiving intravenous administration of iodinated contrast medium in the angiographic phase. Our institutional standardized CTA protocol includes reconstruction with a 1 mm slice thickness, followed by a 1 mm lung kernel reconstruction to optimize image quality and vascular detail.

The study cohort includes 1 CT scan per patient, and repeated scans for the same patient were excluded. Six CTAs with very limited lung coverage (<3 cm in the cranio-caudal dimension) or significant artifacts overlying the lung fields were excluded from the study group, as the CAD algorithm deemed them unacceptable. In addition, 11 of 191 scans were excluded from CAD analysis after CAD software was unable to operate and proceed with the data analyses for unknown reasons. In all cases, the software issued the relevant statement.

Demographic characteristics collected included age, sex, history, risk factors for primary lung cancer or lung metastases (chronic lung disease, smoking, primary malignancy), indication for CTA study, and the availability of a prior exam. Smoking history was obtained via patients’ electronic medical records, which included current and past smokers.

In our clinical setting, studies are reviewed in real time by a radiologist on duty who creates a diagnostic report. During regular daytime hospital hours, this is a senior radiologist; during off hours, this is a radiology resident in training, which are later co-signed by a senior radiologist as the final report. Those final reports were considered the original (null reports) for the initial comparison (Fig.1).

Reading chart demonstrating the process of case revision.

In our study, each examination was re-evaluated in a retrospective manner for nodule detection by 2 separate research radiologists: a radiology resident (T.K.) with 4 years of experience and a senior radiologist with 10 years of experience in subspecialty imaging of the chest (A.K.). Their findings were recorded and compared, and any discrepant findings were jointly re-reviewed until a consensus was reached (“first reading”). Additional information regarding the detected nodules was recorded separately. This included the number of nodules detected and the size, location, and morphology of each nodule (solid or ground glass opacity). The presence or absence of emphysema, artifacts, or fibrotic changes in the lung apices was also noted.

CAD was applied (Syngo.via-B40, Siemens Healthineers AG) to the same cohort of examinations using a threshold ≥3 mm for the detection of lung nodules.

After applying CAD, the radiologists jointly re-reviewed the CAD findings (“second reading”) to determine the accuracy of CAD compared with the radiologist’s opinion (Fig.2).

CAD detected a lung nodule in the right upper lung lobe.

In addition, a comparison between the CAD reading and null reading was performed, recording nodules that might be added to the original (null) reports.

The results of the research radiologists’ interpretationwithoutCAD (first reading) and radiologists’ interpretationplusCAD (second reading) were compared and true nodules were distinguished from false-positive findings (including blood vessels, breathing, metal artifacts, and atelectasis).

The performance of the CAD algorithm was evaluated in terms of additional nodules detected, the number of false-positive and false-negative findings per CT study, and a possible explanation for diagnostic failure. The sensitivity and positive predictive value of CAD were calculated.

CAD performance in limited lung fields was compared with the reported CAD performance when applied to whole lungs.

All statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS software (IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 27, IBM Corp). All statistical tests were 2-sided, andP<0.05 was considered statistically significant. Categorical variables were described as frequencies and percentages. Age distribution was evaluated using a histogram and reported as the median and interquartile range (IQR). The Fisher exact test and McNemar test were applied for categorical variables, while the Mann-Whitney test was applied for continuous variables.

Of the 191 patients in the study, the age interquartile range (IQR) was 57 to 80 years, the mean was 68 years, and 57.6% were men (Table1). Most patients were not active smokers (77.5%), did not have prior exams (92.7%), or did not havea history of cancer (98.5%). Of the 191 patients included, 19.9% had emphysematous changes, 42.4% had fibrotic changes in the lung apices, and 4.7% had mediastinal lymphadenopathy (Table1).

Of the 191 CTA exams included in the study, 74.2% were requested as urgent at the original (null) report, and 56.5% were performed after regular working hours.

A preliminary original (null) report was first created by a radiology resident in 78% of the cases.

Artifacts were noted in 140 out of 191 studies (73.3%), including 77 cases (40.3%) secondary to concentrated contrast media in the central veins of the superior mediastinum, 54 cases (38.5%) attributed to other reasons, including but not limited to beam hardening from life support devices, and 10 cases (7.1%) due to breathing artifacts.

Out of 191 CT scans, 40 nodules were detected within 24 CT scans. Of the 24 scans, a single nodule was detected in 14 scans, 7 had 2 nodules, and 3 had 3 to 5 nodules.

Of 40 nodules, 15 were perivascular and another 15 were subpleural (37.5% each). Thirty-three nodules were solid and 7 were calcified. No ground glass opacity nodules were seen. Nodules were significantly more common on the right (16 cases, 75%), and in 3 cases (12.5%) nodules were bilateral. Only 8 nodules were 6 mm or larger, 6 of them on the right. The largest overall nodule, 11 mm, was observed in the right lung. In the left lung, the largest nodule measured 8 mm.

In 11 of 191 exams (5.8%), CAD was unable to operate and proceed with the data analyses, delivering relevant statements (8 women [9.9% out of 91 female patients in the study cohort] and 3 men [2.7% of 110 male patients],P= 0.056). In the 11 cases in which CAD was unable to operate, there was no statistically significant correlation with smoking history, fibrotic or emphysematous changes in the lung apices, number of nodules, or apical artifacts (P<0.05). In 1/11 cases deemed unacceptable to CAD, a nodule was detected by a radiologist, measuring 5 mm.

In 180 cases, the CAD algorithm was able to operate (Table2), and the software detected 39 nodules in 22 CT scans.

Nodules were found in 23 out of 180 cases processed by CAD. The 24th nodule was among 11 cases where the software failed to proceed.

We compared the same 180 CAD-acceptable cases with the researcher’s review.

Fourteen of 22 CAD-positive cases were accepted as “true” by research radiologists, reflecting a sensitivity of 60.8% and a relatively high PPV of 63.6% (Table2).

Of the 158 examinations without CAD-detected nodules, the radiologists agreed in 149 cases, with a specificity of 94.9%, NPV of 94.3%, and accuracy of 90.6%.

In 9/158 scans where CAD reported no nodules, radiologists detected 9 nodules, of which only 1 nodule was of size ≥6 mm. Two nodules were 5 mm, 2 nodules were 4 mm, and 4 nodules were 3 mm. If we exclude nodules smaller than 6 mm, the NPV becomes 99.4% and the PPV 72.7%.

The age of the patients, location of the nodule, presence of chronic lung disease, fibrotic changes in the apices, or artifacts on the CT scan did not statistically affect the ability of the CAD algorithm to detect nodules (P>0.05).

During re-review, after CAD results were available, of the 39 CAD-detected nodules, radiologists accepted 17 true nodules in 14 of 22 CT scans. Nineteen CAD-detected nodules in 8 scans were concluded to represent false positives (FP) with 0.11 FP nodules per 180 scans. Three nodules in 3 scans were missed by radiologists, including null reports created in the clinical setting and the first reading by 2 research radiologists. Two of the missed-by-radiologists nodules (7 and 3 mm) were recorded as no nodules after null and first reading (Fig.3). In the third case, CAD added a fifth nodule (4 mm) on a scan with 4 others already noted by the radiologists.

Small 0.3 cm nodule in RUL, which was missed in the original (null) report and by research review, but detected by CAD.

No significant difference was found in sex, age or smoking status, location of the nodule, presence of chronic lung disease, fibrotic changes in the apices, or artifacts in cases with nodules compared with the rest of the study cohort (P>0.05).

In summary, 25 CT scans with true nodules were identified among 180 CAD-acceptable scans (23 by radiologists and 2 by CAD only) (Table3).

Results based on CAD automatic detection and research radiologist review were compared with null reports originally written after CTA of the head and neck was performed.

Retrospectively, compared with the null report, the combined reading of the radiologist and CAD review found 37 additional nodules ranging in size from 0.3 to 0.8 cm in 23 cases. CAD reading alone, compared with the null report, detected 22 additional nodules in 12 cases, with 4 of them being determined to be false positives based on radiology research reviews. This included all nodules 0.6 and larger, which would have been detected by the CAD review and could have been added in real time to the null report. Only 2 true nodules (4 and 5 mm) were found on additional review by research radiologists.

Although CAD algorithms have been evaluated extensively for the detection of lung nodules and cancers in thoracic imaging studies,1,2we have not found any research regarding the application of CAD in the evaluation of lung nodules in examinations including only limited anatomic coverage of the lungs such as the lung apices which are included in CTA of the head and neck.

In our institution, CAD results displaying lung nodules on chest CTs are automatically released into PACS and are available for radiologists’ assessment. We propose that this tool may be evaluated and employed even when only the lung apices are imaged.

Our findings are consistent with previously published studies that confirm the potential of CAD to improve the detection of pulmonary nodules.5In our study cohort, CAD found 3/25 (12%) additional cases with nodules not detected by research radiologists.

In our study, the sensitivity of the CAD algorithm was ~72% for nodules of 6 mm and larger, but the system was able to exclude nodules ≥3 mm with an NPV of 94.3%. For nodules with a clinically significant size of 6 mm (according to recommendations of the Fleishner Society from 20179), NPV becomes as high as 99.4%. These features could be extremely helpful in reporting CTA of head and neck, the majority of which are performed on an urgent basis (74.2% were requested stat in our cohort), after regular hours (56.5% in our study), first reported by residents (78% among study cases) and usually signed by neuroradiologists without additional specialization in thoracic imaging similar to previously published papers that demonstrated the ability of CAD to improve performance of thoracic radiologists to detect small lung nodules.10The use of CAD can improve the accuracy of reports by identifying additional nodules in the lung apices. CAD alone added 18 nodules larger than 3 mm to the original (null) report, correctly depicting all nodules ≥6 mm.

However, the false-positive rate remains reasonable, about 0.13 nodules per chest CT study in published works11and 0.11 (19/180) in our study that evaluated lung apices.

Major limitations of this study include its retrospective design and performance at a single tertiary referral center. In addition, no deep learning system or system with the ability to characterize the lung nodules was utilized by the current version of CAD and the software used was vendor-specific. According to recently published studies, these neural networks improve the accuracy, identification, and characterization of lung nodules.11,12However, it is important to note that the goal of this study was to utilize an available CAD system.

There is some bias, as the study is focused on lung nodule detection compared with null reports created in real time during a busy workflow and signed out by general radiologists or neuro-radiologists, after the detailed evaluation of a complicated CTA study of the head and neck.

We suggest that the CAD algorithm, which is currently used for whole lung assessment, might be applied for lung apex evaluation without extra investment and add valuable information to the radiologist’s report.

In conclusion, innovation often involves applying existing tools to new scenarios. Our study results indicate that CAD may be an unexpected, quick, supportive tool for detection, and particularly for the exclusion of clinically significant nodules in the lung apices on CTA head and neck.