Carbonyl sulfide (OCS) is currently the only securely
detected
sulfur-bearing species in interstellar ices, making it an ideal window
into solid-state sulfur chemistry in dense star-forming regions. Previous
astronomical observations of the OCS asymmetric stretching mode (ν3) at ∼2040 cm–1(∼4.9 μm)
demonstrate that interstellar OCS may be embedded in CH3OH-rich ices, indicating that OCS likely forms in the coldest, densest
parts of star-forming regions where catastrophic CO freezeout occurs.
However, a significant portion of the OCS ice observations cannot
be fit with binary OCS:CH3OH laboratory ice mixtures alone,
suggesting a greater degree of chemical complexity in the local ice
environment. With this work, we aim to aid future studies of the abundance,
physicochemical environment, and evolutionary history of interstellar
OCS ice, now enabled for many more interstellar environments by theJames WebbSpace Telescope. We provide a library of new
laboratory IR transmission spectra of the tetrahedron of the OCS in
CH3OH- and CO-rich ice mixtures, some of which also include
H2S and H2O. Of these new spectra, the tertiary
OCS:CO:CH3OH ice mixtures provide the best fits to observations
of high-mass protostars, providing further support for the hypothesis
that the atom of the OCS forms with CH3OH, possibly via
chemical pathways involving frozen-out CO. We calculate apparent band
strengths of the ν3mode in the OCS:CH3OH and the OCS:CO:CH3OH ice mixtures. The derived values
are consistent (within uncertainties) with the apparent band strength
of the feature in pure OCS ice, 1.2 × 10–16cm molec–1. We therefore recommend using this
value when quantifying interstellar OCS ice column densities.

In the past two decades, sulfur-bearing
ices have been a major
focus of astrochemical research due to the observed gas-phase sulfur
depletion in dense star-forming regions.−However, of the many sulfur-bearing molecules proposed by such works
to exist in interstellar ices, carbonyl sulfide (OCS) remains the
only secure detection despite its low abundance (∼0.05–0.5%
with respect to H2O).,This is due to the high
band strength (on the order of 10–16cm molec–1) and the relatively isolated
peak position (4.9 μm) of its strongest IR vibrational feature,
the asymmetric stretching mode (ν3). These spectral
properties aided its early first detection and subsequent identification as OCS in ground-based IR spectra of the ice envelope surrounding the massive
protostar W33A. Since then, OCS has been detected toward the ice envelopes
of over 20 massive protostars,,−as well as the ice envelope of one low-mass protostar and two background stars behind a dense molecular
cloud.

Although OCS is decidedly
not a major sulfur carrier in dense star-forming
regions, its strong ν3absorption feature offers
a unique window into the solid-state sulfur chemistry of such environments.
Experiments presented in Palumbo et al. demonstrated that the profile of this band is highly dependent on
the chemical composition of the surrounding ice matrix, and out of
all of the laboratory ice mixtures compared to the observations, the
ices rich in CH3OH provided the best fit to many of the
observed absorptions.,Additionally, in a survey of
23 massive protostars, Boogert et al. found
that OCS ice column densities correlate well with the ice column densities
of CH3OH, OCN–, and the polar CO component,
while they correlate poorly with the ice column densities of H2O and the apolar CO component. A correlation between OCS and
CH3OH column densities (i.e., small scatter in the OCS/CH3OH ratio) is also observed toward massive protostars in the
gas phase. These results indicate that
most OCS ice likely formed alongside CH3OH after the heavy
CO freezeout stage in the densest regions of the clouds and envelopes,
possibly via routes such as the sulfurization of CO or the addition of SH radicals to CO.

Despite these indications that interstellar OCS ice
may be embedded
in a CH3OH-rich environment, the band strength of the ν3feature in CH3OH-rich ices has not been measured.
So far, most currently reported interstellar OCS ice column densities,were calculated using an OCS ν3band strength of
1.5 × 10–16cm molec–1, derived
for pure OCS ice using a refractive index measured for liquid OCS
and a simply assumed ice density of 1 g cm–3. Recently, Yarnall and Hudson published an improved OCS ν3band strength
of 1.2 × 10–16cm molec–1for both pure OCS ice and OCS in a 1:20 binary mixture with H2O ice using new refractive index and density values that were
measured directly for amorphous OCS ice. Nevertheless, existing OCS
observations indicate that neither pure nor H2O-dominated
OCS ices are relevant to the interstellar medium.

Furthermore,
the large sample of OCS ice observations in Boogert
et al. revealed that in a significant
portion of the investigated sources, the observed OCS ν3peak position is slightly red-shifted (by up to ∼0.01
μm) relative to the peak positions of OCS in binary laboratory
ice mixtures with CH3OH. In contrast, comparably red-shifted
peak positions of the OCS feature are observed in laboratory spectra
of CO- and H2S-containing ices that were irradiated and
then heated.,Thus, the observed red shifts
may indicate a higher degree of chemical complexity in the ice matrix
in which OCS is embedded and could be interpreted as tentative, indirect
evidence for OCS formation via energetic processing of other sulfur-bearing
ices. However, a lack of publicly available laboratory IR spectra
of OCS in more chemically complex ice matrices with carefully controlled
ice mixing ratios precludes drawing more specific conclusions about
the chemical environment of OCS toward these sources with red-shifted
OCS features.

The present work aims to fill several gaps in
experimental studies
of the OCS ice studies. First, we present the transmission IR spectrum
from 4000 to 500 cm–1(2.5–20 μm) of
both amorphous and crystalline OCS ice and calculate the band strengths
of all of its fundamental vibrational modes using the most recently
measured refractive index and density of amorphous OCS ice. Then, we aim to aid deeper investigations into
the chemical environment of interstellar OCS ice molecules by providing
laboratory IR spectra of OCS in more chemically complex, tertiary
ice mixtures with a focus on mixtures rich in CH3OH and
CO, given their aforementioned plausible physicochemical links to
OCS, and because interstellar CH3OH ice is thought to form
primarily via CO hydrogenation after catastrophic CO freezeout,,so it is expected and observationally supported,that CO and CH3OH will be mixed in interstellar ices
to some degree. Some of the investigated mixtures also include H2S, a suggested chemical precursor of OCS,,and H2O, the most abundant observable interstellar ice. We also provide updated IR spectra of binary
OCS ice mixtures using modern ice codeposition methodologies that
result in more accurate and controlled ice mixing ratios. We report the peak positions, fwhms, and relative
integrated absorbances of the OCS ν3modes observed
in these mixtures at temperatures spanning from 15 to 100 K to facilitate
future analyses of astronomically observed OCS ice profiles. The spectral
data are made publicly available on the Leiden Ice Database (LIDA). Finally, we compare our updated database of
OCS ice data to previous OCS ice observations to determine which of
our mixtures are most likely to be analogous to the chemical environment
of the OCS in interstellar ices and calculate the apparent band strengths
of the OCS ν3mode in these mixtures. This set of
experimental data can be used by the community to improve the understanding
of the abundance, physicochemical environment, and evolutionary history
of interstellar OCS ice in an era of copious new ice observations
in environments like cold dark clouds, the faintest and youngest low-mass
protostars, and extragalactic star-forming regions that have been
enabled by the recently launchedJames WebbSpace
Telescope.

All of the data presented in this
work were collected using the Infrared Absorption System for Ice Spectroscopy
(IRASIS) at the Leiden Laboratory for Astrophysics. A schematic of
the setup is presented by Rachid et al., and subsequent upgrades are described by Slavicinska et al. To briefly summarize, the setup consists of
an ultrahigh vacuum chamber (ultimate pressure <1 × 10–9mbar) containing a KBr substrate that can be cooled
down to 15 K with a closed-cycle He cryostat. Three independent dosing
lines with independent gas reservoirs, leak valves, and chamber inlets
located at the bottom of the chamber enable the background vapor deposition
of ices on the cryo-cooled substrate. The deposition of these ices
can be monitored on both sides of the substrate via laser interferometry
with two 633 nm HeNe laser beams positioned at 45° relative to
the substrate normal as well as via transmission IR spectroscopy with
an FTIR beam positioned at 0° relative to the substrate normal.
Ices are typically deposited to thicknesses on the order of hundreds
to thousands of monolayers (depending on what thickness is needed
to achieve satisfactory S/N of the ice feature of interest). The sample
temperature can be kept constant or changed at a set rate via proportional-integral-derivative
control. Gaseous species present in the chamber during deposition
or warming are monitored with a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS).

In the experiments presented in this work, deposition pressures
ranged from the order of 1 × 10–8mbar in the
case of the pure OCS ices to the order of 1 × 10–6mbar in the case of the most diluted OCS ice mixtures. Deposition
time scales ranged from ∼20 to 50 min. The IR spectra presented
in this work were collected from 4000 to 500 cm–1(2.5–20 μm) with a spectral resolution of 0.5 cm–1. Each spectrum consists of 128 averaged scans collected
over a period of ∼3.5 min. During the warm-ups, the substrate
was heated at a rate of 25 K h–1, resulting in ∼1.5
K intervals between the spectra collected during warm-up.

The
liquids and gases used in this work include carbonyl sulfide
(Linde Gas, ≥99.9%), methanol (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99.9%),
carbon monoxide (Linde Gas, ≥99.997%), water (Milli-Q, Type
I), and hydrogen sulfide (Linde Gas, ≥99.5%).

where λ is the wavelength of the laser,nis the ice refractive index, θ is the laser angle
of incidence, ρ is the ice density,NAis Avogadro’s number, andMis the ice molar
mass. The literaturenand ρ values used to
obtain the ice column density growth rates of the species investigated
in this work are presented inTable. The total errors
on these growth rates stem from the uncertainties of the literaturenand ρ values used, estimated here to be on the order
of ∼5 and 15%, respectively, based on typical variations seen
in these values between measurements made in different laboratories
and with different setup configurations.−The variations
in ice densities measured in different laboratories are often primarily
due to different deposition methods resulting in different ice porosities
in the case of amorphous ices, where
background deposition (the method employed in this work) typically
produces more porous ice than directional deposition (the method employed
by, e.g., Yarnall and Hudson), although
the magnitude of variation depends on the particular species. Additionally,
there is a ±5° uncertainty of the laser angle of incidence,
which corresponds to an error of ∼4% in the ice growth rates.
This propagates to a total uncertainty of the ice growth rate of 16%.

A calibration curve is then generated by repeating
pure ice deposition
with at least five different growth rates and finding the best-fit
correlation between the calculated ice column density growth rates
and the average QMS signal of a selected mass peak throughout the
deposition. For all of the investigated molecules, the correlation
was well fit using a linear equation, withR2values ranging from 0.995 to 0.9998. Each leak valve can
then be calibrated to a desired deposition rate of a specific species
by filling the gas reservoir connected to that leak valve with a specific
pressure of the gas or vapor of the species and then adjusting the
leak valve until the QMS signal that corresponds to the desired ice
column density growth rate in the calibration curve is reached. The
exact deposition rate is ascertained by performing multiple laser
interference control measurements of pure ice deposition rates using
the calibrated leak valve position. Five of such measurements typically
have a standard deviation of 0.3–3%, and their average varies
by 2–5% from the desired growth rate used to calculate the
corresponding QMS signal on the calibration curve. However, these
experimental errors are negligible compared to the uncertainty on
the calculated ice growth rate caused by the estimated uncertainty
of the literature ρ value.

After this calibration is complete
for all of the desired ice components,
an ice mixture with specific component ratios can be deposited. First,
each gas reservoir is filled with the same pressure of the pure gas
or vapor used during the leak valve calibration. During this step,
deposition of the gases or vapors into the chamber via the opened
leak valves is prevented via shut valves preceding the leak valves.
Once all of the gas reservoirs have been filled, all of the shut valves
are opened to begin simultaneous deposition. As mentioned by Yarnall
and Hudson, this method assumes that the
ice column density growth rates during codeposition remain the same
as during the deposition of each component individually.

For pure OCS ice, apparent
band strengths were calculated by depositing six pure OCS ices at
five different deposition rates (one deposition rate was repeated
to check for consistency), with rates ranging from ∼0.2 to
2 μm h–1. Throughout each deposition, transmission
IR spectra of the growing ice sample were continuously collected.
The changes in the integrated optical depths of the OCS features of
interest over timed∫τ dν/dtwere determined by finding the best linear fits
to the integrated optical depths over time. HighR2values of these fits in the case of the ν3feature (≥0.9996) indicate very uniform ice growth
rates throughout all of the depositions. The corresponding ice column
density growth rate for each of these measurements was then determined
by usingeqto convert
the period of the laser interference pattern generated during each
deposition todN/dt.

The best linear fits to
the six independentd∫τ dν/dtversusdN/dtmeasurements,
plotted in time-derivative Beer’s law plots, were then determined
via the York method for fitting data with errors on bothXandYvariables. The
slopes of these fits are reported as the apparent band strengths,A′, of the pure OCS bands. Using the time derivatives
of the ice column densities and integrated optical depths rather than
the absolute values of these variables ensures that any residues from
previous experiments present on the substrate do not contribute to
the calculated ice column densities. It also eliminates errors caused
by human imprecision in stopping the deposition at a specific time
or ice thickness. The error of the slope calculated by the York method
yieldsA′ uncertainties ∼10%, with
the dominant source of uncertainty being the uncertainty of the ρ
value used ineq.

whered∫τmixdν/dtis the change
in the integrated optical depth of the OCS ν3feature
during the deposition of each mixture of interest,d∫τpure,avgdν/dtis the average change in the integrated optical depth
of the OCS ν3feature during the five pure OCS depositions
(standard deviation = 0.8%), andApureis the apparent band
strength of the ν3mode of pure OCS.

The IR spectrum of pure OCS ice in both
amorphous and crystalline forms is presented inFigure. The ν3(asymmetric stretching)
mode around 5 μm is by far the strongest feature. Its profile
in both the amorphous and crystalline forms is highly asymmetric and
distinctly broad, which has been suggested to be caused by the isotopic
shifts of and disruption of molecular coupling in the matrix by OC33S and OC34S. The
other fundamental features, the ν1(symmetric stretching)
and ν2(bending) modes, are significantly weaker
than the ν3modes in both the amorphous and crystalline
ices. Several very weak combination and overtone bands are also present
in the investigated spectral range. The peak positions of all of the
assigned modes are listed inTable. A small peak at 2340 cm–1, assigned to CO2, indicates a slight degree
of atmospheric contamination. Using the band strength of the asymmetric
stretching mode of pure amorphous CO2, this contamination is estimated to be on the order of ∼0.2%
with respect to OCS. A table containing the peak position, fwhm, and
relative integrated absorbance of the ν3mode in
pure OCS ice throughout its warm-up from 15 to 83 K is provided in
theSupporting Information.

Infrared spectra of amorphous (black trace) and crystalline (blue
trace) pure OCS ices measured at 15 and 65 K, respectively. Both ices
were deposited at 15 K; the crystalline ice was heated from 15 to
65 K at a rate of 25 K hr–1. Assignments to the
absorption features are labeled, and peak positions of these features
are listed inTable. A small feature ∼2340 cm–1assigned to
CO2ice indicates minor atmospheric contamination.

The apparent band strengthsA′
of the three
fundamental OCS modes in pure amorphous ice at 15 K were calculated
using the method outlined in the Methods section. The resultingA′ values are presented inTable, and the time-derivative Beer’s law plots used to
calculate these values are shown inFigure. OurA′ value for
the ν3mode, 1.20 × 10–16cm
molec–1, is exactly consistent with that reported
for pure amorphous OCS ice at 10 K by Yarnall and Hudson. However, we note that our chosen integration
range for this peak differs from that listed inTablein Yarnall and Hudson, 2154–2070 cm–1, because their
range excludes a majority of the absorption of this feature, leading
us to conclude it likely includes a typo.

Time-derivative Beer’s law plots used to derive the apparent
band strengths of the fundamental IR modes of amorphous OCS ice at
15 K. The black points denote the experimental data, with each point
representing an individual ice deposition with a given deposition
rate in units of column density growth per second, and the dashed
green lines denote the best linear fit to the data calculated using
the York method.

Our measuredA′ values
of the OCS ν1and ν2modes are both
over 2 orders of magnitude
lower than that of the ν3mode. Given such lowA′ values in combination with the relatively low
abundance of OCS in interstellar ices as determined from the ν3mode, we conclude that these bands are not likely to be practical
in future observational studies and, therefore, exclude them from
the analysis of the ice mixtures.

The profiles of the OCS ν3features at select temperatures in all of the ice mixtures
investigated in this work are presented inFigure. InFigure, the extracted peak positions and fwhms of the OCS
ν3features from these experiments are overplotted,
with the peak positions and fwhms extracted from Gaussian fits to
the 4.9 μm feature observed toward massive protostars (or massive
young stellar objects; MYSOs) by Boogert et al. (The binary OCS:CO mixtures and the 1:20:1 mixtures of
the OCS:CO:H2S are excluded from this figure due to their
poor fits to the observations and substructures with multiple peaks.)
Tables containing the peak positions, fwhms, and relative integrated
absorbances of the OCS ν3mode in these ice mixtures
throughout their warm-up from 15 to 100 K are provided in theSupporting Information.

OCS ν3bands at select temperatures in all of
the investigated binary and tertiary OCS-containing ice mixtures.
All of the spectra are normalized so that the peak absorbance of the
ν3mode at 15 K is equal to 1 in each set of spectra
from a given mixture. The profile of the ν3mode
in the 1:20 ice mixture of the OCS:CH3OH at 15 K is scaled
to and plotted with all of the peaks (in gray) to facilitate comparisons
of peak positions and profiles between the different mixtures.

Peak positions and fwhms of the OCS ν3mode in
all of the investigated laboratory mixtures (color), excluding the
binary OCS:CO mixtures and the 1:20:1 mixture. The large outlined
symbols denote mixtures at 15 K, while the traces and smaller symbols
denote how the peak profile changes with increasing temperature. The
black arrows indicate the direction of temperature increase. All mixtures
are plotted up to 100 K except the OCS:CO:H2S mixtures,
which are only plotted up to 37 K because above this temperature,
the OCS ν3feature in these mixtures becomes significantly
broader than the peak in observations. The peak positions and fwhms
of the Gaussian profiles fit to the 4.9 μm band observed toward
massive young stellar objects (MYSOs) by Boogert et al. are plotted in gray.

In all of the binary
OCS:CH3OH mixtures, the OCS peak profile is symmetric and
Gaussian-like, and its position is sensitive to temperature: it lies
around ∼2041.5 cm–1(4.898 μm) at 15
K and gradually blue-shifts with increasing temperature to ∼2042.7
cm–1(4.895 μm) at 100 K in all of the investigated
OCS:CH3OH mixing ratios. The fwhm, on the other hand, is
sensitive to both the temperature and the OCS:CH3OH ratio.
For example, the fwhm decreases from ∼23 to ∼19 cm–1when the OCS:CH3OH concentration decreases
from 1:10 to 1:20 at 15 K, but a similar decrease in the fwhm also
occurs during the warm-up of the OCS:CH3OH 1:10 mixture.
However, differences between the fwhms of the 1:20 and 1:40 mixtures
of the OCS:CH3OH are much smaller. Based on this trend,
we expect that increasing the dilution factor of the OCS:CH3OH beyond 1:40 would have very small effects on the OCS peak profile.

Notably, while several of the peak profiles observed by Boogert
et al. can be well fit with our OCS:CH3OH mixtures, many other observed peak positions are too red-shifted
(by 0.001–0.01 μm) to be sufficiently fit with them.

Given the similarity of these spectra to some of the observations,
we derived apparent band strengths of the ν3band
in the 1:20 and 1:40 mixtures of the OCS:CH3OH using the
procedure described in the Methods section and report these values
inTable. Within
our uncertainties, theseA′ values are consistent
with theA′ value of pure OCS.

Mixing OCS with oxazoline (AgCl)
and CO results in an OCS peak blue shift of ∼5–10 cm–1with respect to the OCS peak positions in the OCS:CH3OH mixtures. Such a peak position is too blue-shifted to fit
observations. Furthermore, at the higher dilution factors (OCS:CO
1:20 and 1:40), the OCS feature splits into four blended but distinct
peaks (Figure). Similar
splitting is observed in OCS:Ar and OCS:N21:200 mixtures,
where it has been attributed to isolated and aggregated OCS molecules
within the Ar or N2matrices, as the multiple peaks eventually disappear at even higher dilution
factors. These split peak profiles do not match the observed Gaussian-like
profile of interstellar OCS ice. Between 30 and 40 K, the multipeak
structures transform into very broad, asymmetric features similar
to the peak structure of pure OCS ice because the CO ice desorbs between
these temperatures, effectively distilling the ice and leaving behind
nearly pure solid OCS.

Most of the investigated
tertiary OCS:CO:CH3OH mixtures have similar OCS profiles
to the OCS:CH3OH mixtures but with two notable differences.
First, the profiles of the OCS:CO:CH3OH mixtures are slightly
asymmetric at lower temperatures. The effect is most pronounced at
15 K and in the mixtures with the lowest CH3OH concentrations
(e.g., see the OCS:CO:CH3OH 1:20:2 peak inFigure) but is still observed in
the spectra up to ∼40 K, before a significant portion of the
deposited CO begins to desorb. Second, the OCS peak positions in these
mixtures tend to be slightly blue-shifted relative to the OCS:CH3OH mixtures at 15 K, but as the temperatures increase to ∼30–35
K, the peaks shift toward longer wavelengths. In the OCS:CO:CH3OH 1:40:10 mixture, a maximum red shift is achieved at 35
K, with a peak position of 2038.6 cm–1(4.905 μm).
Such red-shifted profiles provide substantially better fits to many
of the red-shifted observations.

It is important to note that
these experiments demonstrate how even a small concentration of CH3OH in the matrix has a pronounced effect on the OCS peak profilei.e.,
the mixture does not have to be CH3OH-dominated for the
OCS peak to have a profile similar to that in the OCS:CH3OH mixtures. For example, in the CO-dominated OCS:CO:CH3OH 1:20:5 mixture, the OCS peak profile looks much more similar to
the peak in the OCS:CH3OH 1:5 mixture than in the OCS:CO
1:20 mixture (seeFigure).

Given the match in the red-shifted peak position
of several of
the OCS:CO:CH3OH mixtures to the MYSO observations in Boogert
et al., we calculated the apparent band strengths of the OCS ν3mode in the 1:20:20, 1:40:20, 1:20:10, and 1:40:10 mixtures
using the procedure outlined in the Methods section and report these
values inTable.
As was the case for the OCS:CH3OH mixtures, theseA′ values are consistent with theA′ value of pure OCS within our reported uncertainties.

The three investigated tertiary OCS:CO:H2S mixtures have significantly blue-shifted and markedly asymmetric
OCS peaks at 15 K. As they are heated to 30–40 K, their peaks
red-shift toward the observed values but remain quite asymmetric,
making them poor fits to the observations despite the apparent experimental
overlap with the observational data inFigure. At higher temperatures, much of the deposited
CO desorbs and the OCS peaks become much broader than the observations
as the OCS ice is effectively distilled. Further OCS distillation
occurs in these mixtures between 70 and 80 K when H2S desorbs.

The OCS peak profile of the OCS:CH3OH:H2S
1:20:10 mixture is nearly identical to that of the most dilute OCS:CH3OH mixtures. Therefore, the OCS peak profile is not sensitive
to the presence of H2S in CH3OH-dominated matrices.

The OCS profile in the investigated H2O-containing mixtures
is symmetric and Gaussian-like, similar to that of the binary CH3OH mixtures. The binary OCS:H2O 1:20 mixture is
far too blue-shifted (by at least ∼5 cm–1) to fit any of the observations, as noted previously by Palumbo
et al. However, the tertiary mixtures
of OCS:CH3OH:H2O explored here, even those with
equivalent concentrations of CH3OH and H2O like
the 1:20:20 mixture, have OCS peak profiles and positions that are
very similar to those of the binary OCS:CH3OH mixtures.
They are also slightly blue-shifted but not by enough to lie outside
of the observed OCS peak profile range considering errors. These results
demonstrate again that the presence of CH3OH in the ice
matrix has a strong effect on the OCS peak profile, even if it is
not the only dominant matrix species.

With the spectra collected
in this work, we show that many of the
observed OCS ν3peak positions that were too red-shifted
to be fit with any previously available nonirradiated laboratory ice
mixtures can now actually be fit quite well with tertiary OCS:CO:CH3OH mixtures. In the bottom two panels ofFigure, we demonstrate how OCS:CO:CH3OH mixtures provide good fits to the OCS ice features observed
toward W33A and G029.8620–00.0444 (hereafter G029.8620), two
embedded massive protostars observed via the NASA InfraRed Telescope
Facility (IRTF). The massive protostar
G029.8620 in particular has the highest quality of the IRTF sample
and is shifted significantly to longer wavelengths with respect to
binary OCS:CH3OH mixtures. This is the case even after
the correction for a Doppler velocity shift of +100 km s–1with respect to the Local Standard of Rest and the motion of the Earth around the Sun at the date of the IRTF
observations (this correction was not applied in Boogert et al.).

OCS ν3mode observed toward three icy
sightlines
(gray traces) overplotted with select laboratory ice mixtures from
this work (colored traces). A Gaussian fit to each observed feature
(dashed coral trace) and the laboratory OCS:CH3OH 1:20
15 K spectrum (dotted green trace), along with vertical lines marking
their respective peak positions, are also overplotted to serve as
points of reference and to facilitate visual comparisons between the
different sources and laboratory data. The observational data include
the dense core in front of a background star J110621 (top), the massive protostar W33A (middle), and the massive protostar G029.8620 (bottom). CO gas lines were removed from the MYSO spectra
(see Boogert et al.).

These laboratory spectra therefore provide an alternative
explanation
to that presented by Boogert et al. for
the observed OCS peak positionsnamely, that solid-state interstellar
OCS may be intimately mixed with both CO and CH3OH ice.
This result is one of many that supports a close chemical relationship
between CO and CH3OH−and is consistent with the hypothesis that CO is
a chemical precursor of OCS. Unfortunately,
the analysis of more precise physicochemical parameters like the OCS:CO:CH3OH ratio and temperature of the ice matrix surrounding OCS
cannot be reliably determined by analyzing the OCS ν3peak profile due to the degenerate effects of mixing ratios and
temperatures on both the OCS peak position and fwhm in the OCS:CO:CH3OH laboratory mixtures.

Conversely, our data do not
provide conclusive evidence for OCS
mixing with H2S, another suggested OCS precursor,,in interstellar ices, although they do not refute the possibility,
either. The 1:20:10 mixture of the aqueous OCS:CH3OH:H2S demonstrates that the presence of H2S in a CH3OH-dominated matrix does not have a strong effect on the OCS
peak profile, even at relatively high (10:1) H2S:OCS ratios.
Significantly higher concentrations of H2S are unlikely
given that currently available H2S ice upper limits in
the literature result in H2S:OCS ratio upper limits of
≲4.,The asymmetric profiles of the OCS bands
in the OCS:CO:H2S mixtures investigated here do not match
the more symmetric profiles of the OCS features reported in irradiated
laboratory CO:H2S ice mixtures,,which may be due to the presence of several other irradiation products
in the latter ices. It is possible that including CH3OH
in the nonirradiated OCS:CO:H2S mixtures could result in
more symmetric OCS features that would better match observations,
but any changes in the OCS peak profile due to H2S in such
mixtures are likely to be small (given the tight constraints on H2S ice abundances from the current upper limits) and perhaps
also degenerate with other physicochemical effects.

Finally,
we include inFigureone of the first observations of OCS ice toward a
dense core in front of a background star, J110621, observed by theJames WebbSpace Telescope (JWST). Although the feature is contaminated by CO gas absorption lines
from the photosphere of the background star, a peak profile can be
roughly extracted by fitting to the data points between the absorption
lines, resulting in an extracted peak position that is blue-shifted
relative to the OCS:CH3OH 1:20 position. The laboratory
data from this work that provide the best match to such a profile
are the 1:20:20 OCS:CH3OH:H2O 1:20:20 mixture.
In their analysis of this source, McClure et al. found that the local cloud density may still be too low
to support catastrophic CO freezeout, and that some portion of the
detected CH3OH ice may be mixed with H2O, possibly
due to early CH3OH formation via a pathway like CH4+OH in a H2O-rich environment. The blue shift in the OCS peak position toward this source
could be considered evidence for early formation of both the OCS and
CH3OH in a more H2O-rich ice phase, although
this evidence remains very tenuous given that the overlapping photospheric
contamination may create distortions in the observed OCS profile,
leading to higher uncertainties in the extracted peak position.

Given the spectroscopic degeneracies, we do not claim that our
laboratory spectra provide unique fits to the observed OCS ice observations.
Therefore, our fits do not strictly preclude other chemical environments,
like those investigated by Ferrante et al. and Garozzo et al., providing equally
satisfactory fits. Our fits do provide evidence supporting plausible
chemical environments of OCS ice comprising only simple ice species
that are securely and abundantly observed in dense star-forming regions.

Tertiary laboratory mixtures of OCS:CO:CH3OH provide the best fits to most of the OCS ice bands currently observed
toward the ice envelopes of massive protostars, supporting the previously
hypothesized link between these species. The match also supports the
late OCS formation scenario, in which most of the observed OCS ice
forms in the densest, coldest regions of ice clouds and envelopes
where CO freezeout occurs.

CH3OH has a strong effect on the profile
of the OCS band even when it is not the dominant ice component, and
OCS features observed toward several massive protostars can be fit
well with OCS:CO:CH3OH laboratory ice mixtures whose dominant
component is CO rather than CH3OH.

Specific conclusions regarding local OCS concentration
or OCS ice temperature based on the OCS peak profile are hindered
by the degenerate effects of these parameters. Taking into account
previous work, this degeneracy also applies to proton-irradiated ices
containing H2S, CO, and H2O.

The apparent band strength
of OCS in OCS:CH3OH and OCS:CO:CH3OH mixtures
is consistent with that of
pure OCS ice within our reported uncertainties. We recommend that
a value of 1.2 × 10–16cm molec–1is used to calculate OCS column densities in interstellar ices.

Our data neither support nor refute possible
chemical
links between H2S and OCS, as the OCS:CO:H2S
mixtures collected as part of this work have asymmetric OCS profiles
that do not match any observations, but the investigated OCS:CH3OH:H2S mixture has a similar profile to binary
OCS:CH3OH mixtures that fit some of the observed OCS peaks
well.

While OCS:H2O mixtures
are too blue-shifted
to fit any current OCS observations, OCS:CH3OH:H2O mixtures may provide a good fit to an OCS feature observed toward
a background star behind a dense cloud, suggesting that some OCS may
form earlier in a phase of the ice that is still relatively H2O-rich. However, this conclusion remains tenuous due to spectral
contamination by photospheric CO gas absorptions complicating the
OCS profile extraction toward this source.

Given the weak apparent band strengths of the OCS symmetric
stretching (ν1) and bending (ν2)
modes and the relatively low abundance of OCS ice in dense star-forming
regions, the very strong OCS asymmetric stretching (ν3) mode remains the only likely detectable feature of this molecule
in interstellar ices in the near future.

These laboratory spectra are made available for public
use and
enjoyment on the Leiden Ice Database (LIDA).

This paper is dedicated to the memory of the late Harold Linnartz,
who provided indispensable scientific guidance and inspiration throughout
the collection and analysis of this data. K.S. thanks Ewine van Dishoeck
for helpful scientific discussions, Julia Santos for experimental
support, and Martijn Witlox and Robin Schrama for mechanical support.
K.-J.C. is grateful for support from the Dutch Research Council (NWO)
via the Veni fellowship. Astrochemistry at Leiden is supported by
funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement
No. 101019751 MOLDISK), The Netherlands Research School for Astronomy
(NOVA), and the Danish National Research Foundation through the Center
of Excellence “InterCat” (Grant agreement no.: DNRF150).

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsearthspacechem.5c00134.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Published
as part ofACS Earth and Space Chemistryspecial issue“Harold Linnartz Festschrift”.