We present a case of extensive and bulky pediatric metastatic melanoma originating in the head and neck which markedly responded to combination therapy with anti-programmed cell death (PD-1) inhibition and consolidative personalized ultra-fractionated stereotactic adaptive radiotherapy (PULSAR). After surgical debulking with neck dissection, the patient was initially treated with anti-PD-1 and anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) dual checkpoint blockade immunotherapy, but quickly had disease progression. He was transitioned to a different anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in combination with tyrosine kinase inhibitors in conjunction with consolidative local therapy using PULSAR. This combination therapy achieved tumor response and progression-free status for one year before further disease progression at a separate site in the mediastinum. Due to otherwise good disease control, single agent anti-PD-1 immunotherapy was continued and salvage PULSAR was administered to the progressive site, again resulting in tumor response and progression-free status for 6 months. None of the bulkier sites of gross disease had local progression after combination therapy. This case suggests that the synergistic effect of PULSAR and anti-PD-1 immunotherapy is efficacious for relapsed or refractory metastatic melanoma in pediatric patients. Clinical trial number: not applicable.

Because of the prevalence of B-raf proto-oncogene serine/threonine kinase (BRAF) and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) mutations in melanoma, tyrosine kinase inhibitors are widely indicated for treatment. Dabrafenib, which targets BRAF, and trametinib, which targets MEK, are often used in combination, leading to downstream inactivation of cell growth and proliferation. Immunotherapy with checkpoint inhibition is effective independent of BRAF mutational status. Checkpoint inhibitors such as ipilimumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting cytotoxic T-cell lymphocyte 4 (CTLA-4), and nivolumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting programmed cell death 1 (PD-1), have been used effectively in the treatment of melanoma and other solid tumors. The DREAMSeq trial examined sequenced therapy with nivolumab/ipilimumab for immune checkpoint inhibition followed by dabrafenib/trametinib for BRAF/MEK inhibition and was associated with an increased 2-year OS in patients with advanced melanoma [1].

Pembrolizumab is another anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody which inhibits the functional inactivation of T-cells against tumor cells leading to cell death. The KEYNOTE-001 study demonstrated the efficacy of pembrolizumab with a 41% overall survival (OS) in adult patients with treatment-naïve advanced melanoma [2]. Follow-up study KEYNOTE-002 confirmed the efficacy of pembrolizumab in patients who had disease progression during or after treatment with ipilimumab, an anti-CTLA-4 agent, which had been historically used in the treatment of melanoma [3]. In the randomized controlled trial KEYNOTE-006, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in superior median OS and 7-year OS as compared to treatment with ipilimumab [3,4]. In 2020, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved pembrolizumab for the treatment of adult and pediatric patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma with no alternative treatment options or progression following prior treatments [5]. The use of pembrolizumab for pediatric patients was first examined in KEYNOTE-051, a phase 1–2 trial utilizing pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg every 3 weeks for the treatment of PD-1 positive relapsed or refractory solid tumors in children aged 6 months to 17 years [6]. Overall, pembrolizumab was well tolerated with evidence of antitumor activity in some solid tumors, although final trial results are pending at time of publication.

The majority of non-CNS, solid tumor cancers in pediatrics are small, round, blue cell tumors which respond well to low daily dose, protracted, conventionally fractionated radiation therapy (CFRT) exploiting the poor chromosomal radiation damage repair capacity of such tumor cells relative to adjacent normal tissues. Melanoma is an exception given its unique ability to repair damage from small, daily radiation doses. Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SAbR) and its various hypofractionated forms is better suited for the local treatment of melanoma but has limitations given the ablative dose is technically more difficult to confine with larger targets. Personalized ultra-fractionated stereotactic adaptive radiation (PULSAR), a subset of SAbR, is a novel treatment technique aiming to leverage the technological innovations that have enabled ablative dose delivery with patient-specific biological information obtained during treatment lapses [7,8]. PULSAR purposely separates SAbR treatments by weeks and months allowing considerable patient-specific biological change to occur between treatments.

In contrast to historical split-course CFRT for which clinical trials showed tumor progression during treatment lapses (i.e. tumor control penalty) [9] PULSAR delivers much higher biological doses to gross tumor with each “pulse” while minimizing the dose to adjacent normal tissues. Clinical data suggests higher biological doses delivered at each treatment may overcome tumor control penalty [10]. A PULSAR radiotherapy approach can add value in several respects. First, PULSAR is less toxic than typical SAbR since normal tissues have time to heal between pulses. Second, technical and biological information can “personalize” the treatment via interval re-planning to optimize treatment variables like daily and total dose, treatment volume, dose heterogeneity, concomitant therapies, etc. Finally, typical large daily dose SAbR treatments have been shown to induce a vaccine-like, adaptive immune response in the tumor microenvironment. PULSAR scheduling and biological personalization might be optimized to work synergistically with an overall immune strategy enabling both a better local response and systemic effect known as the abscopal effect.

In pre-clinical models, the utilization of PULSAR in conjunction with immunotherapy suggests that there is a synergistic effect of these treatment modalities that could provide improved outcomes in solid tumor management [11]. Radiation therapy has known immune-mediated antitumor effects that may enhance checkpoint blockade by change in the cytokine environment and priming of the anti-tumor T-cell response [11]. Mechanistically, damage caused by radiation likely recruits circulating dendritic cells and ultimately T-cells into the tumor microenvironment, which may enhance response to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition [11,12]. In a murine model, Moore et al. demonstrated that delivery of ablative radiation prior to or during anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy had superior outcomes in tumor volume reduction when compared to delivery of ablative radiation after anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy [13]. In the model, immunogenic colon cancer tumor demonstrated response with up-front ablative radiation combined with anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy, suggesting inherent synergy between the therapy modalities [13]. Furthermore, immunogenically inactive lung cancer tumor demonstrated superior response with two fractions of ablative radiation spaced 10 days apart, suggesting that the initial fraction provides “priming” that will later be amplified by anti-PD-L1 therapy [13]. This model, in combination with prior studies demonstrating the efficacy of SAbR in combination with pembrolizumab, informed our decision to pursue therapy with combination pembrolizumab and PULSAR in this pediatric patient with metastatic melanoma [14].

A 14-year-old male presented with a large mass in the left cervical region. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck demonstrated left cervical lymphadenopathy at levels 1B, 2 A, 2B, 3 and 4 A with central necrosis and extension to the supraclavicular, mediastinal, pre-vascular and para-aortic lymph chain. There were markedly enlarged peri-parotid and intra-parotid lymph nodes, displacement of the left carotid sheath and left internal jugular vein, and displacement of the larynx and cervical trachea (Fig.1A). He underwent radical neck dissection and median sternotomy for debulking of the mass. Pathology demonstrated BRAF: V600E mutation on fusion sequencing consistent with melanoma. Positron emission tomography (PET) demonstrated no distant metastases. He was diagnosed with stage T4N2M0 malignant melanoma.

He initially started therapy with nivolumab and ipilimumab per the DREAMSeq trial but began to have clinical progression after only two cycles of therapy. Disease progression was confirmed on MRI neck with recurrent growth within the surgical bed and new sites of disease including a new mass adjacent to the left subclavian artery (Fig.1B). He was transitioned to dabrafenib/trametinib in combination with pembrolizumab per the KEYNOTE-051 trial. Additionally, he began adjunct PULSAR therapy to all areas of known gross disease in the left neck and supraclavicular region, which was given as 5 pulses of 8 Gy (40 Gy total) every 2 weeks. An MRI obtained at completion of PULSAR therapy demonstrated greater than 60% reduction in size of the large tumor adjacent to the left subclavian artery from 2.6 centimeters (cm) in greatest transverse dimension to 0.9 cm in greatest transverse dimension (Fig.1C). He maintained clinical response in this region in follow-up (Fig.1D-E) for over 18 months.

Our patient continued to receive pembrolizumab per KEYNOTE-051. Within a month of completing PULSAR to the neck and supraclavicular areas, he had a new mediastinal node just inferior to prior radiation field identified on surveillance computed tomography (CT) (Fig.2B), which was relatively stable in follow-up (Fig.2C). Systemic therapy was continued with maintenance pembrolizumab, dabrafenib and trametinib as the patient was clinically well. He slowly developed symptoms of chest pain and respiratory distress over the next several months leading to repeat imaging which demonstrated massive progression of the mediastinal nodule to 9.1 cm x 8.2 cm x 9.2 cm (359 cubic cm3) resulting in bronchial obstruction (Fig.2D). PULSAR therapy was initiated to the left mediastinum, again given as 5 pulses of 8 Gy (40 Gy total), this time every 3 weeks in conjunction with pembrolizumab. After completion of the second course of PULSAR, repeat imaging demonstrated an almost 90% reduction in size of the mediastinal tumor to 3.6 cm x 3.9 cm x 5.3 cm (38 cubic cm3) (Fig.2E).

Our patient continued to receive pembrolizumab every 3 weeks, as well as oral trametinib and dabrafenib daily and had no evidence of disease progression or recurrence in any locally treated sites for 6 months. Disease was monitored with interval CT chest and MRI neck every 3–4 months and another course of PULSAR as consolidation to immunotherapy would be considered should new lesions arise in the future.

This is the first pediatric case report demonstrating efficacy of combination pembrolizumab and PULSAR in the management of aggressive, bulky metastatic melanoma. After pathology from surgical debulking identified a somatic BRAF: V600E mutation, a personal history of an atypical nevus on the L ear and family history of melanoma in a maternal grandfather (deceased), maternal uncle (deceased), and mother (alive) was discovered. Although no germline mutation was identified in our patient, there remains high suspicion for a genetic predisposition. The initial choice of systemic therapy with nivolumab/ipilimumab and later, BRAF/MEK tyrosine kinase inhibition per the DREAMSeq trial was logical for advanced melanoma, but quickly proved ineffective when new sites of disease developed within weeks of his initial surgical debulking. Based upon the previous findings in KEYNOTE-051 phase 1–2 trial, our patient was transitioned from nivolumab/ipilimumab anti-PD1/anti-CTLA-4 immunotherapy, to pembrolizumab, an anti-PD-1 immunotherapy agent which has had increasing success in the treatment of pediatric solid tumors [6]. Due to the tenuous location of his tumor among the head and neck structures and the need for more rapid disease control, the synergistic effect of pembrolizumab and PULSAR previously described in murine pre-clinical models was an attractive treatment option [13]. The patient had an excellent response to the first course of PULSAR in combination with pembrolizumab, which was overall very well tolerated. Based on this experience, we would advocate for earlier use of pembrolizumab in patients with advanced or rapidly progressive solid tumors such as melanoma with the addition of PULSAR administration to larger masses, especially if symptomatic.

The second course of PULSAR caused significant toxicity for our patient, which was most likely related to the bulk of the tumor, but also may have been related to timing of administration in relation to pembrolizumab. Considering prior studies supporting T-cell infiltration into the tumor bed following damage associated with radiation, it is possible that immune activity at the site of the tumor secondary to the synergistic effect of radiation and anti-PD-1 activity led to the side effects seen in our patient [11,12]. Due to the urgency of the second course of PULSAR, we were unable to administer the first two pulses within 24 h of pembrolizumab. The first pulse was given 11 days following a dose of pembrolizumab (Fig.3), which resulted in rapid development of fever, chills, myalgias and pain over the next 48 h necessitating admission for management of cytokine release syndrome (CRS). The second pulse was given 14 days following the next pembrolizumab (Fig.3) and again required admission for CRS and adrenal insufficiency requiring intravenous steroids and a prolonged steroid taper. It was suggested in murine models that radiation provides “priming” for anti-PD-1 agents in immunogenically inactive tumors, but in our patient it seems that the immunogenic activity of the tumor was activated by either modality, regardless of the time course of administration [13]. Additionally, there are many other factors that may have contributed to the poor tolerance of combination pembrolizumab and PULSAR therapy during the second course including size and location of the tumor, concurrent viral illnesses, worsening thyroiditis, and adrenal insufficiency. The remaining fractions of PULSAR were given within 24 h of pembrolizumab administration and did not cause further toxicities. Especially in patients with rapidly progressive masses, it would be prudent to consider the timing of PULSAR and pembrolizumab administration carefully to avoid adverse effects. It seems that administration of PULSAR and pembrolizumab within 24 h of one another minimized adverse effects and may have also increased synergy.

The abscopal effect, a well-described immune phenomenon in which metastatic disease has an apparent response to radiotherapy at distant location due to systemic immune activation, is a possible contributory factor for the response seen in our patient with metastatic melanoma [15,16]. Although the pathophysiology behind this effect is not completely understood, it is likely mediated by systemic immune activation incited by radiotherapy in combination with immunologic checkpoint inhibitors such as pembrolizumab [17]. For example, the potential improvement seen in the left neck region following PULSAR to the mediastinum without direct involvement in the radiotherapy field could be related to an abscopal effect (Fig.1E).

Our patient has experienced other adverse effects associated with pembrolizumab including thyroiditis, colitis and adrenal insufficiency. Thyroiditis developed 5 months after the initiation of pembrolizumab with significant elevation of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) identified on routine screening labs. He was treated with thyroid hormone replacement, consistent with a Grade 3 adverse event according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5 (CTCAE v5). Although 8% of patients who received pembrolizumab experienced hypothyroidism, only 0.1% experienced Grade 3 hypothyroidism [18]. Our patient also experienced Grade 3 adrenal insufficiency during the second course of PULSAR which was managed with intravenous steroids and an oral steroid taper. He was prescribed courses of oral steroids during any viral illness or episode of CRS to account for adrenal insufficiency. Adrenal insufficiency is reported in 0.8% of patients receiving pembrolizumab, with only 0.3% experiencing Grade 3 reactions [18]. The severity of these adverse events in our patient suggests that patients receiving pembrolizumab and PULSAR should be carefully monitored for adverse effects, which may be exacerbated by combination therapy.

The authors would like to acknowledge the Radiology Department at Children’s Medical Center Dallas for their assistance interpreting the images included in this case report. We would also like to acknowledge our patient and his guardian for their therapeutic alliance and willingness to participate in this case report.