Physical unclonable functions (PUFs), relying extensively on the random spatial distribution of block elements, are promising technology for generating unclonable cryptograph. Herein, we demonstrate time-dependent PUFs (TD-PUFs) by introducing carbon dots (CDs) with bright and long-lived triplet excitons as block elements. The constructed TD-PUFs evolve into multiple unclonable PUFs over time, effectively breaking the spatial limitation of transitional PUFs and increasing the complexity, making them much more difficult to be attacked. This temporal evolution introduces an additional layer of security, as the dynamic nature of TD-PUFs makes it increasingly challenging for adversaries to predict or replicate their states. We have developed pixel matrix function (PMF) to describe the evolution process of the TD-PUFs, enabling a detailed analysis of the dynamic behavior and unique security features. In addition, we exhibit a TD-PUFs painting (30 × 40 cm2) by an etching technology where the primary structures of the panting undergo a transformation over time, driven by the varying triplet exciton lifetimes of the CDs. The proposed concept of TD-PUFs overcome their spatial limitations and increase the complexity, making the PUF labels more difficulty to be cracked.

Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs) derive their uniqueness from the intrinsic randomness within microscopic material structures, making them unclonable in subsequent productions. These substances respond accordingly when exposed to specific challenges such as light, electricity, or magnetism, and the one-to-one correspondence between these challenges and responses can be called unique challenge-response pair1,2. The first conceptual PUF was realized by optically exciting a three-dimensional object with a random physical structure inside, as introduced by Ravikanth Pappu and colleagues in 20023. Since then, PUFs have received widespread attention and research due to their simple and low-cost preparation methods and strong anti-counterfeiting and encryption capabilities. According to their diverse challenges sources and application scenarios, PUFs can be divided into three major categories: (1) Silicon-based PUFs, challenged by electric fields and symbiotic with electronic devices4. The silicon PUFs are one of best-known subset of PUFs, and they are usually a part of an integrated circuit. The reading method for this type of PUFs is contact based, resulting in poor stability and limited application scenarios. (2) PUFs challenged by magnetic fields, such as magnetic simulation PUFs5,6, offer potential solutions. However, the intricate preparation process and the associated high costs persist as significant challenges. (3) Optical PUFs, utilizing light as a challenge have emerged as a significant development in recent years. Variants like edible PUFs7, flexible PUFs8–10, and luminescent PUFs11–14have been widely used for anti-counterfeiting and high-level encryption. However, it is worth noting that most of these PUFs are based on spatial dimensions, which will limit the further improvement of PUF encoding capabilities. Im et al. prepared four-dimensional PUF (4D)15by utilizing the continuous luminescence characteristics of phosphorescent crystals16, and Nocentini et al. exploits reconfigurable photo-responsive materials to create a multilevel PUF17. These methods can build more complex systems by increasing the dimensions of PUF, thereby increasing the anti-counterfeiting encryption capabilities of PUF. However, this study did not address the temporal evolution aspect of PUFs.

Triplet excitons, composed of coupled electron and hole pairs with parallel spins, yield photons containing observable time information due to spin-forbidden transition in accordance with the Pauli exclusion principle18. These long-lived emissive states are the foundation of phosphorescence, a phenomenon that has been investigated since the 1950s when Peter Pringsheim and colleagues began studying fluorescence and phosphorescence19. Later, Charles F. Förster and collaborators identified phosphorescence in plastics20. In recent years, the generation of photons from the radiative recombination of triplet excitons in organic materials21, carbon dots (CDs)22–26, and other metal-based complex materials27–29have been widely achieved through the collaborative efforts of physicists, chemists, materials scientists, and other researchers. Generally, heteroatoms doping has been widely employed as an effective strategy to promote the formation of triplet excitons, while confinement serves as an effective method to inhibit their dissipation, facilitating the realization of triplet exciton emission30. The radiative transition rates from triplet excitons are typically slow due to the ‘spin-forbidden’ nature, leading to emission with lifetimes typically extending microseconds. Specially, the lifetimes of triplet exciton emission in CDs have been extended beyond tens of seconds, and with the emission of triplet excitons in CDs even achieved in aqueous solution, previously considered impossible31,32. The bright and long-lived triplet excitons, incorporating temporal information, serve as ideal candidates for TD-PUFs. CDs characterized by their eco-friendly nature, low cost, and ease of preparation, represent excellent platforms for utilizing triplet excitons in constructing TD-PUFs.

In previous work, we achieved colorful, bright, and long-lasting triplet exciton emission in CDs through conjugated size and confinement engineering33. In this work, we advance PUFs to TD-PUFs by leveraging the slow photon effects generated from triplet excitons in CDs, breaking the spatial limitation of traditional PUFs. We partitioned the TD-PUFs into a two-dimensional matrix and subsequently established a matrix function to depict the evolution of TD-PUFs over time by solving the boundary conditions and setting the lifetimes of triplet excitons in the CDs. Furthermore, the coding capacity of the TD-PUFs can be extended from 22,250,000to 2552,250,000, significantly increasing the complexity of cryptographic primitives. In addition, a multiple-coding painting featuring TD-PUFs has been developed, wherein the primary structures undergo a transformation over time. This transition is propelled by the colorful and time-dependent triplet excitons within the CDs, imparting dynamic visual properties that bolster artwork’s uniqueness and security attributes.

The variation in quantity and lifetime of CDs within each pixel of TD-PUFs contributes to the diverse variations observed in TD-PUFs over time, and the schematic diagram of TD-PUFs is shown in Fig.1. The TD-PUFs was constructed using randomly distributed phosphorescent CDs as building block, and the reading process consists of three components: challenge, response, and digitization (Supplementary Fig.S1). Three kinds of CD powders, each with different sizes from 0.5 mm to 1.4 mm, were selected for the construction of TD-PUFs through different sieve meshes, as depicted in Supplementary Fig.S2. Subsequently, these different kinds of CDs were randomly mixed together to prepared TD-PUFs, the detailed process is illustrated in Supplementary Fig.S3. After excitation, the TD-PUFs will evolve into different PUFs over time following the removal of light source, owing to the prolonged luminescent properties of CDs. The newly generated PUFs exhibit significant differences attribute to variation in both quantity and lifetimes of the CDs within each pixel of the TD-PUFs, as illustrated in Fig.1a. In the entire TD-PUFs system, the quantity of the derived PUFs is determined by the time interval, and the time interval can span from nanosecond to second. Therefore, the lifetime and phosphorescence intensity of CDs play a pivotal role in determining the efficacy of TD-PUFs. Specifically, these properties are governed by spin-orbit coupling (SOC)29,34and non-radiative recombination processes. SOC facilitates intersystem crossing (ISC), allowing singlet excitons to transition into long-lived triplet states34. Due to the spin-forbidden nature of the triplet-to-singlet transition, the radiative decay is significantly prolonged, as illustrated in Fig.1b. To enhance this process, exotic atoms were incorporated into the CD structure35, increasing SOC strength and thereby extending triplet-state lifetime. This mechanism has been extensively studied in our previous research36. Under 365 nm excitation, the luminescence of CDs extends up to 10 s, as shown in Fig.1c. Detailed luminescent properties of CDs are characterized in Supplementary Figs.S4andS5. TD-PUFs comprised of PUF0, PUF1, PUF2and continuing up to PUFn, can be systematically constructed using the time slice technique, with the time interval determined by the shutter frequency.

WhereCis the product ofAandB. In different TD-PUFs, the specific value ofCcan be determined by calculating the boundary conditions att= 0.

Where ‘I’ represents the luminescence intensity of a CD, and ‘i’ is the number of CDs within a pixel. To experimentally verify this rule, TD-PUFs with 1500 × 1500 pixels were demonstrated and converting it into binary coding and quaternary coding. For clarity, the partial magnified TD-PUF consisting of 200 × 200 pixels was extracted for analysis (Fig.2e), the global TD-PUFs and the corresponding binary and quaternary coding maps are shown in Supplementary Fig.S11. Additionally, a region of 40 × 40 pixels, intercepted from the mark square region spanning coordinates (50, 40) to (90, 80) at t = 0 s, is shown in Fig.2f. Figure2gshows the complete gray value picture of the TD-PUFs, displaying random gray values across different pixels, a series of values C for PMF can thus obtained. The corresponding quaternary coding, decimal coding and hexadecimal coding are shown in Fig.2h–j, respectively, exhibiting their strong coding capability.

HereHis the information entropy,xiis each pixel value in the image,p(xi)is the probability distribution of pixel valuexi(the probability that the pixel value appears in the image), and B is the number of pixels in the image. Therefore, the actual coding capacities of PUFs can be expressed as M’ for binary images, where M’ =H×B.

WhereCis the same number of pixels between two PUFs andBis the total number of pixels.

The security performance investigation of TD-PUFs consisting of different CD particle sizes is shown in Fig.3, three TD-PUFs containing a single CD particle size distribution from 0.5 mm to 1.4 mm are shown in Supplementary Figs.S13andS14. The TD-PUFs constructed by different CD particle sizes have higher complexity and safety, thus two TD-PUFs consisting different CD particle sizes named as TD-PUF1and TD-PUF2, were measured at different times, and then they were converted into binary coding and quaternary coding for analysis, as shown in Fig.3a–f. Figures3a,bdisplay the binary coding results of two consecutive measurements of TD-PUF1, while Fig.3cexhibits the measurement results of TD-PUF2. Uniformity result measured at timet= 0 (‘1’ bit as a percentage of the total bits in PUF) indicates that the TD-PUF1and TD-PUF2have good uniform (Supplementary TableS2). As time passed, the number of ‘0’ bits in the TD-PUF gradually increased, resulting in reduced uniformity, which is an unclonable characteristic of TD-PUFs. Figure3d–fpresent the results of quaternary coding obtained using the same method, and they also exhibit a good uniformity (Supplementary TableS2). Subsequently, we conducted uniqueness analysis of the TD-PUFs through binary and quaternary coding at t = 0 s, as shown in Fig.3g,i. According to theoretical expectations, the spacing outcomes adhere to the binomial distribution law, with a Hamming spacing of 750 exhibiting the highest probability of occurrence (representing half the total number of bits)44,45. Nonetheless, due to variations in the proportions of ‘0’ and ‘1’ bits within the PUFs, certain discrepancies were observed in the actual results. For example, at t = 0 s, the Hamming inter-distance statistics of TD-PUF1show that the probability of occurrence is highest at 725, and this value decreases to 665 at t = 2 s (Fig.3gand Supplementary Fig.S15). Figure3h(binary) and Fig.3j(quaternary) display the intra-distance values of the same PUF measured twice att= 0 s. Similarly, the intra-distance comparison results at other time points are shown in Supplementary Fig.S16(binary) and Supplementary Fig.S17(quaternary). To eliminate contingency, we selected eight PUFs and measured them twice at t = 0.5 s for analysis and comparison, as shown in Supplementary Fig.S18(binary). Notably, the measurement results of the same PUF measured at the same time exhibit remarkable repeatability. Furthermore, we performed two measurements on the TD-PUFs fromt= 0.5 s tot= 7 s, resulting in 64 similarity index values obtained through pair-to-pair comparisons. The corresponding binary and quaternary statistical results are presented in Fig.3k,m, indicating high repeatability and uniqueness. In addition, by changing the time interval between each PUF in TD-PUF, the crosstalk problem can be reduced, thereby improving the repeatability between PUFs (Supplementary Fig.S19). We also conducted measurements on eight different PUFs with 1500 × 1500 pixels, comparing the results of two measurements att= 0 s, yielding 64 similarity index values, as shown in Fig.3l,n. Supplementary TableS3illustrates the 64 calculated similarity indexes for TD-PUFs by binary and quaternary coding. The comparison result indicates that the same PUF measured twice at the same moment exhibits a high similarity index, while low similarity index values were observed for different PUFs and the same PUF measured at different moments.

Compared with conventional PUFs, TD-PUFs integrate the time dimension in addition to the spatial dimension51, presenting a time evolution feature. At time t < 0, the PMF (Φ) equals to zero; after challenge the PMF (Φ) exhibits a response with value of∑i=1nI(CD)iatt= 0; subsequently, the PMF (Φ) decays exponentially over time, as illustrated in Fig.4a. To provide a clearer explanation of how the response of each pixel within a TD-PUF changes over time, we randomly selected one row of data from the 1500 × 1500 pixels TD-PUF for analysis, and the PMFΦ(x,930,0)is shown in Fig.4b. Here, the intensity of the CDs within a pixel was transformed into gray value (the value was located in the range of from 0 to 255). The PMFΦ(x,(y=50,200,500,800,1200),0)of the TD-PUFs are shown in Supplementary Fig.S20, and the statistical results clearly confirm randomly distributed value. Figure4cdepicts the process from generating gray value data to its transformation into N-nary coding. We employed a single threshold (30) to generate binary coding, three thresholds (30, 150, and 200) to produce quaternary coding and multiple thresholds to produce N-nary coding42,47. As time progresses, the quaternary coding evolves as the grayscale values decrease at the same thresholds. We repeated the response test of the TD-PUFs for 10 times under the same excitation challenge to avoid the accidental variations, the gray value results at t = 0 s, 3 s and 5 s are shown in Fig.4d, exhibiting high reliability and consistency. Figure4edisplays the statistic results of the coding for hexadecimal coding att= 0 s, 3 s and 5 s, respectively. The results indicate that the coding in hexadecimal format also evolve randomly over time, elucidating why the original PUFs can generate new PUFs. Finally, the safety characterization results for the hexadecimal coding TD-PUFs also confirm its exceptional properties, as presented in Fig.4f. Figure4gand Supplementary Fig.S21are the similarity of the two repeated test results of the TD-PUFs under the same time interval change. The results show that the new PUFs derived from the TD-PUFs changes randomly over time. Finally, a comparison between the TD-PUF and representative optical PUFs reported in previous studies was conducted (see Supplementary TableS5). The results highlight the superior performance of the TD-PUF in key evaluation metrics.

WhereΦ(x,y,t)is the response value of the pixel at coordinates (x,y) at time t,I(CD)iis the intensity of thei-th CD within the pixel,e−t0.96+e−t1.24+e−t0.5represent the exponential decay functions corresponding to the lifetimes of blue, green, and red emissions, respectively. Figure5eshows the response value maps of the painting att= 1 s,t= 3 s, andt= 5 s. A gradual weakening of intensity can be observed across different regions of the peacock’s body over time, exhibiting unpredictability until eventually stabilizing. The progression illustrates how the painting’s response changes over time, with varying grayscale values indicating different levels of luminescence due to the different contents and decay lifetimes. Furthermore, a section of the painting was tailored to a 40 × 40 pixels image for coding analysis, as shown in Fig.5f, and then it was converted into octonary coding, as shown in Fig.5g. Figure5hmagnifies a smaller section (10 × 10 pixels) from the previous 40 × 40 pixels area, and the corresponding detailed octonary coding matrix for the 10 × 10 pixels magnified image is shown in Fig.5i. Notably, the inter-distance results presented in Fig.5jindicate that the TD-PUFs painting demonstrates robust internal randomness. The vibrant triplet exciton emissions and diverse lifetimes of the CDs result in dynamic and visually striking changes in the painting over time, making it highly resistant to forgery.

In summary, TD-PUFs technology has been proposed and demonstrated in this work, and the introduction of temporal dimension endow it with a dynamic and versatile capability for anti-counterfeiting, information storage, and visual representation. The CD with long-lived and bright triplet excitons serves as the cornerstone for the construction of TD-PUFs, breaking the spatial limitation and increasing the difficulty of being attacked. Moreover, we have built PMF by resolving boundary conditions for description the temporal evolution of TD-PUF with time. Furthermore, we showcased the versatility of TD-PUFs through flexible labeling and highlighting their anti-counterfeiting for valuable items. In the end, TD-PUFs painting has been demonstrated, the vibrant emission and diverse lifetime of the CDs endow the panting with a greater variety of changes, making it highly resistant to forgery. The introduction of TD-PUFs technology in this study signifies a departure from the spatial limitations inherent in traditional PUFs, thus paving the way for significant advancements in PUF development within the temporal dimension.

The precursors used in this study include poly acrylic acid ([C3H4O2]n, purity > 99.5%), 1,3-diamino propane (C3H10N2, purity > 98%), Ethylenediamine (EDA, purity > 99%), phosphoricacid (purity > 95%), rhodamine B (C28H31ClN2O3, purity > 99%), biuret (C2H5N3O2, purity > 98%), silicic acid (C8H20O4Si, Purity > 98%), ammonium hydroxide solution (H5NO, purity > 98%). All the chemicals were purchased from Macklin Chemistry Co. Ltd (Shanghai, China). Note that all the chemicals used in this work were analytical grade without further purification.

Firstly, 0.45 g of poly (acrylic acid) powders were dissolved in 20 mL of deionized water. Then 0.85 mL of 1,3-diaminopropane was added to the poly (acrylic acid) aqueous solution with stirring for 5 min. Then, the resulting solution was transferred to a 50 ml Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave. The sealed autoclave was heated to 200 °C and maintained at this temperature for 8 h. Afterward, the reactor was cooled naturally to room temperature. The aqueous solution was then centrifuged for 10 min to remove sediment. The supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 μm membrane, and the resulting filtrate was collected. Next, 1 mL of the supernatant aqueous solution and 0.5 mL of tetraethoxysilane (TEOs) were dispersed in 15 mL of deionized water to form a solution. Then, 0.5 mL of ammonia was added to the solution and stirred at room temperature for 8 h. Finally, the blue phosphorescent CNDs can be obtained by drying at 60 °C.

1.0 g of biuret precursors were mixed in a mortar and ground uniformly for 10 min. The resulting solid mixture was removed to a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave and heated at 190 °C for 10 h. The resulting CNDs sample was allowed allowed to cool slowly to room temperature.

First, 1.0 mL of ethylenediamine (EDA) solution was dissolved in 15 mL of deionized water. Next, 2 mL of phosphoric acid was added to the EDA aqueous solution and stirred for 5 min. The resulting transparent solution was heated in a microwave oven (750 W) for 120 s. After cooling room temperature, 20 mL of deionized water was added, resulting in a light-yellow solution. The solution was then centrifuged for 10 min to remove sediment. The resulting supernatant was collected. 1 mL of the CNDs supernatant aqueous solution, 1 mL of Rhodamine B (4.5 mg/mL), and 1 mL of tetraethoxysilane (TEOs) were mixed in 16 mL of deionized water to form a solution. Then, 1 mL of ammonia was added, and stirred at room temperature for 8 h. Finally, the red phosphorescent CNDs were obtained by drying at 60 °C.

First, CD particles of various sizes were randomly selected and scattered on the black background. Next, the particles were stimulated using 365 nm ultraviolet light in a dark environment. After removing the ultraviolet light source, a camera was used to capture phosphorescence response images at different time intervals. These optical images were converted into corresponding binary codes, which serve as the fundamental elements of TD-PUF. All PUFs exhibiting temporal changes over time constitute TD-PUFs.

Eight B-CD samples, with masses in an arithmetic progression ranging from 0.02 g to 0.32 g, (with a 0.04 g interval), were accurately weighed. Each sample was mixed with 2 g of PDMS. The mixtures were subsequently placed in a drying oven and heated at 60 °C for 2 h. After heating, the PDMS films embedded with CDs were exposed to a 36 nm ultraviolet lamp. After ceasing of the UV excitation, phosphorescence images of the films were captured using a camera. The resultant phosphorescence images exhibited varying luminescence intensities corresponding to the different masses of CDs in the PDMS films.

The preparation methods for PDMS films incorporating G-CDs and R-CDs are identical to those used for B-CDs.

Converting images to grayscale images: Photos taken with a camera or mobile phone were imported into MATLAB. The photos are then converted into corresponding grayscale images.

Digitizing the grayscale image into base on N-nary coding: A suitable threshold within the digital range of 0-255 was selected to convert the grayscale image into binary coding or N-nary coding.

Calculating the Hamming distance: For binary coding, two sets of PUF data were imported into the MATLAB to generate the corresponding data matrices. Appropriate thresholds were chosen to form a binary matrix, with values above and below the threshold defined as “1” (white) and “0” (black), respectively. The inter-distance was determined by calculating the Hamming distance within each PUF, while the intra-distance was measured by calculating the Hamming distance between different PUFs. The similarity index is computed as an intuitive performance metric between two PUFs, based on the statistical result of the Hamming distance. The percentage of differing pixels (represented as “0”) relative to the total number of pixels was used to determine the similarity.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 62075198, 11974317, 12274378), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant (Grant No. BX20240337), Key Research and Promotion Projects in Henan Province (Grant No. 252102231055).