Transition-metal-catalyzed C-H alkylation of heteroaromatics with alkenes represents an atom-economical and cost-effective strategy for accessing industrially and pharmaceutically relevant compounds. However, the selective C5-H alkylation of biomass-derived furfural and its isosteric analog, thiophene-2-carboxaldehyde, highly challenging yet industrially vital substrates, has remained elusive. Herein, we disclose a Ni/NHC-catalyzed strategy for the C5-H alkylation of furan- and thiophene-2-carboxaldehydes with styrenes and norbornene, enabled by a readily installable and recyclableN-PMP (p-methoxyphenyl) imine protecting group. This method also achieves selective C5-H alkenylation with internal alkynes. Mechanistic studies suggest that C-H alkylation proceeds via a ligand-to-ligand hydrogen transfer (LLHT) pathway. TheN-PMP imine group effectively suppresses undesirable benzoin condensation of these reactive aldehydes and prevents NHC trapping in Breslow intermediates, a major catalyst deactivation pathway. The protecting group is efficiently cleaved under acid hydrolysis, yielding C5-functionalized aldehydes, while the liberated anisidine can be recycled for imine substrate preparation. This work also highlights the largely unexplored potential of theN-aryl imine group as the protecting group for distal C(sp²)-H functionalization of heteroaromatic aldehydes under Ni catalysis.

A Ni/NHC-catalyzed strategy for C5-H alkylation and alkenylation of furan- and thiophene-2-carboxaldehydes with alkenes and alkynes has been developed, leveraging an easily installable and recyclable N-PMP imine protecting group. This group suppresses unwanted benzoin condensation of the reactive aldehydes and avoids NHC trapping in Breslow intermediates—a key catalyst deactivation pathway.

Atom- and step-economical C–H alkylation and alkenylation of heteroaromatic substrates with alkenes and alkynes, the so-called hydroheteroarylation reactions, represent highly promising, cost-effective, and environmentally benign strategy for the synthesis of alkylated and alkenylated heteroaromatic scaffolds demanded in biomedical research, medicine, agrochemistry, polymers, and materials chemistry1–6. Nickel catalysts have drawn considerable attention in hydroheteroarylation reactions owing to their high efficiency and relative low cost of nickel compared to noble metals (Fig.1a)7–20.

aNickel-catalyzed alkylation and alkenylation of furan(thiophene) derivatives with alkenes and alkynes.bRepresentative examples of practically valued compounds.cThis work: C5-H alkylation and alkenylation of furan(thiophene)-2-carboxaldehydes enabled by a recyclable imine protecting group.

Heterocyclic substrates containing various functional groups are particularly attractive for C-H functionalization because they allow the synthesis of new, selectively functionalized molecules capable of further structural modifications21–23. However, the presence of functional groups in addition to active C-H bonds raises the problem of selectivity of reactions of such substrates, especially under conditions of metal catalysis. Formyl group represents one of the most widely used functional group; however, C-H alkylation and alkenylation of heterocyclic rings in heteroaromatic aldehydes can be problematic due to the possibility of C-H activation of the formyl group and competitive hydroacylation reactions24–26. Although examples of selective C-H alkylation and alkenylation of some heteroaromatic substrates with a formyl group under Ni catalysis are reported in the literature15,27, heteroaromatic aldehydes are still remain challenging substrates.

Among the heteroaromatic aldehydes, furfural (furan-2-carboxaldehyde) is considered a promising renewable biobased feedstock for the production of chemicals and fuels28–38. The global production of furfural from agricultural residues and forestry wastes is ~370 kt/a (according to 2016 data)31and has the potential to increase to 1 Gt/a in the future, exceeding the current demand for chemicals and aviation fuels of 0.4 and 0.2 Gt/a, respectively34. Among furfural derivatives, 5-alkyl- and 5-alkenyl-furan-2-carboxaldehydes have received application as reagents in the preparation of medicinally oriented compounds39,40, plant effectors41, and photoactive materials (Fig.1b)42–45. Conventional synthesis of 5-alkylated and 5-alkenylated furfurals via Friedel-Crafts reactions faces challenges due to furfural’s instability, while alternative routes using C5-prefunctionalized furfural derivatives (lithiated46–48, halogenated49–77, or borylated43,78–80) generate substantial waste despite good selectivity. Recent advances in C–H functionalization of furfural81, such as C5-H alkylation with alkyl halides under Pd82–84, Fe85or photoinduced Pd86,87catalysis, or with carboxylic acid peroxides under Fe catalysis88, as well as Pd-catalyzed oxidative alkenylation with alkenes89–92offer more sustainable approaches, but these methods remain constrained by limited substrate compatibility and stringent reaction conditions.

C-H alkylation and alkenylation of furfural with alkenes and alkynes seems to be highly promising and environmentally benign strategy for the synthesis of furfural derivatives, though it still remains immature. Approaches to the selective C5-H alkenylation of furfural with alkynes under Rh and Pd catalysis have been developed93,94. However, to the best of our knowledge, similar reactions between furfural and alkenes, yielding 5-alkylfurfurals, remain unexplored. The only example of furfural acetal alkylation with decene-1 under catalysis with a Ni(0)/MHC complex with a hindered IPr*OMeligand has been reported by Hartwig and coworkers13. However, to our knowledge, the synthesis of 5-functionalized furan- and isosteric thiophene-2-carboxaldehydes by metal-catalyzed hydroheteroarylation reactions of appropriate aldehydes or their protected derivatives has not yet been reported.

Herein, we report an efficient approach for the selective C5-H alkylation of furfural, thiophene-2-carbaldehyde and some of their derivatives with styrenes and norbornene, as well as the selective C5-H alkenylation with internal alkynes, under Ni/NHC catalysis (Fig.1c). Key to this approach is the use of anN-PMP (p-methoxyphenyl) imine protecting group, which is readily installed, removable in situ, and recyclable. Mechanistic studies show that theN-PMP imine group plays a dual role: (1) suppressing deleterious benzoin condensation and (2) preventing deactivation of the Ni/NHC catalyst by highly reactive aldehydes. Notably, despite the potential of theN-PMP imine group to act as anN-donor directing group—which could favor C3-H functionalization—the reaction exhibits exceptional selectivity for C5-H alkylation/alkenylation. An important novelty of this study lies in demonstrating the utility of imine groups as protecting groups for remote C–H functionalization of carbonyl-containing heteroaromatics under Ni catalysis.

We started our study by investigating various Pd- and Ni-based catalytic systems for the reaction of furfural (1a) with styrene (2a) in 1,4-dioxane (Fig.2, Supplementary TableS1). The catalytic systems were generated in situ from Pd(dba)2, Pd(OAc)2, or NiCp2(nickelocene) in combination with phosphine ligands5a-eor NHC proligands6a-d(Fig.2a). Additionally, well-defined Ni/NHC complexes7a-fwere evaluated as precatalysts (Fig.2a).

aLigands, Pd and Ni salts and complexes used in the study.bAttempts to react1awith2aunder Pd and Ni catalysis. Reaction conditions: furfural1a(1 mmol), styrene2a(0.25 mmol), [Pd] or [Ni] (5-10 mol%), (pro)ligand (5-10 mol%, if required, TableS1), HCOONa (100 mol%, or another additive, if required, TableS1), dioxane (1 mL), 16 h, 110 °C, argon atmosphere.cThe main route of catalyst decomposition under the action of furfural.

Unfortunately, none of the tested Pd or Ni catalytic systems facilitated the formation of the desired alkylation product3a(Fig.2b, Supplementary TableS1; extended discussion in the ESI, Section S3.1). Attempted alkenylation of furfural with diphenylacetylene under Pd/NHC and Ni/NHC catalysis was also unsuccessful (Supplementary TableS2). The conversion of styrene and diphenyl acetylene did not exceed 10%. However, compound4was identified as the major product in both Pd/NHC- and Ni/NHC-catalyzed reactions (Fig.2b, Supplementary TablesS1andS2). Notably, furfural conversion was nearly complete under Ni/NHC catalysis, producing4in 54–76% (attempted alkylation) and 63–80% (attempted alkenylation) yields. Unidentified tar-like furfural decomposition byproducts were also observed.

Compound4arises from the NHC-catalyzed benzoin condensation of furfural95–100, mediated by NHCs generated via deprotonation of azolium salt-NHC-proligands6a-dor decomposition of Ni/NHC complexes7a–f101,102. The significantly lower yields of4under Pd/NHC catalysis, as opposed to Ni/NHC, can be explained by the greater stability of Pd/NHC complexes under the reaction conditions.

Further studies revealed that furfural rapidly decomposes Ni/NHC complexes7a-fin the presence of HCOONa (Supplementary Fig.S2; Supplementary Information, Section S3.1) via formation of the Breslow intermediate (BI, Fig.2c). The high reactivity of furfural promotes Ni–C(NHC) bond dissociation by trapping the NHC as theBI, a key intermediate in the benzoin condensation cycle98,99. However, theBIis thermally unstable and gradually degrades (Supplementary Fig.S3), leading to NHC ligand depletion and eventual breakdown of the Ni/NHC catalytic system. While the benzoin condensation of aldehydes catalyzed by NHCs in the presence of Ni complexes is well-documented103, the aldehyde-induced decomposition of M/NHC complexes via NHC trapping in the Breslow intermediate (Fig.2c) represents, to our knowledge, a previously unreported phenomenon.

Thus, the failure of furfural alkylation and alkenylation under Ni/NHC catalysis, despite previous successes with C5-alkylation of other furan derivatives14,16, can be attributed to furfural-induced degradation of Ni/NHC systems and its high propensity for NHC-catalyzed benzoin condensation.

To suppress Ni/NHC catalyst deactivation and competing benzoin condensation, we investigated readily available furfural derivatives containing protected formyl groups specifically, acetal8(previously employed by Hartwig’s group)13andN-arylimines9a–das substrates for the reaction with styrene (Fig.3). It should be noted that in metal-catalyzed C-H functionalization reactions, imine groups have been predominantly used asN-donor directing104–109or functional24,26,110–112groups. Surprisingly, the potential of the imine group as a protecting group in transition metal-catalyzed distal C-H functionalization reactions remains understudied.

Reaction conditions: compound8,9a-d(0.25 mmol), styrene2a(0.3 mmol),7d(10 mol%), HCO2Na (0.25 mmol), 1,4-dioxane, 110 °C, 16 h.

The stable Ni/NHC precatalyst7dand sodium formate (as a precatalyst activator) were used under conditions analogous to those recently reported for the alkylation and alkenylation of heterocyclic compounds (Fig.3)14. Alkylation of substrate8proved unsuccessful, with only trace amounts of the proposed product10detected by GC-MS. In contrast, imines9a–dyielded the target alkylated products11a–din 41–95% yield (GC-MS). Notably, no benzoin condensation product (4) was observed by GC-MS, underscoring the stability of the imine protecting group under the reaction conditions. The observed reactivity difference between compounds8and9is probably due to the different electronic properties of their substituents at position 2 of the furan ring. The electron-donating 1,3-dioxolane group in8increases the electron density of the furan ring, thereby decreasing the C-H acidity and consequently increasing the reactivity under the C-H alkylation conditions studied. In contrast, the imine-protected carbonyl group in9retains its electron withdrawing character through negative resonance effect, thus maintaining sufficient C–H acidity and reactivity of the furan nucleus. The identity of the N-aryl group in the imine-protected substrates (9a–d) had a significant impact on the yields of alkylated products (11a–d). The significantly lower yield of product11c(41%) compared to products11a,11b, and11d(Fig.3) can be explained by proposed partial catalyst inhibition due to nickel coordination with theN,N-dimethylamino group in substrate9c. Substrates9band9dproduced comparable yields of the alkylation products11b(94%) and11d(95%), respectively Fig.3. However, the N-PMP imine group seems the best choice for protecting the carbonyl group in alkylating substrates due to the significantly higher yield of compound9d(91%) compared to9b(24%) during preparation from furfural and the corresponding aromatic amines (Supplementary Information, Section S2.2), as well as the better crystallizability of the N-PMP imines derived from numerous aldehydes.

Based on the experimental results (Fig.3), compound9d, synthesized through the condensation of furfural withp-methoxyaniline, emerged as the most effective substrate for achieving selective C5-H alkylation of the furan ring. Consequently, theN-PMP group was identified as the optimal protecting group for nickel-catalyzed C5-H functionalizations involving furfural and related aldehyde substrates.

The reaction conditions were optimized (Table1and Supplementary TableS3). Nickel systems with phosphine ligands were found to be completely inactive (TableS3, entries 1-6). Among the well-defined Ni/NHC complexes7a–f(Table1, entries 1-6), complex7d(entry 4) was found to be the most efficient precatalyst in the presence of HCOONa as an activator. The inefficiency of complexes7a(entry 1) and7b(entry 2) may be related to the detrimental effect of the sigma-coordinated second NHC (in7a) or Cp ligand (in7b). The low efficiency of complexes7c(entry 3) and7e(entry 5), which have the same structural type as7d, may be explained by the less suitable steric parameters provided by theN-aryl substituents in the NHC ligands. These results agree with a previous report identifying mesityl-substituted NHCs as optimal ligands for the (NHC)Ni(Cp)Cl-catalyzed C–H alkylation of heteroaromatics with styrene14. We also tested complex7aas a self-activated precatalyst in strongly alkaline media usingtBuONa as an additive (the second NHC can serve as a sacrificial ligand, from Ni(II) to Ni(0) reductant, in alkaline medium)113,114, but the yield of11dwas moderate (entry 7) and decreased with prolonged reaction time (entry 8), apparently due to the instability of the reaction product11dunder harsh reaction conditions. Complex7b, which was reported as a thermally activated precatalyst due to the possibility of Ni(II) reduction to Ni(0) via reductive elimination of two Cp ligands at elevated temperatures18, was also found to be an underperforming precatalyst, as only a moderate yield of11dwas obtained (entry 9). Considering the results of the experiments described in entries 1–9 (Table1), the catalytic system consisting of complex7dand sodium formate was found to be the most effective. Different solvents were also tested, and 1,4-dioxane was found to be the best (compare entry 4 with entries 10–13). Increasing the reaction temperature from 110 °C to 120 °C (and higher) did not increase the yield, whereas decreasing the temperature to 100 °C (and lower) significantly decreased the yield (Table1, comparing entries 4, 14, and 15; Supplementary TableS3, entries 22–25). Therefore, 110 °C was selected as the optimal reaction temperature. Systematic variation of complex7dand HCOONa loading failed to improve the yield of11d(Supplementary TableS3, entries 26–28). The reaction time proved critical: shorter durations substantially reduced the yield (Supplementary TableS3, entries 29–30), while extending to 24 h afforded11din 98% GC-MS yield (91% isolated yield; Table1, entry 16). Control experiments confirmed the essential role of both7dand HCOONa, as no product formation occurred in the absence of either (Supplementary TableS3, entries 32-33). This requirement for sodium formate is consistent with its proposed role in reducing Ni(II) to active Ni(0) species via intermediate Ni-hydride complexes (e.g.,7f)14. Supporting this mechanism, preformed7fcatalyzed the reaction without HCOONa (Table1, entry 17). An in situ generated Ni/NHC system from NiCp2and IMes·HCl proved less effective than well-defined precatalyst7d(Table1, entries 16 vs 18). These results established the conditions of entry 16 (Table1) as optimal for the alkylation.

With the optimized conditions in hand, we explored the scope and limitations of the reaction (Fig.4). FuranN-arylimines9d–eand thiopheneN-arylimines9g–iwere investigated in the reactions with different alkenes (Supplementary Fig.S1). Arylation products such as11dand similar suffered from partial hydrolysis of the imine protecting group during isolation and purification (especially during column chromatography). Therefore, the primary reaction products were subjected to hydrolysis of the imine group with a 1 M aqueous HCl solution without isolation to give the target aldehydes3, which were isolated and purified. Substrates9d,9e,9g-iwere successfully alkylated with various styrenes and norbornene to give products3a–oin 31-90% isolated yields (Fig.4a). The presence of an aryl group at position 3 of the furan or thiophene ring did not significantly affect the reaction yields (products3f,3g,3mand3n), whereas all attempts to alkylate theN-PMP derivative of 4-phenylfurfural (9j, Supplementary Fig.S1) as well as theN-PMP derivative ofN-methylpyrrole (9k, Supplementary Fig.S1) were unsuccessful. Apparently, the reaction is highly sensitive to steric and, probably, electronic factors of the heteroaromatic substrate.

aNi/NHC catalyzed alkylation.bNi/NHC catalyzed alkenylation.aReaction conditions:7d(10 mol %), HCO2Na (0.25 mmol),9d–i(0.25 mmol),2a–f(0.3 mmol) or12a–h(0.5 mmol), dioxane (1 mL), 110 °C, argon atmosphere, 24 h, then hydrolysis with 1 M aq. HCl at 25 °C for 16 h; isolated yields are shown.bIsolated yields of a mixture of stereoisomers.cAt 140 °C ino-xylene.

Styrenes2a-e(Supplementary Fig.S1) reacted selectively to give branched regioisomers3a–g,i–n, which is consistent with previously reported regioselectivity for ligand-controlled Ni/NHC-catalyzed hydroarylation reactions (NHC = IMes or similar NHCs with moderate steric bulkiness) in the absence of special Lewis acid additives that can affect regioselectivity14,17,115–117. Aliphatic linear alkenes such as 1-hexene, acrylates, and stilbenes were nearly inactive and provided only trace yields of alkylation products (Supplementary Fig.S1). The same alkenes were found to be inactive in the alkylation of many other heteroaromatic substrates under similar conditions14. In contrast, norbornene, which has a more reactive double bond due to ring tension, gave product3hin 76% isolated yield. However, in the reaction with the thiophene derivative9g, norbornene gave only a moderate yield of the alkylation product3o(31%), presumably due to the lower reactivity of9gcompared to9d(~50% of the starting9gremained intact after the reaction) and the greater losses of norbornene due to side polymerization. Remarkably, the reaction involved only the C5-H bond of the furan (thiophene) ring for all alkenes. Products that might be formed via side activation of the imine C-H functional group, such as hydroalkenylation118,119, or reductive alkylation120,121, were not detected.

The scalability of the developed procedure was demonstrated by the gram-scale syntheses of compounds3aand3iin 79% and 72% yields, respectively (see SI, sections S2.6 and S2.7). Remarkably,p-methoxyaniline formed after hydrolysis of the alkylated imine intermediate can be recovered and reused. This was demonstrated in the gram-scale syntheses of compounds3aand3i. Aqueous HCl solutions formed after the isolation of products3aand3iwere alkalinized with aqueous NH3, andp-methoxyaniline was extracted with ether and then reacted with furfural or thiophene-2-carboxaldehyde to give starting compounds9dand9g, which were isolated (after crystallization from hexane) in 70% and 60% yields, respectively, and successfully used as substrates in the alkylation reactions without further purification.

In addition, substrates9d–iwere selectively alkenylated with internal alkynes12a-hto give products13a–qin 54-86% isolated yield (Fig.4b). A twofold molar ratio of alkyne to heterocyclic substrate was used in the alkenylation due to alkyne losses by side trimerization under the reaction conditions. Due to the reduced electrophilicity of alkynes containing TMS groups, the reaction with these alkynes was carried out at 140 °C in o-xylene to obtain better yields of compounds13c–e,k,l–n(Fig.4b). Alkenylation, in most cases, afforded theE-stereoisomer (with acis-orientation of the aryl or alkyl groups relative to the double bond in the alkenyl moiety) as the only isolated product. Only products13b(Z-isomer content ~15%) and13j(Z-isomer content ~20%) were isolated as mixtures of stereoisomers. This result is consistent with the commonly observed stereoselectivity of Ni-catalyzed hydroheteroarylations of alkynes, which typically affordE-stereoisomers as the dominant products14,27,122–124. Reactions with unsymmetrical alkynes containing a TMS group on one of the acetylenic carbons selectively afforded regioisomers with a TMS group on the ethylenic carbon distal to the furan(thiophene) moiety, in agreement with previously observed regioselectivity of Ni-catalyzed hydroheteroarylations of similar alkynes14,27,122,123.

The structures of compounds3a–oand13a–qwere unambiguously confirmed by NMR spectroscopy, including NOESY,1H-13C HSQC, and1H-13C HMBC experiments (see SI, section S5).

A plausible reaction mechanism (Fig.5a) involves the initial in situ formation of active Ni(0)/NHC complexes by reduction of complex7dwith sodium formate via the formation of the intermediate (NHC)Ni(Cp)H complex7f, which undergoes reductive elimination of cyclopentadiene to give active Ni(0)/NHC complexes such as14(L = cyclopentadiene or solvent, etc.), which enter the catalytic cycle14. Based on literature data, two alternative mechanisms of catalysis involving complex14, namely substrate C-H oxidative addition125,126and ligand-to-ligand hydrogen transfer (LLHT)126,127, can be postulated.

aProposed mechanism of Ni/NHC-catalyzed C-H alkylation.bKinetic isotope effect (KIE) measurement.cAttempted competitive C3-H alkylation.dObservation of C3-D for C3-H exchange.eThe suggested roots for catalyst deactivation.

The first mechanism, observed experimentally for Ni/NHC catalyzed reactions of some heteroaromatic substrates14,17,117,128–130, involves coordination of the substrate to the complex14to form the intermediate complexA. Of course, complexes with alternative coordination modes can also participate in the equilibrium with the intermediateAas resting states (as an example, Ni-N coordination in the apical position to the metal is shown inB, and similar interactions can occur in other structures, which are omitted for simplicity). ComplexAundergoes oxidative addition (OA) of the substrate C-H bond to form a heteroleptic nickel hydride complex15, which reversibly coordinates alkene (or alkyne) to form complex16. Subsequent insertion of alkene (or alkyne) into a Ni–H bond yields the organonickel intermediate17, which reductively eliminates the alkylation (or alkenylation) product11d. In this type of mechanism, the oxidative C-H addition is usually considered to be the rate-determining step.

The alternative LLHT mechanism, accepted for Ni/NHC catalyzed reactions of many heteroaromatic substrates13,127,131–135, involves sequential coordination of the substrate9dand alkene (or alkyne) with14to give the intermediate18, which undergoes concerted oxidative addition-migratory insertion to give the intermediate17in one step, without the formation of the hydride complexes15and16. In the LLHT mechanism, reductive elimination of the alkylation (or alkenylation) product127,132,134, or LLHT131,133,135, is typically rate-determining step.

To gain more insight into the reaction mechanism, we performed electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) and NMR spectroscopy studies of the reaction mixtures. We also conducted kinetic experiments with the deuterated substrate. Contrary to previous observations14,117,129, attempts to detect the hydride intermediate (15) by ¹H NMR were unsuccessful. In parallel experiments on the alkylation of9dand deuterated9d-D(5)with styrene (Fig.5b, Supplementary Fig.S4), we determined the kinetic isotope effect (KIE). The low value of the determined KIE = 1.08 suggests that the C-H activation is not involved in the rate-limiting step, making the LLHT mechanism more likely. However, only ~50% of the deuterium incorporation was observed in the coupling product11d-D(Scheme S1). The deuterium loss could be due to reversible oxidative addition of the substrate C − D bond to Ni with subsequent deuterium for protium exchange or, alternatively, ligand-to-ligand hydrogen transfer (LLHT) followed byβ-H elimination. Considering numerous literature data on Ni catalyzed hydroheteroarylation136, the widely accepted LLHT mechanism with the rate-limiting reductive elimination step seems to be the most likely reaction route for the alkylation of furfural imines. However, alternative oxidative C − H addition mechanism could not be completely ruled out.

Another interesting question concerns the origin of the high selectivity for C5-H alkylation/alkynylation and the absence of C3-H functionalization byproducts. In many metal-catalyzed C-H functionalizations, the imino group serves as a directing group104–109, suggesting that C3-H alkylation of the furan (or thiophene) core might be expected137,138. However, when substrate9l(where the C5 position of the furan is blocked by a methyl group) was subjected to alkylation, no C-H functionalization products were observed (Fig.5cand discussion in Supplementary Information, Section S4.2). Notably, alkylation of deuterium-labeled substrate9d-D(3)(with deuterium at the furan C3 position) yielded exclusively the C5-H alkylation product, yet over half of the deuterium was exchanged for protium. This implies reversible nickelation of the C3-D(H) bond (Fig.5dand Section S4.3). While C3-H metallation thus occurs, C3-alkylation products are conspicuously absent. We attribute this to the pronounced sensitivity of nickel-catalyzed C-H alkylation/alkenylation to steric constraints. Specifically, steric hindrance from the N-aryl imino group likely disfavors the formation of the requisite transition state involving the alkene (or alkyne) and C3-nickelated intermediates, thereby suppressing C3-H alkylation/alkenylation.

Plausible routes for catalyst deactivation include the formation of the H-NHC (6b) and R-NHC (19and20) coupling products101, as detected by the ESI-MS spectra of the reaction mixtures (Fig.5e, Supplementary Fig.S6). These deleterious NHC reductive elimination routes have been previously observed in heteroarylation reactions of alkenes and alkynes with various substrates14.

We also investigated the possible role of Ni nanoparticles (Ni NPs), which are expected to be formed by the decomposition of Ni/NHC complexes, in the catalysis of the investigated alkylation and alkenylation reactions. The sampling of colloidal metal particles from reaction mixtures after the reaction between compounds9dand2acatalyzed by complex7din the presence of HCOONa was carried out using a “nanofishing” technique. The “nanofishing” procedure is implemented by dipping a fresh thin carbon-coated grid directly into a reaction mixture to capture dynamic metal particles from the solution139. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study revealed the presence of metal-containing nanoparticles in the reaction mixture (Supplementary Fig.S7). The reaction solutions were centrifuged, black precipitates were collected, washed, and analyzed by energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX). The presence of Ni in the collected precipitate was clearly demonstrated (Supplementary Fig.S8). It should be noted that the formation of Ni NPs is not surprising, since such precedents are known for reactions involving Ni(0) species in catalytic process140,141. Participation of NHC-ligated Ni NPs in catalysis as alternative active centers140,142,143, or Ni NPs as metal reservoirs144, should not be completely excluded. Therefore, a hot-filtration test was performed to clarify the potential role of Ni NPs in the studied catalytic systems using the example of the reaction between compounds9dand2a(Supplementary Fig.S9). The reaction was carried out at 110 °C in an argon atmosphere in two parallel experiments. In the control experiment (without hot filtration of the reaction mixture), GC-MS analysis revealed a 47% yield of11dafter 8 h and a 97% yield after 24 h from the start. In the parallel experiment, the yield of11dalso reached about 50% initially. The reaction mixture was then subjected to hot filtration under an argon atmosphere to remove the catalyst. The filtrate was then transferred to a new reactor and subjected to further heating and stirring for another 16 h under identical conditions, resulting in a 79% yield of11dat the end of the experiment (Supplementary Fig.S9). The data suggest that the majority of the active nickel species are predominantly present in the solution. However, the decrease in11dyield after hot filtration does not exclude the possibility of a cocktail-type mechanism involving both homogeneous and nanoparticulate Ni/NHC active species (e.g., NHC-ligated Ni NPs). Another proposed reason for the decrease in11dyield after hot filtration could be the partial decomposition of active Ni/NHC complexes by the filter material (celite) used in the hot filtration (see discussion in SI, section S4.6). Overall, the data obtained suggest that catalysis with homogeneous Ni/NHC complexes dominates.

The present study introduces an efficient approach to overcome the limitations of the Ni/NHC catalytic systems in reactions of highly active aldehyde substrates, leading to catalyst deactivation. The approach utilizes N-aryl imine protection of the formyl group to enable distal C(sp²)-H functionalization of the heteroaromatic core under Ni catalysis. While imine groups have been widely used as N-donor directing or functional groups in C-H functionalization chemistry, their utility as protective groups in metal-catalyzed C-H transformations has remained largely unexplored.

An efficient method for the C5-H alkylation of furan- and thiophene-2-carboxaldehydes with styrenes and norbornene under Ni/NHC catalysis has been developed. The key to the process is the use of a recyclableN-PMP imine protecting group. Thorough studies of the reaction have shown that the protecting group allows suppression of deleterious benzoin condensation, which leads to rapid decomposition of aldehyde substrates. In addition, N-PMP protection prevents deactivation of the catalytic system by highly reactive aldehydes that decompose Ni/NHC complexes by trapping NHC ligands in the Breslow intermediates. The developed approach is also suitable for the synthesis of C5-alkenylated derivatives of furfural and thiophene-2-carboxaldehyde via reactions with internal alkynes. Other practical advantages of theN-PMP imine protecting group include the simplicity of its installation (by condensation of the corresponding aldehyde withp-methoxyaniline), the readiness of its removal (by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis without isolation of intermediate alkylated and alkenylated imines), and the possibility of recovering and reusing anisidine after deprotection of the formyl group.

The Ni/NHC catalytic system is easily generated from bench-stable, air-tolerant (IMes)Ni(Cp)Cl precatalyst and sodium formate, the Ni(II) to Ni(0) reductant, without the use of unstable Ni(0) sources or hazardous Ni(II) reductants.

To the best of our knowledge, the developed approach represents the first example of the synthesis of C5-alkylated furfurals and thiophene-2-carboxaldehydes via metal-catalyzed hydroheteroarylation with alkenes.

An oven-dried vial equipped with a magnetic stirring bar and a septum was charged with7d(12 mg, 0.025 mmol, 10 mol %), compound9d,e,g–i(0.25 mmol), alkene2a–f(0.3 mmol) and dioxane (1 mL). The resulting mixture was purged with argon through a syringe via a septum and then heated at 110 °C with vigorous stirring within 24 h (see Fig.4a). After cooling to room temperature, the mixture was diluted with dioxane (3 mL) and filtered through a short pad of Celite. The solvent was then rotary evaporated under vacuum, and the residue was dissolved in diethyl ether (4 mL). 1 M aqueous HCl (4 mL) was added to the ether solution, and the mixture was stirred overnight at 25 °C. The ether layer was separated by decanting. The aqueous layer was extracted with diethyl ether (3 × 5 mL). The ether solution separated from the reaction mixture, and the extracts were combined, dried over MgSO4and rotary evaporated to dryness. The oily residue obtained was chromatographed on SiO2(elution with hexane-EtOAc 10:1 mixture) to obtain desired products3a–o.

An oven-dried vial equipped with a magnetic stirring bar and a septum was charged with7d(12 mg, 0.025 mmol, 10 mol %), compound9d–i(0.25 mmol), alkyne12a–i(0.5 mmol) and dioxane (1 mL, for alkyne12a–c,h,i) oro-xylene (1 mL, for alkyne12d–g). The resulting mixture was purged with argon through a syringe via a septum and then heated at 110 °C (for dioxane) or 140 °C (foro-xylene) with vigorous stirring within 24 h (see Fig.4b). The resulting mixture was then treated as described for the synthesis of products13a–q.

The authors acknowledge the Russian Science Foundation (RSF grant no. 24-43-00081) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC grant 22361132543) for joint financial support of this work. The authors also thank the Shared Research Center “Nanotechnologies” of the Platov South-Russian State Polytechnic University and the Shared Research Center of Zelinsky Institute of Organic Chemistry for analytical services.