Lysine malonylation is a post-translational modification
in which
a malonyl group, characterized by a negatively charged carboxylate,
is covalently attached to the ε-amino side chain of lysine,
influencing protein structure and function. Our laboratory identified
Mak upregulation in cartilage under aging and obesity, contributing
to osteoarthritis (OA). Current antibody-based detection methods face
limitations in identifying Mak targets. Here, we introduce an alkyne-functionalized
probe, MA-diyne, which metabolically incorporates into proteins, enabling
copper­(I) ion-catalyzed click reactions to conjugate labeled proteins
with azide-based fluorescent dyes or affinity purification tags. In-gel
fluorescence confirms MA-diyne incorporation into proteins across
various cell types and species, including mouse chondrocytes, adipocytes,
HEK293T cells, and . Pull-down experiments identified known Mak proteins, such as GAPDH
and Aldolase. The extent of MA-diyne modification was higher in Sirtuin
5-deficient cells, suggesting these modified proteins are Sirtuin
5 substrates. Pulse-chase experiments confirmed the dynamic nature
of the protein malonylation. Quantitative proteomics identified 1136
proteins corresponding to 8903 peptides, with 429 proteins showing
a 1-fold increase in the labeled group. Sirtuin 5 regulated 374 of
these proteins. Pull down of newly identified proteins, such as β-actin
and Stat3, was also done. This study highlights MA-diyne as a powerful
chemical tool to investigate the molecular targets and functions of
lysine malonylation under OA conditions.

Post-translational modification
of proteins refers to the biochemical
covalent, enzymatic, and nonenzymatic addition of functional groups
on proteins following their synthesis from ribosomes. These functional groups can be small electrophilic biochemical
metabolites like phosphate, sugars, nucleotides, methyl group, and
acetyl group, long chain/short chain acyl chains like palmitoyl, malonyl
groups, radicals generated from redox reactions likeS-nitrosylation (SNO) andS-glutathionylation, etc. Post-translational modifications induce changes
in amino acid chemical properties such as deamination, deamidation,
citrullination, and oxidation as well as protein autocatalysis that
results in protein backbone cleavage. It offers complex and diverse
functional roles to the existing proteome by regulating protein activity,
structure, and conformation, its location, and molecular interactions. Post-translational covalent modification of proteins
is fundamental to numerous cellular and biological functions. It plays
a significant role in regulating normal cell physiology as well as
the pathogenesis of diseases. Lysine malonylation
(Mak) is a reversible protein post-translational modification wherein
a malonyl group is added to the ε-amino group of the lysine
residue in a protein. The addition of a negatively charged carboxylate
group to the protein imparts significant changes in the protein’s
structure and function. The reversible
protein malonylation is theoretically regulated by acyltransferases
and deacylases. The enzymes responsible for catalyzing the transfer
of a malonyl group remain largely unidentified. However, recent work
by Zang et al. has provided evidence that KAT2A is involved in histone
malonylation. Meanwhile, Sirtuin 5 (Sirt5),
a class III lysine deacetylases member, is known for its lysine demalonylation
activity along with its lysine desuccinylation function.,Our lab has previously demonstrated that deficiency of Sirt5 in
mouse primary chondrocytes increases the global protein MaK level
and disrupts cellular metabolism. Identification
of the protein substrates of Sirt5 is crucial for further elucidating
the function of malonylation on the cellular metabolism and pinpointing
the downstream targets. The antimalonyl lysine antibody has been used
previously to enrich and identify several malonylated proteins.−Antibody-based enrichment is generally based on the development
of different antibody domains specific to targeting antigens with
specific PTM, followed by immunoaffinity pull-down of target peptides
from the protein lysates. However, this strategy suffers from a lack
of specificity by missing some of the target PTM site due to the presence
of adjacent PTM present on the same sequence. To overcome this challenge, we took a chemical approach, utilizing
an alkyne functionalized chemical probe to efficiently detect and
quantify protein substrates of lysine malonylation through fluorescence
visualization and further identify them using a quantitative proteomics
approach (FigureB).
An alkyne functionalized probe allows metabolic detection of protein
substrates by utilizing the copper­(I) ion-catalyzed alkyne azide cycloaddition
click chemistry to conjugate the labeled proteins with azide-fluorescent
dyes or affinity purification tags. This
approach has been widely utilized in identifying several other types
of PTMs including lipidation like myristoylation,,succinylation,,acetylation,,and glycosylation.,Previously, Bao et al. developed
a malonic acid-based chemical probe called MalAM-yne to detect lysine
malonylation. In this study, we designed
and synthesized a novel Meldrum’s acid-based probe, i.e., MA-diyne.
Meldrum’s acid or isopropylidene malonate is a condensation
product of malonic acid and acetone. We developed this new probe by
functionalizing Meldrum acid or isopropylidene malonate with alkynylation
under control conditions (FigureA). We hypothesize that Meldrum acid will be readily
absorbed into the cells due to its cyclic structure and subsequently
will be linearized to form a malonyl group by an unknown action of
intracellular esterases, thus leading to effective detection and identification
of the malonylated proteins.

(A) Design, synthesis, and characterization
of MA-diyne. (B) Schematic
description of the workflow to detect and identify lysine malonylated
proteins using MA-diyne.

Bao et al. 2013 were the first to report a chemical probe with
an alkyne handle on the malonate group named Mal-yne. However, they modified this probe to increase cell permeability
by masking the carboxylate sides with two acetoxymethyl groups and
called it MalAM-yne. In this report, we selected an alternative approach
by adding an alkyne handle to Meldrum acid or isopropylidene malonate.,The high reactivity of this molecule is attributed to the methylene
group present between the carbonyl groups, and this site was utilized
to add the propargyl unit to Meldrum acid under controlled conditions.
Thereby, we generated dipropargyl Meldrum acid or MA-diyne through
the following chemical synthesis (FigureA). The synthesis involves dialkynylation
on commercially available Meldrum acid. The reaction is performed
under mild conditions such as DIPEA (diisopropyl ethylamine) with
anhydrous DMF solvent at room temperature. The reaction is stirred
for 24 h. After the work-up of the reaction, the product is taken
for purification. The initial purification of the MA-diyne product
is carried out with normal SiO2, which leads to ring-opening
of MA-diyne due to its acidity. Later, SiO2is neutralized
with triethylamine, and then, purification is carried out. The pure
product is characterized by1H NMR spectroscopy [1H NMR (400 MHz): δ 1.84 (s, 6H), 2.18, (t,J= 5.2 Hz, 2H), 2.88 (d,J= 2.8 Hz, 4H) ppm. The
respective assignments and full spectra of MA-diyne are given as theSupporting Information(Schemes SF1 and SF2).
The synthesized probe showed two distinct quaternary carbons: (i)
near two oxygen atoms and (ii) near two carbonyl groups. The same
quaternary peaks were observed in the13C NMR spectrum:
one at 107 ppm, which is near oxygen atoms, and another at 53.43 ppm,
which is near carbonyl groups. This confirms dipropargylation in the
active methylene carbon of Meldrum’s acid. The13C NMR spectrum peaks are depicted inScheme SF3. Although mass spectrum analysis of dipropargyl Meldrum’s
acid revealed no M+ peak for 220.07, we observed smaller fragments
(sized 192.04, 148.05, 92.06, and 203.28) as shown inScheme SF4. The reasons for the fragmentation
of the parent molecule could be attributed to the labile nature of
the lactone structure. However, the occurrence of smaller fragments
indirectly confirms the expected compound. The previous method by
Bao et al. 2013 involves a three-step strategy, where the first step
is propargylation of diethyl malonate followed by hydrolysis to propargylated
malonic acid with a yield of 30%. Then, propargylated malonic acid
is further taken for masking the carboxylate groups with bromomethyl
acetate under ambient temperature, resulting in the product formation
of the Mal-yne probe with a yield of 77%. As a result, the reported
method gives an overall yield of 23%. MA-diyne, on the other hand, was synthesized via a streamlined synthetic
approach, employing dialkynylation of Meldrum’s acid, which
is commercially available. This method proved both straightforward
(a single-step process) and expeditious, achieving a maximum yield
of 40%, markedly surpassing the 23% yield (overall) obtained with
MalAM-yne. However, the yield limitation to 40% in the present method
arises from the ring-opening reaction of Meldrum’s acid under
the specified conditions. Furthermore, cyclic structures are seen
with improved cell permeability due to their reduced conformational
flexibility.−Therefore, we hypothesized that Meldrum acid due
to its cyclic structure will be readily taken into the cell. MA-diyne
demonstrated comparable labeling efficiency over a 0.5–1 h
duration to MalAM-yne, without necessitating the protection or masking
of Mal-yne’s carboxylate groups with two acetoxymethyl (AM)
substituents (as required to form MalAM-yne). This suggests efficient
cellular uptake. The enhanced permeability of MA-diyne may be ascribed
to the stabilization of its carboxylate groups within a cyclic structure.

Our first inquest was to analyze whether
MA-diyne can be metabolically incorporated into proteins similarly
to malonyl-CoA. Therefore, we incubated mouse primary chondrocytes
with different concentrations (0–200 μM) of MA-diyne
in complete medium for 6 h (a working stock of 100 mM was prepared
by dissolving MA-diyne in DMSO; DMSO was taken as the control). The
protein lysate was collected after harvesting the cells and was subjected
to azide–alkyne click chemistry to conjugate the alkyne side
group with IR680 azide dye. The clicked proteins were then resolved
on SDS-PAGE and scanned using an in-gel IR fluorescence imager. The
result showed that there was a dose-dependent increase of MA-diyne
labeling of global proteins with the optimal concentration at less
than 50 μM MA-diyne (FigureA). To analyze the time required for the metabolic
labeling, a time-dependent experiment was conducted by incubating
the primary chondrocytes with 100 μM of MA-diyne at different
time points ranging from 0 to 12 h. MA-diyne was able to efficiently
label the proteins in no more than 2 h (FigureB). Interestingly, we observed that MA-diyne
showed more bands in gel fluorescence than in Western blot analysis
of the same proteins from primary chondrocytes using a commercial
anti-KMal antibody (Figure S1). The dose-
and time-dependent experiment demonstrated the efficient labeling
of proteins by MA-diyne. MA-diyne employs a strategy of metabolic
labeling of proteins. Since malonyl-CoA can target both cysteine and
lysine residues due to their nucleophilic properties, it is imperative
to recognize that MA-diyne may label both amino acids. In fact, previous
studies have shown that malonylation of a single cysteine residue
is critical for the activity enzymes CPT1 (a pivotal enzyme facilitating the translocation of long-chain fatty
acids from the cytoplasm to the mitochondrial matrix, modulated by
its physiological inhibitor, malonyl-CoA) and DpgA (a bacterial type III polyketide synthase that decarboxylates
and concatenates four malonyl-CoA units to yield 3,5-dihydroxyphenylacetyl-CoA).
To elucidate the chemoselectivity of MA-diyne toward lysine, we conducted
a labeling experiment in the presence and absence of hydroxylamine,
a chemical to mask cysteine residues. As depicted inFigure S2A,B, the metabolic labeling exhibited minimal reduction
when MA-diyne-labeled protein lysates were subjected to incubation
with 1 M hydroxylamine at 95 °C for 5 min. This observation suggests
that although MA-diyne can label both lysine and cysteine side chains
on proteins, it can predominantly label lysine side chains with a
markedly greater propensity than it can cysteine groups. Another possibility
is that the lower abundance of cysteines than of lysines in the protein
may result in only a minimal reduction in labeling when cysteines
are masked by hydroxylamine. Further studies are warranted to investigate
this possibility in more detail.

Assessment of the ability of MA-diyne
to metabolically label proteins.
(A) Mouse primary chondrocytes were incubated with the indicated concentration
of MA-diyne for 6 h. The cell lysates were then clicked with IR680-azide
followed by in-gel fluorescence analysis. (B) Mouse primary chondrocytes
were incubated with 100 μM MA-diyne for the indicated time points.
Cell lysates were then clicked with IR680-azide and in-gel fluorescence
analyses. β actin was used as a loading control. (C) Confocal
microscopic fluorescence image depicting the ready uptake of the MA-diyne
into the cells and subcellular localization of malonylated proteins
in the primary chondrocytes. The primary chondrocytes grown on coverslips
were labeled with 100 μM MA-diyne for 6 h and then subjected
to click chemistry with Carboxyrhodamine 110 Azide (fluorescein isothiocyanate-FITC
tag) after fixing and permeabilization. Scale bar: 50 μM. (D)
Box plot showing the concentration of intracellular malonyl-CoA in
the cells after incubation with different concentrations of MA-diyne
for 4 h.n= 4. Data are presented as mean ±
SEM. Three group comparisons were evaluated using two-way ANOVA. Significance
is noted as nsp> 0.05, *p<
0.05, and **p< 0.01.

To confirm that the signal achieved in the primary
chondrocytes
after treatment with MA-diyne is due to metabolic labeling and not
to nonspecific binding, we used qualitative fluorescence imaging to
visualize the labeled proteins. The primary chondrocytes were cultured
on coverslips overnight and treated with different doses of MA-diyne
for 6 h. The cells were immediately fixed using ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde
and then permeabilized. The cells were then subjected to a click reaction
using Carboxyrhodamine 110 Azide for 1 h. The cells on the coverslips
were mounted on clean glass slides using a mounting reagent with DAPI.
Control samples were generated by performing the same procedure without
MA-diyne or Carboxyrhodamine 110 Azide. The slides were imaged using
Nikon A1R confocal microscopy under 60× magnification (FiguresC andS3). MA-diyne was found to be rapidly absorbed
into the cells, which was demonstrated by the intensity of labeling
only in the samples treated with MA-diyne followed by the click reaction
with Carboxyrhodamine 110 Azide but not in the control samples incubated
with Carboxyrhodamine 110 Azide only or samples treated with only
MA-diyne (Figure S3). We observed widespread
protein labeling in various cell compartments, prompting us to conduct
quantitative proteomics. However, to ensure the labeling is due to
the malonyl-CoA formed by the acyclization of Meldrum acid, we estimated
the concentration of malonyl-CoA formed in the cells using an ELISA
kit after incubating the cells with MA-diyne in different concentrations
and compared it with that in control cells without MA-diyne. We observed
a significant increase in the concentration of malonyl CoA at 100
μM. Here, it is noteworthy to state the limitation of the ELISA
kit in estimating the malonyl CoA in the alkyne form. Nevertheless,
as protein labeling by MA-diyne intensifies with prolonged incubation,
the measured malonyl-CoA likely reflects the residual malonyl-CoA
remaining after conjugation with proteins rather than the total malonyl-CoA
produced from the linearization of MA-diyne.

Lysine modifications like succinylation, glutarylation, and malonylation
are reversible forms of protein post-translational modifications.,,Although the enzyme responsible
for adding a malonyl group to the proteins is still unknown, Sirtuin
5 (Sirt5) has been well-documented as the enzyme responsible for removing
this modification.,To examine whether the labeling
by MA-diyne is also reversible, we conducted a pulse-chase experiment.
The wild type and Sirt5 knockdown primary chondrocytes were first
incubated with 200 μM MA-diyne for 1 h. The cells were then
washed and chased with 200 μM Meldrum acid for 0–5 h.
The cells were harvested at different time points, and the protein
lysates were conjugated with IR680-azide dye. The in-gel fluorescence
imaging reveals that the labeling signal by MA-diyne in wild-type
primary chondrocytes started fading after 0.5 h of Meldrum acid incubation,
indicating the removal of MA-diyne labeling from the proteins (FiguresA andS4). In comparison, in Sirt5 knockdown cells,
the labeling signal with MA-diyne became more intense after 0.5 h
than the baseline level, and there is less removal of MA-diyne from
the labeled proteins than from the wild-type cells (FiguresB andS4). We also noticed that the labeling by MA-diyne was not
modulated by the endogenous levels of malonyl-CoA, evidenced by no
difference between wild type cells and cells deficient of acetyl-CoA
carboxylase (ACC1), an enzyme that produces malonyl-CoA (Figure S5). These results suggested that the
metabolically modified proteins by MA-diyne could be substrates of
Sirt5 demalonylase and the process is reversible.

Pulse-chase experiment
to determine the dynamic nature of lysine
malonylation. Wild-type mouse primary chondrocytes (A) and Sirt5 KD
primary chondrocytes (B) were labeled with 200 μM MA-diyne for
1 h and then pulse chased with 200 μM Meldrum acid (precursor).
The lysates were collected at the indicated time points followed by
a click reaction with IR680-azide and in gel fluorescence analysis.
β actin was used as a loading control. The same blot was probed
with an anti-Sirt5 antibody to quantify the knockdown efficiency.

Our previous studies have demonstrated
the important role of Sirt5 in chondrocyte metabolism by regulating
the malonylation of metabolic enzymes.−We have also used proteomics
to identify the malonylome in chondrocytes using the traditional Kmal
PTMscan antibody-based enrichment method. We reported the enrichment of 1000 peptides corresponding to 469
proteins. Herein this report, we applied a chemoproteomics-based approach
to enrich malonylated proteins from primary chondrocytes using MA-diyne.
Wild type and Sirt5 knockdown primary chondrocytes were labeled with
MA-diyne (100 μM) for 6 h, and then, the protein lysates were
conjugated to biotin azide through an azide–alkyne copper cycloaddition
reaction. The biotin-conjugated proteins were then immunoprecipitated
using avidin agarose beads. The beads were thoroughly washed with
HPLC water to prevent detergent or protease inhibitor contamination
in the LC–MS, followed by the addition of a 9 M urea wash.
The beads were then subjected to reductive alkylation with dithiothreitol
(DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA), on-bead trypsin digestion, and desalting.
The enriched peptides were then subjected to bottom-up quantitative
proteomics on an Orbitrap Astral Instrument. A total of 1136 proteins
corresponding to 8903 peptides across all samples (Supporting Informationexcel 1) were identified, which was
2.4 times more than the proteins we identified before using Kmal PTMscan
antibody enrichment. 430 proteins were
seen to show a more than 1-fold increase in the probe group in comparison
to the control group with more than 6 unique peptides (Supporting Informationexcel 2). This indicated
that MA-diyne could enrich malonylated proteins. The enrichment of
proteins in the control group accounts for the endogenously biotinylated
proteins that might have been enriched with avidin beads. Furthermore,
387 out of the 430 proteins were found to have a more than 1-fold
increase in the Sirt5 knockdown + MA-diyne group in comparison to
the wild type + MA-diyne group (Supporting Informationexcel 2). This indicates that Ma-diyne successfully enriched proteins
that are regulated by Sirt5 demalonylase enzyme. It is possible that
MA-diyne may nonspecifically bind to other protein residues due to
the structural difference of Meldrum acid (precursor of MA-diyne)
from malonic acid. Therefore, we compared the 8903 peptides to those
modified sites identified by Kmal PTMscan antibody enrichment in our
previous study. Interestingly, some of the peptides sequences identified
in MA-diyne enrichment matched with the sequence identified in the
LC–MS/MS data acquired after enrichment with the Kmal PTMscan
antibody (Table). All these observations indicate that MA-diyne
can efficiently detect and identify lysine malonylated proteins, though
we still could completely exclude the possibility of nonspecific binding.
Since our data lack site-specific identification of malonylation,
our lab is currently exploring alternative proteomic approaches to
identify malonylated sites on proteins detected by MA-diyne in MA-diyne-treated
primary chondrocytes. Further, these proteins will be pulled down
using enrichment tags and analyzed by LC–MS/MS for the signature
satellite peaks.

We then conducted a pull-down experiment to validate
further that
MA-diyne could enrich malonylated proteins. The eluted protein from
the avidin beads in a separate experiment were resolved on the SDS-PAGE
followed by immunoblotting against antibodies for some already known
malonylated proteins, ALDOA (fructose-bisphosphate aldolase A) and GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase). The detection of GAPDH and ALDOA by Western
blot analysis of the eluted proteins from the beads (FigureA) confirmed that MA-diyne
can indeed enrich malonylated proteins. We could also pull down other
novel proteins in our proteomics list like Stat3 and β actin
that have not been reported before (FigureB). Furthermore, we also experimented to
validate the chemoselectivity of MA-diyne by introducing a single
amino acid mutation in the GAPDH gene at position 184 by replacing
lysine amino acid with glutamate amino acid. The primary chondrocytes were transfected with wild type GAPDH as
well as GAPDH K184E plasmids, and then, the cells were incubated with
MA-diyne and the protein lysates were tagged with biotin azide via
a click reaction followed by avidin beads enrichment. The eluted proteins
from the avidin beads were subjected to Western blot and probed for
the anti-GAPDH antibody.FigureC demonstrates that MA-diyne was unable to label GAPDH
with single amino acid mutation of K184E in comparison to wild GAPDH,
suggesting the chemoselectivity of MA-diyne to the lysine residue.

Validation
of lysine malonylated protein targets of MA-diyne. (A)
Pull down of known malonylated proteins such as GAPDH and Aldolase
A after enrichment using avidin beads.n= 2. (B)
Pull down of newly identified proteins after MA-diyne enrichment.n= 2. (C) Pull-down of MA-diyne labeled GAPDH protein after
overexpressing GAPDH wild type and GAPDH K184E plasmids in primary
chondrocytes. Primary chondrocytes were overexpressed with GAPDH wild
type and GAPDH K184E plasmids for 48 h and then labeled with MA-diyne.
The protein lysates were clicked with biotin azide, and avidin beads
were used to enrich the biotinylated proteins. The elute proteins
from the avidin beads were resolved on SDS Gel and then transferred
on a PVDF membrane. The blot was probed for anti-GAPDH antibodies.
(D) Pie chart depicting the percentage of malonylated proteins found
in different subcellular compartments by GO analysis. (E) Distribution
of enriched proteins based on their biological process by GO analysis,
(F) KEGG pathway analysis of the enriched proteins.pvalue < 0.05.

Gene ontology (GO) and pathway analysis of the
identified proteins
revealed that the malonylated proteins are localized differentially
in various subcellular compartments including the cytoplasm, plasma
membranes, endoplasmic reticulum, nucleus, mitochondria, and Golgi
apparatus of the primary chondrocytes (FigureD andSupplementaryexcel 3). These findings align with similar subcellular localization
patterns of malonylated proteins observed in other cell types, such
as plants, prokaryotes, parasites, and mammalian cells. GO analysis based on the biological processes
revealed that the identified malonylated proteins belonged to processes
related to musculoskeletal tissues like collagen biosynthesis and
ossification. Additionally, it was revealed that malonylated proteins
are highly involved in glucose, amino acid, and pyruvate metabolic
and lipid transport processes. The identified proteins are also enriched
in biological processes like ribose phosphate metabolism, ATP production,
TCA cycle, glycolysis, and oxidative phosphorylation (FigureE andSupplementary excel 4). These findings are consistent with previous reports
on the involvement of lysine malonylation in regulation of metabolic
disorders like type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular
diseases, osteoarthritis,,etc. We also observed the role of malonylated proteins in the mechanisms
related to the quality control of proteins such as response to endoplasmic
reticulum stress, autophagy, and proteasome-mediated protein processing (FigureE andSupplementary excel 5). KEGG analysis of the
identified malonylated proteins revealed regulation of several signaling
pathways like VEGF, Wnt signaling, cGMP-PKG, PI3K-AKT, estrogen signaling,
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance, growth hormone synthesis
and secretion, phospholipase D signaling pathways, etc (FigureF andSupplementary excel 5).

To assess the applicability
of the MA-diyne probe in detecting malonylated proteins in different
types of cells, we analyzed the metabolic labeling profile of MA-diyne
in subcutaneous primary adipocytes (FigureA) and HEK 293T cell lines (FigureB). Both cells exhibited robust
MA-diyne signaling compared to the control, suggesting successful
metabolic incorporation of MA-diyne into cellular proteins. In addition,
we assessed whether MA-diyne can be used to metabolically label proteins
of . We incubated live with 1 mM MA-diyne for 6 h with constant
shaking and then lysed the worms to extract proteins. The proteins
were then conjugated with the IR680 azide. In-gel fluorescence analysis
revealed that MA-diyne resulted in a robust labeling of malonylated
proteins (FigureC).
The route for the metabolic labeling is unclear, but it is assumed
that MA-diyne could have penetrated cells via either the esophageal route or epidermal absorption/passive
diffusion.

MA-diyne can detect lysine malonylated proteins in other cells
like primary subcutaneous adipocytes, HEK293T cells, and ,n= 2.

In summary, we have developed
a novel chemical probe MA-diyne for
identifying and quantifying the protein malonylation in primary chondrocytes
and several other types of cells. This probe was synthesized by adding
a propargyl group to the Meldrum acid for utilizing the conventional
chemoproteomic approach to pull down the malonylated proteins. MA-diyne
was observed to be readily uptaken into the cells, and after getting
acyclized to malonyl-CoA by the action of intracellular esterases,
it then metabolically labeled the proteins. It was also observed that
labeling by MA-diyne was dynamic and regulated by the demalonylase
enzyme, Sirt5. Moreover, the labeling by MA-diyne was observed to
be nonenzymatic and not dependent on the endogenous levels of malonyl
CoA. Quantitative proteomics could identify a significantly larger
number of proteins than our previous attempt with the Kmal PTMscan
antibody. Moreover, this further enables us to validate the enzymatic
function of several identified metabolic proteins and their role in
the progression of osteoarthritis.

To a stirred
solution of Meldrum acid (1.0 g, 6.94 mmol, 1.0 equiv) in DMF (10
mL) was added DIPEA (6.04 mL, 34.7 mmol, 5.0 equiv) followed by propargyl
bromide (0.79 mL, 10.41 mmol, 1.5 equiv) at room temperature under
an inert atmosphere. The resulting reaction mixture was allowed to
stir at room temperature for 24 h. The reaction mixture was then diluted
with cold water (100 mL) and extracted with EtOAc (2 × 50 mL).
The combined organic extracts were washed with brine solution (100
mL), dried over anhydrous Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated
under reduced pressure to obtain the crude. The crude was purified
by flash column chromatography [eluent: 1% MeOH in DCM] to afford
dialkynylated Meldrum acid (460 mg, 40% yield) as an off-white solid.

Primary mouse chondrocytes were isolated from the articular cartilage
of the knee joints obtained from the ∼7 days-old C57BL-6 mice
according to the previously mentioned protocol. Briefly, the articular cartilage from the tibia and femur
part was extracted from the knee joints of ∼7 day-old C57BL-6
mice and dipped in a serum-free Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM) (Life Technology, 10567014) solution at room temperature.
After thorough washes with 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS),
cartilage tissues were incubated in 3 mg/mL Collagenase D (Roche)
in serum-free DMEM solution for 45 min twice and then transferred
to overnight incubation in 0.5 mg/mL Collagenase D in DMEM solution
supplemented with 3% Liberase TL (Sigma). The next day, tissues were
homogenized by using pipettes to release and suspend the cells multiple
times. Finally, the homogenate was filtered through a 40 μm
strainer to remove large debris and resuspended in fresh DMEM supplemented
with 10% FBS and 1% pen–strep solution. The suspension of cells
was then plated in 60 mm cell culture dishes and allowed to expand
as passage zero cells at 37 °C and 5% CO2.

Other
cell lines such as primary mouse adipocytes and HEK293T were also
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% pen–strep
solution.

The cells were treated with MA-diyne as prescribed. The same volume
of DMSO was used as a negative control. After the stipulated incubation
time for metabolic labeling, cells were washed with ice-cold 1×
PBS three times and scraped using a plastic scraper in 1× PBS.
The cells were collected in a 1.5 mL centrifuge tube and centrifuged
at 3000 rpm. The cell pellet thus obtained was lysed using ice-cold
lysis buffer (1% NP 40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mMN-(2-hydroxyethyl)­piperazine-N′-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), 2 mM MgCl2, 20% Glycerol pH 7.4, EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail) for
15 min on ice, followed by centrifugation at 16,000gfor 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected, and protein
concentration was estimated using a BCA protein estimation kit (Pierce).
The cell lysates were then diluted using dilution buffer (150 mM NaCl,
50 mM HEPES, 2 mM MgCl2, 20% glycerol pH 7.4, EDTA-free protease inhibitor
cocktail) to give the final concentration of 1.5 mg/mL for the click
reaction.

The procedure for the CuAAC click chemistry
reaction with protein lysates was performed as described in Yang et
al. 2010 with slight modification. Briefly,
a click reaction master mixture for the required volume of protein
lysates was prepared by mixing the reagents in the following order:
100 μM IR680 azide dye (click chemistry tools) for in-gel fluorescence/100
μM Biotin azide (Click chemistry tools) for streptavidin enrichment
and Western blotting, 100 μM tris­((1-benzyl-4-triazolyl)­methyl)­amine
(TBTA) (Click chemistry tools), 1 mM tris­(carboxyethyl)­phosphine (TCEP)
(Sigma), and 1 mM CuSO4. The protein lysates were incubated
with the click reaction master mix for 1.5 h at room temperature.

After the protein was incubated with the click reaction mixture
for 1.5 h, 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone were used to stop/quench
the reaction. The proteins were then incubated at −20 °C
overnight to precipitate the proteins. The protein acetone solution
was centrifuged at 6000gfor 5 min at 4 °C.
The obtained pellet was washed with ice-cold methanol once and then
air-dried for 10 min. The protein pellets were solubilized in 1×
loading buffer with 100 mM DTT, heated at 95 °C for 10 min, and
then resolved in 10% SDS PAGE gel. The labeled proteins were visualized
by scanning the gel under the Odyssey CLx Imaging System (excitation
maxima-672 nm, emission maxima- 694 nm).

Wild-type
primary chondrocytes and Sirt5KO cells were isolated from the wild-type
or the Sirt5 conditional knockout (Sirt5-CKO-Aggrecan-CreERT2; Sirt5flox/flox) mice, respectively. The primary chondrocyte
cells (wild type and SirtKO) were treated with 4-hydroxy tamoxifen
for 48 h to induce the cre-lox system. The cells were labeled with
200 μM MA-diyne for 1 h. The medium was removed, and the cells
were washed thrice with 1× PBS to ensure removal of residual
MA-diyne. Fresh medium supplemented with Meldrum acid (200 μM)
was added to the cells. The cells were extracted at different time
points (0–5 h). The cells were then subjected to protein lysis
as described earlier, followed by the click reaction with IR680 azide.

The cells were cultured on sterile coverslips in 6-well culture
dishes. The cells were treated with different concentrations of MA-diyne
for 6 h and washed with 1× PBS. The cells were then fixed using
ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde solution for 20 min at 4 °C. The
cells on coverslips were then washed thoroughly with ice-cold 1×
PBS several times and permeabilized using 0.25% triton X-100 prepared
in 1× PBS for 25 min at room temperature. The cells were later
washed with 1× PBS, and then, 5% bovine serum albumin blocking
buffer was added to the wells and left for shaking at room temperature
for another 30 min. The cells were then incubated with the click reaction
mix containing 100 μM Carboxyrhodamine 110 Azide, 100 μM
TBTA, 1 mM TCEP, and 1 mM CuSO4in PBS for 1 h. Finally,
cells were washed with 1× PBS to remove the remaining staining,
and coverslips were mounted on clean glass slides with the DAPI-containing
mounting reagent. The image was collected in a Nikon A1R confocal
microscope at 60× magnification.

The cells were treated with
MA-diyne for 2–4 h at different concentrations. After the incubation,
cells were trypsinized and resuspended in 1× PBS at a concentration
of 1 × 106cells/mL. The cells were lyzed by repeated
freeze–thaw cycles and centrifuged at 2000–3000 rpm
for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected to estimate
the malonyl CoA concentration using the mouse malonyl CoA ELISA kit
(MyBioSource). The instructions followed for the experiment were as
mentioned in the manufacturer’s protocol.

The cells were labeled with MA-diyne as instructed
above, and then, the protein lysates were conjugated with biotin azide
via the click reaction. The reaction was quenched using 4 volumes
of ice-cold acetone, and the solution was incubated at −20
°C overnight to precipitate the proteins. The proteins were pelleted
at 3000gfor 5 min and washed with methanol thrice.
The protein pellet was air-dried for 10 min and solubilized in 100
μL of solubilizing buffer (4% SDS, 20 mM EDTA, and 20% glycerol
in 1× PBS) by vortexing and gentle heating. The solution was
diluted with 1× PBS to decrease the SDS concentration to 0.5%.
100 μL of prewashed (three times 0.2% SDS prepared in 1×
PBS) avidin agar beads was added to the above protein solution and
kept for incubation for 1.5 h at room temperature on a gyrator rocker.
The solution was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 2 min, and the supernatant
was discarded. The beads were washed thoroughly as follows: 5 times
with 10 mL of 0.2% SDS in 1× PBS, 5 times with 10 mL of 1×
PBS, and finally 5 times with distilled water. The beads were boiled
in equal volume of 100 μL of elution buffer (loading buffer
+ 100 mM DTT) at 95 °C for 5 min, and the elute was loaded on
the SDS PAGE gel. The proteins were then transferred to the nitrocellulose
membrane and probed against antistreptavidin as well as the primary
antibody of choice.

The avidin beads bound to the biotinylated proteins were washed
as instructed above and stored at −80 °C before being
sent for the LC–MS/MS at Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. Proteomics
facility. The beads were washed again with HPLC water to prevent detergent
or protease inhibitor contamination in the mass spectrometer. The
beads were incubated with 9 M urea for 10 min at room temperature.
The cysteines were then subjected to reductive alkylation with dithiothreitol
(DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA). Finally, the whole solution was diluted
with 3 volumes of 20 mM HEPES so that urea concentration was reduced
to less than 2 M. The beads were then subjected to on-bead trypsin
digestion overnight followed by the addition of 1% trifluoroacetyl
(final concentration). The peptides were then desalted using a stage
tip and eluted with 50% acetonitrile. Peptide concentration was measured
using a BCA assay, and samples were dried. The enriched peptides were
then subjected to bottom-up quantitative proteomics on an Orbitrap
Astral Instrument. Peptides were loaded directly onto an Aurora Ultimate
TS column (25 cm × 75 μm ID, 1.7 μm C18) packed with
the C18 reversed-phase resin. The column was developed with a 45 min
linear gradient of acetonitrile at 400 nL/min. “A” buffer
= 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. “B” buffer
= 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. Full MS parameter settings
are available upon request.

MS/MS spectra were evaluated by using Spectronaut software from Biognosys.
Hybrid DIA searches were performed by using factory default settings.
Searches were performed against the most recent update of the Uniprot database. Tryptic cleavage was required
with up to 4 missed cleavage sites per peptide allowed. Carbamidomethyl
modification on cysteine was kept as static modification, while oxidized
methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications
with a maximum of 5 modifications/peptide. All of the results were
filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the precursor peptide level.

Gene ontology analysis
(https://predictprotein.org/) was used to identify the subcellular localization and biological
processes of the proteins enriched by MA-diyne. A Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis was also conducted to
evaluate the pathways involved (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway).

Ethical approval for the animal experiments reported here
was obtained from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) at Ohio University, and the IACUC protocol number is 20-H-014.

We thank the following funding support: Hevolution
Foundation AGE award AGE-008 (S.Z., H.L.), National Institutes of
Health grant R01AR081804 (S.Z., H.L.), National Institutes of Health
grant R15AR080813 (S.Z., H.L.), Arthritis National Research Foundation,
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research FIRST award (S.Z.),
Rheumatology Research Foundation Innovative Award (S.Z.), and Osteopathic
Heritage Foundation Ralph S. Licklider, D.O. Endowed Professorship
(S.Z.). We thank the staff (including Tammy Mace, Angela Smith, Shawn
Rosensteel, and Scott Carpenter) at the animal facility in the Life
Science Building for their excellent care for our animals. We thank
Dr. Vishwajeet Puri, Dr. Craig Nunemaker, and Dr. Kevin Lee for providing
the cell lines. We also thank Dr. Nathaniel Szewczyk for helping us
conduct the labeling in .
We acknowledge the help from the Proteomics Core Facility at the Cell
Signaling Technology Company for their help with the proteomics assay.

The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.4c00151.

A.B. and
P.N. contributed equally to the work. CRediT:Anupama
Binoyconceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation,
methodology, visualization, writing - original draft;Pandurangan
Nanjandata curation, investigation, software, validation,
writing - original draft;Kavya Chellamuthudata curation,
methodology;Huanhuan Liuinvestigation, writing - review
& editing.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.