Current American Society of Clinical Oncology guidelines state that patients with metastatic prostate cancer (MPC) should undergo germline and somatic DNA sequencing. The authors examined the utility of next‐generation sequencing (NGS) on fine‐needle aspiration (FNA) biopsies in which NGS was performed on cell block (CB) and/or smears.

A retrospective review was performed of cytology cases with diagnosis of MPC either before and/or after NGS on FNA material. Clinical and NGS data were obtained from the medical record. Androgen receptor, NKX3.1, INSM1, synaptophysin, chromogranin, Rb, PTEN, and Ki67 immunohistochemical stains were performed on CB if not originally done.

Slides and NGS data were available for 46 MPC FNA biopsies from 45 patients from 2015 to 2024. Metastatic sites included 20 lymph node, 12 liver, five lung, four soft tissue, two pleura, two bone, and one adrenal gland. Ten patients (22%) had change or potential change in therapy based on NGS results. For one patient with poorly differentiated carcinoma previously thought to be urothelial, aTMPRSS2:ERGfusion confirmed prostatic origin. NGS confirmed lung origin for one patient diagnosed initially as metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma. For one patient, NGS demonstratedTP53andRB1mutations, supporting transformation to high‐grade neuroendocrine carcinoma. Change or potential change in therapy was planned for two patients withCDK12mutations, one withIDH1mutation, three withBRCA2mutations, and one withPTENandTP53mutations.

NGS on cytology material showed diagnostic and therapeutic utility in a subset of patients, with 10 of 46 patients (22%) having a change or potential in therapy based on NGS results.

The authors examined the use of next‐generation sequencing (NGS) in 46 metastatic prostate cancer fine‐needle aspiration biopsies and found that NGS showed diagnostic and therapeutic utility in a subset, with 10 of 46 patients (22%) having a change or potential change in therapy based on NGS results.

Cytology cell blocks (CB) and smears have been previously shown to be excellent material for NGS testing in many organs.12,13,14Although several studies have examined the use of IHC in MPC fine‐needle aspiration biopsies,1,15,16,17the use of NGS in MPC FNA biopsies has not been well reported. The goal of this study was to examine the diagnostic and therapeutic utility of NGS in MPC FNA biopsies. If tissue was available, an extensive IHC panel was also performed to further characterize the FNA biopsies as conventional, intermediary, HGNEC, or double negative prostate cancer.

Under institutional review board approval, patients with FNA biopsies with a diagnosis of MPC either before and/or after our institution’s NGS panel was performed were identified. Patient age, prostate‐specific antigen (PSA) at biopsy, outcome (dead, alive, or lost to follow‐up), and biopsy site data were obtained from the medical record. Therapy history information, including use of ADT, taxane, platinum, androgen receptor signaling inhibitor (ARSI), and radiation therapy information was obtained from the medical record. Clinical notes were reviewed to determine how the NGS results were used.

NGS data was obtained from the medical record. The NGS assay at our institution (University of California, San Francisco) targets coding regions of 529 cancer‐related genes, select introns from 73 genes (for detection of structural variants including gene fusions), and theTERTpromoter, with a total sequencing footprint of approximately 2.8 mega‐base pairs.19Somatic single‐nucleotide variants and indels were visualized and verified using the Integrative Genomics Viewer. Genome‐wide copy number analysis based on on‐target and off‐target reads was performed by CNVkit and Nexus Copy Number (Biodiscovery, Hawthorne, California). Microsatellite instability analysis was performed with MSIsensor2.20Tumor mutational burden was calculated from the number of somatic mutations in the coding regions of the genes on the panel, counting single nucleotide variants and small indels, with exclusion of germline variants. Only pathogenic or likely pathogenic molecular alterations are reported and included in the analysis. For each sample, tumor content, DNA yield (ng/µL resuspended in 100 µL), and average number of reads were recorded. Although a quantity of 250 ng DNA is considered optimal for library preparation and sequencing, a minimum threshold of 50 ng was used.

To assess the impact of high proliferation on overall survival, we performed a univariable Cox proportional hazards model for time to death as a function of Ki67 percentage stratified by the median value, with findings shown graphically by Kaplan‐Meier plot. This analysis was done in R using the survival and survminer packages.

Fifty FNA biopsies from 2015 to 2024 with MPC on which UCSF500 NGS had been performed or attempted were identified. For three cases, aspirate slides and CB were not available, and so the three cases were not included in the study. For one case, NGS was attempted but failed due to insufficient amount of tumor. A total of 46 FNA biopsies were included (Table1). The FNA biopsies were from 45 patients, with an average age of 72.4 years (SD, 6.5 years). PSA at time of biopsy ranged from 0.02 to 1753 ng/mL, with average 131 (SD, 335) and median 4.6. Of the 45 patients, 21 were alive as of 3–45 months after biopsy, 21 patients were dead of disease, ranging from 0.3 to 36 months after biopsy, and three were lost to follow‐up, ranging from 4 to 12 months after biopsy (Table1). Nine of the 46 biopsies had a concurrent core needle biopsy; for all nine cases, NGS had been performed on the cytology material, not core material.

The biopsy sites included 20 lymph nodes, 12 liver, five lung, four soft tissue, two pleura, two bone, and one adrenal gland. Of the 20 lymph node biopsies, there were six mediastinal, five supraclavicular, three neck, three inguinal/pelvic, two axilla, and one peri‐esophageal (Table1). A majority of patients had received either ADT (91%), ARSI therapy (67%), or radiation therapy (76%). Prior treatment history data is shown in Table2.

Abbreviations: ADT, androgen deprivation therapy; ARSI, androgen receptor signaling inhibitor.

IHC stains were performed if not done as part of the original workup for the case and if sufficient tissue remained in the CB after NGS. The vast majority (40 of 45, 88.9%) of cases were positive with NKX3.1 (Table3). Approximately one‐fifth (8 of 42, 19%) showed staining with a neuroendocrine marker (synaptophysin, chromogranin, INSM1). A total of 17 of 40 (42.5%) cases showed PTEN loss, and nine of 40 (22.5%) showed Rb loss (Table3; Figure1). The median Ki67 proliferation index was 20%. A Ki67 proliferation index greater than 20% was associated with a 4.1‐fold increased risk of death (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.6–10.6,p= .004) (Figure2).

Note: IHC was performed either as part of the original clinical work up or as part of this study. There were several cases in which insufficient tissue remained after NGS for staining to be performed.

Abbreviations: IHC, immunohistochemical; NGS, next‐generation sequencing.

Cell block of metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma fine‐needle aspiration biopsy, with H&E stain in (A). The tumor shows both PTEN loss (B) and Rb loss (C).

Ki67 proliferation index on FNA cell block and survival. The median Ki67 proliferation index was 20%. A Ki67 proliferation index >20% was associated with a 4.1‐fold increased risk of death (95% confidence interval, 1.6–10.6,p= .004).

There were four cases in which insufficient tissue remained after NGS for neuroendocrine stains and Ki67 stains to be performed. Of the remaining 42 cases, 11 cases showed conventional acinar morphology with low proliferation index (Ki67 <20%) and no neuroendocrine staining. Of these 11 patients, seven were alive at 3–45 months and four had died of disease at 8–36 months (Table4).

Categorization of FNA cases by immunohistochemical staining results and outcomes.

Abbreviations: CHG, chromogranin; FNA, fine‐needle aspiration; SPH, synaptophysin.

There was one case with transformation to HGNEC, with negative NKX3.1 and AR stains, positive neuroendocrine staining, and Ki67 proliferation index of 80% (Figure3). This patient was alive at 5 months (Table4). Three patients showed transformation to so‐called “double negative prostate cancer” with lack of staining with NKX3.1, AR, and neuroendocrine markers (Figure4). All three of these patients were dead of disease at 2, 6, and 6 months (Table4).

One patient showed transformation to high‐grade neuroendocrine carcinoma (H&E stain of cell block in A). Tumor cells were negative for NKX3.1 (B), positive for synaptophysin (C), and had a Ki67 proliferation index of approximately 80% (D).

Three cases were so‐called “double negative prostate cancer.” Papanicolaou stain on Thin Prep is shown in (A) and H&E stain of cell block is shown in (B). Tumor cells show loss of staining with NKX3.1 (C), androgen receptor (D), INSM1 (E), and synaptophysin (F).

A subset of patients showed intermediary features, with either Ki67 of 20% or greater (n= 20) or neuroendocrine staining (n= 7). One such example is shown in Figure5; this patient’s biopsy appeared to show the beginning of a transformation to HGNEC, with a subset of tumor with acinar morphology and a subset with HGNEC morphology. The subset of the tumor with HGNEC morphology was positive with synaptophysin but showed a low Ki67 proliferation index. Survival data for these intermediary patients with Ki67 of 20% or greater or with any neuroendocrine staining is shown in Table4.

For one patient, the biopsy appeared to show the beginning of a transformation to HGNEC, with a subset of tumor with acinar morphology and a subset with HGNEC morphology (H&E of cell block in A). The subset of tumor with HGNEC morphology was positive with synaptophysin (B) but showed a low Ki67 proliferation index (C). HGNEC indicates high‐grade neuroendocrine carcinoma.

NGS was performed on the cell block for 41 cases, smears for four cases, and pooled material from cell block and smear for one case. The number of pathogenic/likely pathogenic mutations ranged from 1 to 24, with a median of 4, and average of 4.7 (SD, 3.5).

NGS results are shown in Table5. For the purpose of this study, we focused on the clinically relevant alterations seen in prostate carcinoma:TMPRSS2:ERGfusions, androgen axis, cell cycle (RB1,TP53,PTEN,CDK12, andNF2), homologous recombination and DNA damage repair, ubiquitination (SPOP), transcription factors (includingFOXA1,FOXO1,FOXP1,MYC,CTNNB1, andSMAD4), GTPase (KRAS), WNT signaling (APC), and oxidative decarboxylation (IDH1).

There were 20 patients withTMPRSS2:ERGalterations, 11 of whom had fusions, eight with rearrangement/structural change with fusion partner not identified by DNA sequencing, and one with deletion ofTMPRSS2with breakpoint in intron 1 that would be predicted to result inTMPRSS2:ERGfusion by deletion. Fifteen patients had androgen receptor mutations, with amplifications in 11 and point mutations in four. For cell‐cycle genes, there were seven withRB1mutations, 27 withTP53mutations, 21 withPTENmutations, two withCKD12mutations, and one withNF2mutation.

Regarding homologous recombination/DNA damage repair genes, five patients hadBRCA2mutations and one hadMLH1mutation. TheMLH1mutation was accompanied by a high MSIsensor2 score of 54.12% and tumor mutation burden of 54.3 mutations/Mb, consistent with a microsatellite unstable (high) tumor. Two patients hadSPOPmutations, a gene involved in ubiquitination. Among transcription factors, 10 hadFOXA1/FOXO1/FOXP1mutations, five hadMYCmutations, two hadCTNNB1mutations, and one hadSMAD4mutation. Other mutations included twoKRASmutations, eightAPCmutations, and oneIDH1mutation (Table5). A summary of NGS results with cases categorized as either conventional, intermediary, high‐grade neuroendocrine carcinoma, or double negative prostate cancer is shown in TableS1.

Based on review of clinician notes, there were 10 of 46 (22%) patients with either a change or potential change in therapy based on NGS results (Table6). There were two patients for whom a change in diagnosis was made due to NGS findings. One patient had been previously diagnosed with poorly differentiated carcinoma presumed to be of urothelial origin. NGS of his biopsy showed aTMPRSS2:ERGfusion, confirming prostatic origin, and he was switched to prostate cancer therapy. For a second patient with a history of lung adenocarcinoma and prostatic adenocarcinoma, his lung FNA biopsy was originally diagnosed as metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma. However, NGS of his lung biopsy showed a similar profile to his previously sequenced lung adenocarcinoma, withCDKN2A,TP53,KEAP1, andNAV3mutations. The FNA diagnosis was amended, and the patient was then treated with cyberknife therapy to his lung.

Patients with change in diagnosis or change/potential change in therapy per clinician notes based on NGS results.

For one patient with transformation to HGNEC (Figure3), NGS supported the diagnosis, withTP53andRB1mutations. The patient was switched to docetaxel and carboplatin therapy (Table6). For two patients withCDK12mutations, one was started on olaparib and one on pembrolizumab. For the one patient with anIDH1mutation, the IDH1 inhibitor ivosidenib was planned. For three patients withBRCA2mutations, one started a PARP inhibitor and olaparib was planned for two. For one patient withPTENandTP53mutations, the immuno‐oncology therapy AMG757 was listed as a potential future option.

Although historically patients with MPC were not biopsied late in the course of disease,2this practice has shifted in recent years. The current ASCO guidelines recommend germline and somatic DNA sequencing for MPC patients.4In addition, patients are often biopsied if conversion to HGNEC is suspected.2Although the use of IHC in MPC FNA biopsies is well‐described in the cytology literature,1,15,16,17the use of NGS in MPC FNA biopsies is less so. In this study, we examined the utility of NGS in a cohort of 46 MPC FNA biopsies. Based on clinician notes, NGS resulted in either a change in diagnosis or therapy/potential therapy in 22% of patients, with a change in diagnosis for two patients and a change or potential change in therapy for eight patients. However, this percentage is likely an underestimation, as it only includes cases in which there was explicit mention of a specific NGS finding in the clinician’s note. For example, there were five patients withBRCA2mutations, yet the clinician notes only explicitly mentioned a change or potential change in therapy for three of those patients. In addition,MLH1mutation and microsatellite instability in one patient would potentially confer consideration for immunotherapy.

Accurate diagnosis in the setting of MPC can be difficult, as numerous morphologic and IHC staining patterns are encountered. In addition to conventional acinar morphology, HGNEC, and double negative prostate cancer, a range of intermediary forms exist.1,2In this study, if enough tissue remained in the cell block after NGS testing, the IHC staining panel recently described by Haffner et al.2was performed. In addition to the panel, PTEN and Rb stains were also performed.PTENandRB1are tumor suppressor genes, mutations that have been shown to be associated with treatment resistance and decreased survival.21We successfully showed that the FNA cell blocks can be an excellent source for the IHC panel recommended by Haffner et al.2Of the 42 cases with sufficient tissue remaining for immunohistochemical staining, 11 were classified as conventional, 27 as intermediary, one as HGNEC, and three as double negative prostate cancer. In addition, PTEN loss was observed in 42.5% and Rb loss was observed in 22.5%. A median Ki67 of 20% was observed, which is the same as has been reported for CRPC biopsies.2Strikingly, a Ki67 proliferation index higher than 20% was associated with a 4.1‐fold increased risk of death.

In addition to identifying targetable molecular alterations, there are also scenarios in which NGS has diagnostic value by confirming prostatic origin. One such example is high‐grade prostatic adenocarcinoma that morphologically mimics urothelial carcinoma, which can occur in post‐treatment settings.22,23NGS can be helpful in such a scenario, asTMPRSS2fusions are considered pathognomonic of prostatic origin.24TERTmutations, on the other hand, are present in approximately 70% of urothelial carcinomas but are extremely rare in prostatic adenocarcinoma.23NGS also has utility in patients with metastatic disease of unknown primary. For example, in one large study24that examined the frequency ofTMPRSS2:ERGfusions in various tumor types, six tumors that were initially diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma were found to haveTMPRSS2:ERGfusions. The index case of the study was a patient with a large retrovesical mass originally diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma. Sequencing of the patient’s retrovesical mass, primary prostatic adenocarcinoma, and a metachronous prostatic adenocarcinoma showed aTMPRSS2:ERGfusion in all three, and the patient was started on androgen deprivation therapy. In summary, NGS confirmation for diagnosis should be considered in cases where IHC findings are equivocal, in the post‐treatment setting, and in metastatic carcinomas of unknown primary.

For patients with MPC who are undergoing biopsy, we advocate for concurrent FNA and core biopsies if feasible. Rapid onsite evaluation (ROSE) of FNA biopsies is beneficial both for confirming that the site has been accurately targeted and for appropriately triaging diagnostic material.14An additional advantage of performing both types of biopsy is that if tissue is exhausted from IHC stains on a core biopsy, the FNA biopsy can serve as a backup for ancillary testing such as NGS,14,25or vice‐versa. If the CB is inadequate for NGS testing, FNA smears can be used. FNA material can also be used in clinical trials.25An additional advantage of FNA biopsies is that they can be performed in sites where cores are typically not performed, such as mediastinal lymph nodes.

Limitations of our study include that it is a retrospective study with a relatively small number of patients, with maximum follow‐up time of 45 months. Additionally, clinical utility was assessed based on explicit documentation in clinician notes, which could have led to underestimation of the true impact of NGS results on therapeutic decision‐making. Last, the study did not compare NGS results from cytology specimens with matched core biopsy specimens.

To our knowledge, however, this is the first study of the utility of NGS in MPC FNA biopsies. Based on clinician notes, NGS resulted in a change or potential change in therapy for 22% of patients. In addition, the CB material was significantly robust that for 42 of 46 cases an extensive IHC staining panel was performed, and cases could be classified as either conventional, intermediary, HGNEC, or double negative prostate cancer. Current ASCO guidelines state that MPC patients should undergo germline and somatic DNA testing.4This study shows that cytology samples are an adequate source of NGS testing, which has both diagnostic and therapeutic utility. Future directions could include validating these findings in larger, multi‐institutional cohorts to strengthen generalizability. Prospective studies could further evaluate the real‐world impact of FNA‐based NGS testing on treatment outcomes and survival. In addition, as molecular classifications and therapeutic targets evolve, integration of cytology‐based NGS into clinical trials could offer more personalized treatment options for patients with MPC.