Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is currently the treatment of choice for most patients with severe aortic stenosis. We conducted this meta-analysis to compare the outcomes of the cusp overlap technique (COT) versus the standard three-cusp technique during self-expandable valves implantation. We systematically searched PubMed, Scopus, Embase, Cochrane, and Web of Science (WOS) from inception to March 5, 2024. To estimate the effect size, dichotomous outcomes were pooled as RR, and continuous outcome was pooled as MD with their respective 95% CI. We included seventeen studies with a total of 3,129 patients in cusp-overlap technique (COT) arm and 2,818 patients in standard technique (ST) arm. The rate of 30-day mortality was borderline reduced in COT compared with ST, however, with no significant difference (RR = 0.61; 95% CI: [0.37–1.00],P= 0.05). Regarding conduction abnormalities, COT was related to lower risk of complete atrioventricular (AV) block (RR = 0.51; 95% CI: [0.37–0.69],P< 0.01), and permanent pacemaker implantation (PPM) (RR = 0.56; 95% CI: [0.46–0.70],P< 0.01). Mild to severe paravalvular leak (PVL) (RR = 1.00; 95% CI: [0.66–1.51],P= 1.00, I2 = 62%;P= 0.02) were comparable between COT and ST. Our study findings suggest that COT offers several advantages over ST, including reduced 30-day mortality, bleeding complications, and shorter procedural duration. The COT most importantly lowers the risk of conduction abnormalities, and hence the incidence PPM.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12872-025-05009-8.

Aortic stenosis (AS) is a progressive, and life-threatening condition primarily attributed to aortic valve calcification, and has been hypothesized to be caused secondary to atherosclerosis [1]. AS has a significant impact on public health, with a steady incidence rate observed over recent decades. The incidence of AS stands at 52.5 cases per 100,000 population per year [2]. Left untreated, severe AS can lead to rapid deterioration and heart failure, resulting in a poor survival prognosis [3,4]. Despite the importance of early intervention, current clinical guidelines often recommend aortic valve replacement (AVR) procedures during earlier stages of the disease for certain patient populations, potentially exacerbating patient outcomes of others [5–8].

Transcatheter AVR (TAVR) has revolutionized the management of symptomatic severe AS, offering a less invasive alternative to traditional surgical interventions [9]. However, concerns persist regarding the optimal positioning of transcatheter valves and the associated risk of complications. The standard three-cusp technique typically involves perpendicular implantation of the self-expandable (SE) valves on the aortic annulus, with the right coronary cusp between the left coronary and non-coronary cusps, which may lead to conduction disturbances [(e.g. high degree atrioventricular (AV) block and left bundle branch block (LBBB) due to its proximity to the AV node and His bundle, as well as an increased risk of paravalvular leak (PVL) [10–12]. Post-procedural conduction disturbances requiring permanent pacemaker implantation (PPI) have been reported with an average incidence rate of 12.5%, ranging from 6.2 to 32.8% [12,13]. These conduction abnormalities have been shown to be associated with increased risk of mortality, and heart-failure rehospitalization [14].

Consequently, the emerging cusp overlap technique aims to mitigate these issues by altering valve positioning. By overlapping the right coronary cusp with the left coronary cusp, the cusp overlap technique aims to achieve a higher device implantation near the membranous septum, potentially reducing interference with the conduction system [15,16]. This technique offers theoretical advantages, including improved control during deployment, and reduced risk of prosthesis displacement [11,17]. Despite the theoretical benefits of the cusp overlap technique, its clinical effectiveness remains uncertain, thus this review aims to compare the effectiveness of the standard three-cusp technique with the cusp overlap technique, based on the existing evidence.

This systematic review was reported based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA 2020) guidelines [18]. Study protocol was registered on Prospero (CRD42024549582).

Observational studies whose participants had aortic stenosis, comparing the SE TAVR procedures via cusp-overlap view technique, versus the standard three-cusp view technique were included. Studies reporting at least one outcome measuring the procedure’s success, effectiveness, or adverse events were included.

Our outcomes included procedure time, technical success and procedural success depending on VARC-3 criteria, need for PPI, need for second valve implantation, and adverse events including new-onset LBBB, moderate/severe aortic regurgitation, valve embolization, cerebrovascular accidents (CVA), complete AV block, aortic annular rupture, PVL, major bleeding, major vascular complications, and mortality rates.

Studies with these criteria were excluded (1) non-English papers; (2) thesis, review articles or meta-analyses; (3) case reports or case series; (4) animal studies; (5) technical reports or conference abstracts with unpublished full-text; and (6) studies discussing other types of valves, balloon expandable valves, or mechanically expandable valves.

A comprehensive literature search was conducted on PubMed, Scopus, Embase, Cochrane, and WOS from inception to March 5, 2024. The used search terms included these keywords and their synonyms: Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement, Aortic Valve Stenosis, and cusp overlap. The full search strategy is displayed in the Supplementary Table 1.

Articles were uploaded on the Endnote-20 program to remove the duplicates, and then imported to Rayyan for title, and abstract screening [19]. The potential included studies went for further full-text screening. The two screening stages were completed by two independent reviewers who compared their decisions at the end, and reached a consensus through discussion with the first author.

Four reviewers independently extracted the relevant data from the included studies’ cusp overlap group, and the standard three-cusp group separately into four online sheets. Discrepancies were resolved through group discussion. Extracted data included (1) The summary of study characteristics including the study design, country, population, intervention, comparator, follow-up duration, inclusion and exclusion criteria, and conclusion of studies’ results; (2) The baseline characteristics of the studies’ participants as mean age; the proportion of males; smoking status; history of having any of these medical conditions, dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, peripheral artery disease, transient ischemic attack (TIA), or prior myocardial infarction (MI) (3) The procedure characteristics including access approach, pre-dilation, post-dilation, valve pop-out, valve type, and valve size; and (4) primary outcomes including mortality, conduction disturbances after procedure, permanent pacemaker implantation, bleeding and CVA; (5) secondary outcomes including vascular complications, moderate/severe aortic regurgitation, valve embolization, annular rupture, and paravalvular leak.

The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) was used to assess the quality of the included observational studies. Each study was awarded a score out of 9 based on its criteria of selection (4 points), comparability (2 points), and outcome/exposure (3 points). Overall score less than 4 indicates a low-quality study, while 4–6 was defined as moderate, and a score more than 6 indicates a good-quality study. Every study was assessed by two independent authors, and discrepancies were managed with the assistance of a third author.

The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) scale was used to evaluate the strength and level of evidence for recommendations and was stratified into four categories: high quality, meaning no need for further research and that further research is unlikely to change the confidence of the effects estimations; moderate quality, meaning that more studies can affect the confidence of the effects estimation; low quality, meaning further Research is likely to have a critical impact on the confidence of the effects estimation; and very low quality, meaning that we cannot be sure about those estimations. True differences in the underlying treatment effect may be likely when there are widely differing estimates of the treatment effect (i.e. heterogeneity or variability in results) across studies. As effect measures were almost consistent across all studies, inconsistency was rated as not-serious. Regarding imprecision, in general, results are imprecise when studies include relatively few patients and few events and thus have a wide confidence interval (CI) around the estimate of the effect, which can lead to uncertainty about the results. Although the sample sizes in individual studies wasn’t large enough, the confidence intervals (CI) of individual outcomes were narrow, so imprecision was rated as not-serious.

To estimate the effect size, dichotomous outcomes were pooled as risk ratio (RR), and continuous outcomes were pooled as mean difference, and their respective 95% confidence intervals. We conducted a random-effect meta-analysis employing the Der-Simonian-Laird method. The random-effects model was chosen to overcome any conceptual, and clinical heterogeneity between studies. Significant heterogeneity was defined when the Cochrane Q testp-value is < 0.1, and the I2test is > 50%. The meta-analysis was conducted using the appropriate packages in R software version 4.3.2. A meta regression analysis was performed for thirty-day mortality, permanent pacemaker implantation and LBBB incidence using the Restricted Maximum Likelihood Random Effects Model. In one case, LBBB predicting PPM, the convergence failed, so we used the Maximum Likelihood Random Effects Model instead.

We identified 1,536 records through initial search of the electronic databases (six in Cochrane Library, 825 in Embase, 247 in PubMed, 284 in Scopus, and 174 in Web of Science), which were reduced to 876 articles after removing duplicates. Twenty articles satisfied the inclusion criteria during the title and abstract screening, and finally, after full-text screening, seventeen studies [20–36] were identified for inclusion in this systematic review, and meta-analysis. Figure1displays the PRISMA flow diagram of this meta-analysis.

Seventeen observational studies were included in our systematic review and meta-analysis with a total of 3,129 patients in the cusp-overlap technique (COT) arm and 2,818 patients in the standard technique (ST) arm. Detailed summary and baseline characteristics of the included studies is provided in Table1and Supplementary Table 2 respectively.

Patients who underwent TAVR with a balloon-expandable valve.

The most commonly used access approach was transfemoral. Nearly all studies used new generation self-expandable valves including Evolut R/PRO/PRO+. Detailed information regarding procedure characteristics is provided in Supplementary Table 3.

In-hospital mortality was reported in six studies with a total 3,154 patients. The results revealed that in-hospital mortality was comparable between both COT and ST (RR = 0.62; 95% CI: [0.27–1.41],P= 0.25). The pooled studies demonstrated no heterogeneity (I2= 0%;P= 0.47) Fig.2A.

30-day mortality was reported in eleven studies with a total of 2,365 patients. Our analysis showed that COT was associated with a borderline significant reduction in 30-day mortality compared with ST (RR = 0.61; 95% CI: [0.37–1.00],P= 0.05). The pooled studies were homogenous (I2= 0%;P= 0.91) Fig.2B.

Meta-regression analysis was insignificant for the mean age (coefficient = 0.1212912;p= 0.298), diabetes mellitus (coefficient = 1.266839;p= 0.839), HTN (coefficient = 2.519582;p= 0.218), prior MI (coefficient = −0.0810239;p= 0.987). Details of meta regression provided in Supplementary Table 4.

One-year mortality was reported in only two studies with a total of 465 patients. Our results revealed that one-year mortality was similar between COT and ST (RR = 0.54; 95% CI: [0.13–2.24],P= 0.39). The pooled results were significantly heterogenous (I2= 83%;P= 0.02) Fig.2C.

Incidence of complete AV block was reported in five studies with a total of 1,696 patients The results demonstrated that COT was associated with a significantly lower risk of complete AV block compared with ST (RR = 0.51; 95% CI: [0.37–0.69],P< 0.01). The pooled studies displayed non-significant heterogeneity (I2= 28%;P= 0.24) Fig.3A.

LBBB was reported in sixteen studies with a total of 5,407 patients. The analysis showed that COT was associated with a significantly reduced risk of LBBB compared with ST (RR = 0.77; 95% CI: [0.61–0.97],P= 0.03). The pooled results demonstrated significant heterogeneity (I2= 77%;P< 0.01) Fig.3B.

Meta-regression analysis was insignificant for the mean age (coefficient = 0.003513;p= 0.156), diabetes mellitus (coefficient = 2.303158;p= 0.33), HTN (coefficient = 0.985711;p= 0.447), prior MI (coefficient = −0.03918;p= 0.973) and was significant for baseline atrial fibrillation (coefficient = 2.34553;p= 0.04) and baseline RBBB (coefficient = 8.063774;p= 0.042). Details of meta regression provided in Supplementary Table 5.

PPI was reported in sixteen studies with a total of 5,615 patients. Our analysis revealed that COT was associated with a significantly lower risk of PPI compared with ST (RR = 0.56; 95% CI: [0.46–0.70],P< 0.01). The pooled results displayed non-significant heterogeneity (I2= 26%;P= 0.16) Fig.3C.

Meta-regression analysis was insignificant for the mean age (coefficient = 0.001565;p= 0.428), HTN (coefficient = 1.614654;p= 0.232), prior MI (coefficient = −0.98787;p= 0.293) and was significant for baseline diabetes mellitus (coefficient = 3.370358;p= 0.034) and baseline STS score (coefficient = −0.22908;p= 0.008). Details of meta regression provided in Supplementary Table 6. Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2 show the bubble plot for diabetes and STS score predicting PPI, respectively.

CVA was reported in ten studies with total of 4,066 patients. The analysis showed that the incidence of CVA was comparable between COT and ST (RR = 1.05; 95% CI: [0.74–1.49],P= 0.78). The pooled results displayed no heterogeneity (I2= 0%;P= 0.72) Fig.4A.

Supplementary Table 7 summarizes the effect estimates of each primary outcome.

For major and life-threatening bleeding, eleven studies with a total of 4,154 patients COT was associated with a significantly lower likelihood of major and life-threatening bleeding compared with ST (RR = 0.60; 95% CI: [0.46–0.79],P< 0.01). The pooled results displayed no heterogeneity (I2= 0%;P= 0.68) Fig.4B.

For major vascular complications, twelve studies with a total of 4,561 patients demonstrated a comparable incidence of major vascular complications between COT and ST (RR = 0.90; 95% CI: [0.61–1.33],P= 0.61). The pooled studies displayed non-significant heterogeneity (I2= 24%;P= 0.22) Fig.4C.

For moderate or severe AR, ten studies with a total of 2,754 patients displayed a comparable incidence of moderate or severe AR between COT and ST (RR = 0.72; 95% CI: [0.45–1.14],P= 0.16). The pooled studies were homogenous (I2= 0%;P= 0.60) Fig.4D.

For mild to severe PVL, six studies with a total of 3,046 demonstrated a comparable incidence of mild to severe PVL between COT and ST (RR = 1.00; 95% CI: [0.66–1.51],P= 1.00). The pooled results revealed significantly heterogeneity (I2= 62%;P= 0.02) Fig.4E.

Technical success was reported in five studies with a total of 1098 patients. The results showed that COT was associated with similar rates of technical success compared with ST (RR = 1.02; 95% CI: [1.00–1.04],P= 0.05). The pooled results demonstrated non-significant heterogeneity (I2= 26%;P= 0.25) Fig.5A.

Procedural success was reported in four studies with a total of 781 patients. The results showed that COT tended to have slightly higher rates of procedure success compared with ST with borderline significance (RR = 1.02; 95% CI: [1.00–1.04],P= 0.05). The pooled results were homogenous (I2= 0%;P= 0.47) Fig.5B.

Valve embolization was reported in seven studies with a total of 3,302 patients. The analysis showed a comparable incidence of valve embolization between COT and ST (RR = 0.67; 95% CI: [0.33–1.36],P= 0.27). The pooled results displayed no heterogeneity (I2= 0%;P= 0.87) Fig.5C.

Need for second valve was reported in eight studies with a total of 4,138 patients. The pooled analysis did not favor either COT or ST (RR = 0.62; 95% CI: [0.36–1.05],P= 0.07). The pooled studies were homogenous (I2= 0%;P= 0.81) Fig.5D.

Implantation depth was reported in seven studies with a total of 1,612 patients. Our results demonstrated that COT was associated with significantly higher implantation depth compared with ST (MD = −1.00; 95% Cl: [−1.83 to −0.17],P= 0.02). The pooled results demonstrated significant heterogeneity (I2= 94%;P< 0.01) Fig.6A.

For procedure duration, four studies with a total of 2,618 patients demonstrated a shorter procedure duration in COT compared with ST (MD = −7.41; 95% CI: [−12.05 to −2.77],P< 0.01). The pooled studies revealed significant heterogeneity (I2= 88%;P< 0.01) Fig.6B.

Supplementary Table 8 summarizes the effect estimates of secondary outcomes.

All included studies are of good quality as estimated by the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS). Detailed risk of bias assessment is provided in Supplementary Fig. 3.

The GRADE rating results are shown in Table2. According to the GRADE system, the strength of evidence was low for important outcomes including in-hospital mortality, 30-day mortality, new LBBB, permanent pacemaker implantation, major and life-threatening bleeding, moderate to severe AR and implantation depth.

All outcomes were defined according to VARC-2 [37] and VARC-3 criteria [38]. Details about definitions of outcomes in individual studies are provided in Table1.

Our study assessed the efficacy and safety of the cusp-overlap technique during TAVR compared to the standard three-cusp technique. We observed a significant reduction in thirty-day mortality in the COT group, contrasting with comparable rates of in-hospital mortality, and one-year mortality between both techniques. COT exhibited a significantly lower incidence of complete AV block, LBBB, and hence associated significantly reduced PPI, which can potentially be attributed to achieving a lower implantation depth. Additionally, quantitative analysis revealed COT to be associated with reduced major, and life-threatening, bleeding, and shorter procedure duration compared to ST. However, there were no significant differences in the procedural success between the two techniques. Furthermore, the occurrence of moderate or severe aortic regurgitation (AR), major vascular complications, CVA, PVL, and valve embolization were similar in both groups. Finally, our analysis showed that the need for a second valve was comparable across COT and ST cohorts.

Since its introduction, TAVR has faced challenges such as high rates of complications like PVL, vascular issues, and new PPI. Advancements in transcatheter heart valve (THV) design, and implantation techniques, as well as pre-procedural planning have reduced these complications which was noticeable in our analysis, but new PPI remains a concern due to its association with longer hospital stay, increased mortality, and healthcare costs [20,39–42]. Based on these findings, it can be hypothesized that the trend toward lower 30-day mortality in the COT group, could be linked to the significant reduction in PPI after the index TAVR procedure in the COT arm. The lower 30-day mortality observed with COT may be driven by reduced rates of conduction abnormalities and subsequent pacemaker implantation. These complications are known to contribute to early post-discharge morbidity and mortality, even if not reflected in in-hospital mortality. COT has been associated with a significantly shallower implantation depth, which has been key in reducing conduction abnormalities, and hence PPI. The proximity of the aortic valve to the cardiac conduction system contributes to the occurrence of new conduction disturbances during and following TAVR. The conduction system extends from the atrioventricular node to the bundle of His, then divides into the left and right bundle branches. The location of the bundle of His relative to the commissure between the right and noncoronary cusps varies, with certain anatomical variants increasing the risk of conduction disturbances during TAVR [43].

The depth of THV implantation in the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) is closely linked to the need for new PPI with both balloon- and self-expandable THVs [44,45] with more studies showing lower risk with COT [39–42] whether implanted valve was BE or SE, yet some showing lower risk with ST [45]. Deeper implantation increases the risk of contact between the THV, and the conduction tissue, potentially leading to injury; and resulting in conduction abnormalities such as high degree block and LBBB. Shallower THV implantation in the LVOT is thus a straightforward method to reduce new PPI rates, while ensuring adequate anchoring and sealing of the valve to avoid paravalvular leaks, or valve embolization. Accurate imaging of the aortic root during valve implantation is crucial to achieving the correct implantation depth and minimizing PPI rates [44,45]. The Minimizing Depth According to the membranous Septum (MIDAS) approach has been proposed for self-expandable THVs, aiming for an implantation depth less than the length of the membranous septum, which has shown promise in reducing new conduction disturbances and the need for new PPI [46].

Previous meta-analyses [47–49] have been conducted showing similar results of lower risk of PPI with COT compared to ST. Although Chen et al. [48] and Sa et al. [49] showed no difference in 30-day morality and LBBB, our results showed a lower risk favoring COT for both. Moreover, our results are consistent with previous meta-analyses that there is no difference in terms of moderate/severe PVL and cerebrovascular events with significant higher mean of implantation depths favoring COT. Furthermore, COT demonstrated significant improvement in terms of procedural outcomes, including reduced occurrences of major, and life-threatening bleeding. Shorter procedure duration and potentially fewer manipulations with the cusp overlap technique may explain the lower incidence of major bleeding. Controlled valve deployment and optimized positioning may reduce the risk of vascular trauma and associated complications. This indicates that COT may lead to fewer post-procedural complications related to bleeding, thereby enhancing patient safety, and potentially shortening hospital stays.

COT exhibited a trend towards higher rates of technical success, and shorter procedure duration compared to ST. The trend of improved technical success suggests that COT may offer greater precision, and reliability during valve deployment, leading to better procedural outcomes. The shorter procedure duration is also advantageous as it can reduce patient exposure to procedural risks, fluoroscopy timing and contrast, leading to an improvement in overall efficiency in the catheterization laboratory. Moreover, the similarity in the occurrence of other complications such as moderate or severe aortic regurgitation, major vascular complications, CVA, PVL, and valve embolization between COT and ST suggests that COT does not introduce additional risks compared to the standard technique. While both techniques showed high procedural success rates, although with no significant differences, this demonstrates the overall improvement in the TAVR procedure due to the refinements that have been made to the procedure.

This study has the limitations indivisible to the retrospective nature of the observational studies. Only three of included studies were propensity matched [32,33,36], so potential confounders could not be avoided. Baseline differences in atrial fibrillation and RBBB may act as potential confounders, particularly in the interpretation of conduction outcomes and PPI rates. These baseline imbalances should be accounted for in future randomized studies. There were differences in baseline characteristics and operator’s decisions between the groups, and neither selection nor confounding biases could be excluded. Additionally, some of the studies follow-up period was limited to in-hospital outcomes or not going beyond 90 days. Only two studies reported outcomes at 1 year which hinders us from drawing a robust conclusion about this outcome. These findings support the growing body of evidence favoring the use of COT over ST. However, given the observational nature of the included studies and potential for confounding, results should be interpreted with caution. It is recommended that these trials further expand on procedural outcomes such as fluoroscopy timing, contrast load, renal impairment, and stroke rates to further validate the safety of the technique. More studies that evaluate the length of stay, associated complications, mortality and quality of life are warranted.

Our study findings collectively suggest that COT offers several advantages over ST, including a trend towards reduced 30-day mortality though this did not reach robust statistical significance, decreased bleeding complications, and shorter procedural duration, without apparently compromising mid-term outcomes, or increasing procedural complications. The COT most importantly lowers the risk of conduction abnormalities, and hence the incidence of new PPI. This supports the use of COT, as it addresses the increased PPI, hospital stays, and mortality concerns associated with TAVR.

BBK conceived and designed this study while AKA, ARG, MNY, NGH, HE, MR, AD, MTO, AD, BFQ, MT SS and MB participated in the drafting of the manuscript. YY and BR supervised and revised the manuscript.

This systematic review and meta-analysis did not receive any funding.