Despite compelling evidence identifying psychological predictive factors in in-person rehabilitation, their validity in remote digital care settings remains unknown.

To assess whether fear-avoidance beliefs, depression, and anxiety predict pain outcomes after a digital care program (DCP) for chronic musculoskeletal pain (CMP).

This ad hoc analysis of a decentralized interventional investigation included patients with CMP who underwent a DCP integrating exercise, education, and behavioral change. Pain outcomes were assessed using 4 measures: last pain score, relative pain change, achievement of postintervention mild pain, and pain response (≥30% change or last pain score ≤3). Predictors included baseline scores of Fear-avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire related to Physical Activity, Patient Health 9-item Questionnaire, and Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item scale. Structural equation models evaluated their predictive value on pain outcomes, with or without including potential demographic and clinical confounders.

Fear-avoidance beliefs and depression symptoms were consistent predictors across all pain outcomes after confounders adjustment. Worse outcomes were associated with higher baseline fear-avoidance beliefs (eg, last pain score: β = 0.15, SE 0.04,P< 0.001; pain response: odds ratio [OR] 0.86, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.78; 0.96,P= 0.001) and depression levels (eg, last pain score: β = 0.14, SE 0.05,P= 0.007; pain response: OR 0.85, 95% CI 0.74; 0.98,P= 0.008). Anxiety did not significantly affect any pain outcome. Sensitivity analyses showed stronger predictive performance when psychological factors were combined with clinical characteristics.

Fear-avoidance beliefs and depression consistently predicted pain outcomes, reinforcing their critical role in digital rehabilitation for CMP. Multimodal, tailored approaches targeting these factors may optimize recovery in remote care.

Clinical guidelines recommend nonpharmacological interventions for CMP management, following a biopsychosocial approach that integrates exercise, education, and behavioral modification strategies.46,60,67,74However, treatment responses vary widely even among patients sharing the same CMP diagnosis, suggesting that individual factors significantly influence outcomes.47Predictors, defined as patient characteristics or baseline clinical features associated with treatment success or specific outcomes,43,44are crucial for guiding clinical decision-making, tailoring care pathways, and improving success rates.

Although most research has focused on predictors specific to anatomical pain regions,1,12,86the shared pathophysiological mechanisms across different musculoskeletal conditions (such as central sensitization)21,29suggest that certain factors may consistently influence outcomes regardless of pain location.9,27,83Generic prognostic factors offer broader clinical applicability and streamline assessment.

Despite the extensive research on predictors, namely baseline psychological factors, in in-person rehabilitation, their impact in remote digital care remains unknown. Remote rehabilitation is a distinct context that may reshape the influence of known predictors, namely the therapist–patient dynamic, communication channels and cadence (often more frequent), no possibility of hands-on interventions, and greater accessibility. Therefore, treatment compliance depends more on patient motivation and commitment toward recovery. Consequently, findings from in-person settings may not necessarily be transferable to digital interventions, underlying the need for additional research in this specific setting.

Among remote rehabilitation, one randomized trial found that self-efficacy moderated greater pain improvement in knee osteoarthritis using video-based telerehabilitation, while pain catastrophizing had no impact.51A recent systematic review on mHealth-based rehabilitation in musculoskeletal conditions concluded that evidence on outcome predictors remains scarce,71with none being a prognostic study, but with only exploratory analyses with limited covariate adjustment. Overall, research assessing psychological predictors—particularly fear-avoidance beliefs, depression, and anxiety—in digital musculoskeletal rehabilitation remains limited. The high prevalence of these factors in patients with CMP (approximately 50%)24,50and its impact on pain31warrant further investigation.

Knowledge on the predictive role of fear-avoidance beliefs, depression, and anxiety factors in digital rehabilitation is essential to personalized care and, ultimately, reduce the socioeconomic burden of CMP. This study aimed to assess whether baseline fear-avoidance beliefs, depression, and anxiety predict pain outcomes in a digital care program (DCP) for patients with CMP. We hypothesized that the studied psychological variables would significantly predict digital rehabilitation treatment outcomes. A secondary aim was to explore the influence of potential confounders on the predictive power of psychological factors.

Participants were adults (18 years and older) from all states in the United States, beneficiaries of employer health plans, reporting CMP (ie, persistent or recurrent musculoskeletal pain complaints with ≥3 months duration)81in any of the following anatomical regions: ankle, elbow, hip, knee, low back, neck, shoulder, wrist, or hand. All participants provided informed consent. Participants were not offered any form of compensation.

Exclusion criteria comprised: (1) conditions (eg, cardiac, respiratory) or contraindications preventing ≥20 minutes of light to moderate intensity exercise; (2) receiving treatment for cancer; (3) red flags not screened by a health care professional (eg, rapidly progressive loss of strength and/or numbness in the arms/legs or unexplained bowel or urinary function change); (4) inability to understand simple and complex motor commands, or perform home-based exercise independently; and (5) missing baseline assessment, or no reassessments at any of the designated timepoints.

Each participant was accompanied by a physical therapist who conducted an initial assessment and prescribed the tailored intervention. Exercise sessions were performed with an FDA–listed class II medical device composed of a mobile app in a dedicated tablet, motion tracking system, and a cloud-based portal. Sessions were displayed on the tablet with real-time video and audio biofeedback, and the physical therapist could access these data through the portal.

Pain was measured using the 11-point Numerical Pain Rating Scale considering the average pain over the preceding 7 days. Both continuous and binary outcomes were assessed (Table1). Programs' last reported pain score was selected for the dependent variable computation.

Description of outcomes and respective measures included in the predictive models.

Independent variables were selected based on the existing literature,1,2,12,25,78comprising baseline scores of fear-avoidance beliefs, depression, and anxiety (Table2).

Description of predictor variables and respective measures included in the predictive model.

Potential confounders of the predictor–outcome association were identified based on the literature,9,25,62,86considering the disjunctive cause criterion.85The covariates used to adjust the predictive model included age, sex (binary: men; nonmen—women and nonbinary), body mass index (BMI), race/ethnicity (binary: non-Hispanic White; non-White—including Asian, Black and African American, Hispanic or Latino, and Other), education levels (binary: high—Bachelor's or Graduate degree; low—high school diploma or less, and some college), analgesic intake (binary: yes; no), pain anatomical area (binary; extremities—hip, knee, ankle, shoulder, elbow, and wrist/hand; spine—neck and low back), number of sessions, and baseline pain levels. These variables were included to mitigate confounding and to investigate their influence on the predictive power of psychological factors.

Data were collected through electronic self-reported surveys between June 18, 2020, and July 2, 2022. Patients completed surveys at baseline, and at 4, 8 and 12 weeks, with the discharge timepoint determined by the patient's progression.

While no standard method exists for regression model sample size calculations, research suggests a minimum of 10 to 20 events per predictor parameter (EPP) or more conservative calculations.69,70As the study forecasted more than 1,000 observations, this exceeds the minimum requirements.

Descriptive statistics summarized study baseline characteristics. Association between candidate predictors and the outcomes was visually explored through scatterplots.

Both unadjusted and adjusted models were developed, with the latter comprising all variables in a single model, including the covariates mentioned in the Confounders section. Predictors scores, age, BMI, number of sessions, and baseline pain levels were standardized using z-scores (ie, by subtracting its mean and then dividing by its standard deviation [SD]) before analysis as variables showed a non-normal distribution. For reference, 1 SD corresponds to: FABQ-PA = 5.8, PHQ-9 = 5.1, GAD-7 = 5.0, age = 11.7, BMI = 7.1, number of sessions = 20.1, and baseline pain = 1.9. The last pain score reported was considered to compute the outcomes.

Associations between predictors and outcomes were expressed as regression coefficients (β). For continuous predictors, β represents the effect of a one-SD increase in a given predictor on the outcome. Odds ratios (ORs) were computed to quantify the relationship magnitude between predictors and binary outcomes. Goodness of fit was evaluated through the comparative fit index (CFI; values close to 1 indicate good fit), root mean square error of approximation index (RMSEA; values < 0.08 indicate good fit), and standardized root mean square residual index (SRMR; values < 0.05 indicate good fit) for all models.40Predictive power, representing the proportion of outcome variance attributable to independent variables, was quantified through R2.

A sensitivity analysis was conducted to determine which group of covariates contributed additional predictive power to the model, using 2 reduced models for each outcome: (1) psychological variables combined with demographics, and (2) psychological variables combined with clinical characteristics.

All statistical analyses were performed using RStudio (version 2023.09.1+494) and Mplus software (version 8.10). Statistical significance was set atP< 0.05 for all tests considering a two-sided hypothesis test.

The initial cohort comprised 4720 participants, with 62.4% (2945/4720) reporting postintervention mild pain (ie, last pain score ≤3) and 70.6% (3332/4720) being pain responders (ie, achieved ≥30% change or last pain score ≤3).

The study cohort was predominantly middle-aged (mean 47.3 years, SD 11.7), non-Hispanic White (64.8%), presented a higher education level (66.6%), resided in urban areas (87.4%), and were employed (93.0%). Most participants had overweight or obesity (72.8%; mean BMI: 29.8 SD 7.1) with a slight predominance of women (59.9%) (Table3).

Baseline characteristics of the overall cohort (N = 4720).

BMI, body mass index; FABQ-PA, Fear-Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire subscale for physical activity; GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item Scale; PHQ-9, Patient Health 9-item Questionnaire; WPAI, Work Productivity and Activity Impairment Questionnaire.

The number of sessions was inversely associated with baseline depression (r (4718) = −0.21, 95% confidence interval [CI] −0.23; −0.18;P< 0.001) and anxiety (r (4718) = −0.18, 95% CI −0.21; −0.16;P< 0.001); however, all correlations were weak. No significant association was found with fear-avoidance beliefs (r (4327) = 0.03, 95% CI 0.00; 0.06;P= 0.068).

Fear-avoidance beliefs, depression, and anxiety at baseline were significant predictors of the last pain score without adjusting for covariates. After adjusting for demographic and clinical variables, fear-avoidance beliefs and depression remained significant predictors of postintervention pain scores. Specifically, from each additional 5.8-point in FABQ-PA or 5.1-point increase in PHQ-9, there was an increase in postintervention pain score of 0.15 and 0.14 points, respectively (β = 0.15, SE 0.04,P< 0.001 and β = 0.14, SE 0.05,P= 0.007, respectively; Table4). The adjusted model incorporating all variables showed an improved predictive power of 22.8%.

BMI, body mass index; BIC, Bayesian information criterion; CFI, comparative fit index; FABQ-PA, Fear-Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire subscale for physical activity; GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item Scale; PHQ-9, Patient Health 9-item Questionnaire; RMSEA, root mean square error of approximation index; SE, standard error; SRMR, standardized root mean square residual index.

Men were more likely to have lower last pain scores (β = −0.24, SE 0.07,P< 0.001). Patients with musculoskeletal spinal pain had higher postintervention pain scores compared with those with pain in the extremities (β = 0.24, SE 0.07,P< 0.001). Performing a higher number of sessions was related to lower pain levels at program-end (β = −0.25, SE 0.04,P< 0.001), whereas higher baseline pain was associated with greater pain levels at intervention-end (β = 0.74, SE 0.04,P< 0.001). Analgesic intake was also associated with higher final pain scores (β = 0.17, SE 0.07,P= 0.023).

For relative pain change, conversely to the previous outcome, depression was the only significant predictor in the unadjusted model (β = −0.04, SE 0.02,P= 0.005, Table4). After adjusting for potential confounders, both depression and fear-avoidance beliefs were shown to be significant predictors. Higher fear-avoidance beliefs (β = −0.04, SE 0.01,P< 0.001) and depression symptoms (β = −0.03, SE 0.01,P= 0.016) were both related to a lower pain reduction. Model's predictive power improved significantly when combining all variables with an R2of 10%.

Being a man (β = 0.09, SE 0.02,P< 0.001), having pain located in the extremities (β = 0.08, SE 0.02,P< 0.001), and performing more sessions (β = 0.05, SE 0.01,P< 0.001) were all associated with greater pain reduction. Conversely to the observed above, higher baseline pain was associated with greater relative pain reduction (β = 0.16, SE 0.01,P< 0.001). In addition, higher education levels were a significant predictor of greater pain reduction (β = 0.05, SE 0.02,P= 0.035). Relative pain change was also negatively associated with older age (β = −0.03, SE 0.01,P= 0.002).

All studied psychological variables were significant predictors in the unadjusted model, with fear-avoidance beliefs and depression remaining significant predictors after accounting for confounders. Worse scores on fear-avoidance beliefs and depression predicted lower odds of achieving postintervention mild pain (OR: 0.86, 95% CI: 0.81; 0.93,P= 0.001 and OR 0.85, 95% CI 0.76; 0.94,P= 0.010, respectively; Table5). The model combining the psychological variables and covariates resulted in a greater predictive power of 26.5%.

BMI, body mass index; CFI, comparative fit index; CI, confidence interval; FABQ-PA, Fear-Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire subscale for physical activity; GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item Scale; PHQ-9, Patient Health 9-item Questionnaire; RMSEA, root mean square error of approximation index; SE, standard error; SRMR, standardized root mean square residual index.

Similarly to the continuous outcomes, being a man (OR: 1.41, 95% CI 1.18; 1.69,P< 0.001), musculoskeletal pain in the extremities (OR: 1.20, 95% CI 1.04; 1.39;P= 0.022), performing a higher number of sessions (OR: 1.24, 95% CI 1.16; 1.33,P< 0.001), and having lower baseline pain (OR: 2.00, 95% CI 1.85; 2.13,P< 0.001) were associated with an increased odds ratio of achieving mild pain.

The pain response outcome showed a similar pattern to the previous outcomes: all studied psychological variables were significant predictors in the unadjusted model, and fear-avoidance beliefs and depression remained significant after confounders adjustment. Worse baseline scores in these factors were associated with lower likelihood to achieve responder status (fear-avoidance beliefs OR: 0.86, 95% CI: 0.78; 0.96,P= 0.001, and depression OR: 0.85, 95% CI 0.74; 0.98,P= 0.008; Table5). Model performance improved significantly with the inclusion of covariates, achieving an R2of 13.9%.

Similarly to above, men (OR: 1.34, 95% CI: 1.12; 1.60,P= 0.001; Table5), patients with pain in the extremities (OR: 1.32, 95% CI 1.10; 1.56,P= 0.001), those who completed a higher number of sessions (OR: 1.24, 95% CI 1.16; 1.33,P< 0.001), and those with lower baseline pain (OR: 1.43, 95% CI: 1.30; 1.59,P< 0.001) were more likely to be pain responders. In addition, higher education had a positive association with being a responder (OR: 1.24, 95% CI 1.00; 1.54,P= 0.045).

Sensitivity analyses were conducted to assess the added predictive value of combining psychological variables with demographic and clinical characteristics. Model estimates are presented in Supplementary Tables 2 and 3,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A334for continuous and binary outcomes, respectively.

When psychological factors were combined with clinical characteristics only, the models maintained similar predictive performance to the full models (last pain score: R2= 22.4% vs 22.8%; relative pain change: R2= 8.7% vs 10.0%; postintervention mild pain: R2= 25.4% vs 26.5%; pain response: R2= 13.0% vs 13.9%), and the psychological predictor coefficients remained stable. Conversely, when psychological factors were combined with demographics only, the predictive power showed only a trivial improvement compared with the model with psychological factors alone (last pain score: R2= 9.7%; relative pain change: R2= 0.9%; postintervention mild pain: R2= 11.4%; pain response: R2= 8.0%). Compared with the full model, the version including only psychological factors and demographics showed a significant drop in predictive power, along with changes in the psychological predictor coefficients.

Fear-avoidance beliefs (β = −0.04–0.15, OR = 0.86) and depression symptoms (β = −0.03–0.14, OR = 0.85) consistently predicted pain outcomes across both continuous and binary measures. By contrast, anxiety did not affect pain after accounting for potential confounders, regardless of the assessed outcome. Confounders adjustment significantly improved model performance, with sensitivity analyses showing that predictive power significantly increased when combining psychological factors with clinical characteristics (eg, last pain score: R2= 22.4% vs 6.6%%; postintervention mild pain: R2= 25.4% vs 7.7%). These findings reinforce the multifactorial nature of chronic pain, underscoring the critical role of fear-avoidance beliefs and depression in digital remote rehabilitation.

Fear-avoidance beliefs and depression symptoms emerged as consistent psychological predictors of pain outcomes for CMP across all adjusted models. Our findings are congruent with the general evidence found for in-person rehabilitation research, particularly in multidisciplinary and exercise-based interventions.1,2,12,25,55A recent umbrella review gathering 13 systematic reviews reported moderate-certainty evidence for fear-avoidance beliefs and low to very low evidence for depression as predictors of development of CMP.27This study extends the current knowledge to remote rehabilitation, showcasing the importance of addressing maladaptive pain-related beliefs and depression symptoms across different care modalities. Importantly, these identified psychological factors remained significant after adjusting for confounders across all models, indicating that fear-avoidance beliefs and depression may serve as generic predictors across CMP.

Conversely, anxiety was not predictive of pain outcomes after accounting for potential confounders. While research from in-person rehabilitation indicates that anxiety negatively affects pain treatment outcomes,1,55the certainty of evidence is lower, with contradictory results, and derives from fewer studies compared with fear-avoidance beliefs and depression.62Although the reason behind this finding is unknown, one possible explanation is the flexibility and enhanced accessibility promoted by the remote nature of the DCP,8,11which may have contributed to attenuate the effect of anxiety on pain outcomes. The availability of as-needed communication with the physical therapist may have also helped to reduce anxiety related to the condition by offering timely support and reassurance. It is still noteworthy that this study assessed general anxiety, and different dimensions of anxiety (eg, general vs condition-specific anxiety) may exert distinct effects on pain outcomes. Further research should explore the interactions between psychological factors in a remote context, and assess the specific roles of general and pain-specific anxiety measures.

A higher number of sessions predicted better outcomes, but as session prescription was personalized to patient's needs, this finding should be interpreted cautiously, considering as well the inverted U-shaped dose–response relationship reported in previous studies.58,66Race and ethnicity has been reported to be influential in in-person rehabilitation, with race/ethnic minority groups reporting worse outcomes.14,39In this article, race and ethnicity did not affect pain recovery in any model, which is consistent with previous studies with this DCP demonstrating similar pain improvements across racial/ethnic72and socioeconomic groups.6The digital format of this multimodal intervention, including education and behavior change strategies, likely supported engagement and reduced logistic barriers often encountered in traditional care settings.6,72In addition, its availability through employer health plans and the lack of direct costs with the intervention may have minimized financial barriers, thereby promoting greater equity.

Specific variables, such as education and baseline pain, showed outcome-dependent discrepancies. Education significantly predicted outcomes that were corrected for baseline pain levels (ie, relative pain change and pain response), but not absolute pain scores. This finding, alongside the near-significantP-values (0.035 and 0.045), suggests potential latent influences in pain outcomes. Similarly, higher baseline pain was generally associated with poorer outcomes, which is similar to the reported for in-person rehabilitation,35,86but was inversely associated with relative pain change which may reflect its inclusion in the calculation formula for this measure. This variability across outcome measures may explain the heterogeneity observed in research on in-person rehabilitation,1,61,86where differences in outcome definitions likely contribute to inconsistent results. Considering that the choice of outcome measures affects results, further research is needed, alongside a clinical consensus and standardized research guidelines.

Although our findings do not evaluate intervention effects directly, it supports the routine assessment of fear-avoidance beliefs and depression in remote care as part of yellow flags screening. For patients with heightened fear-avoidance beliefs, a structured approach with graded exposure to feared daily activities with pacing may support behavioral change and be beneficial.3,4,16Similarly, strengthening motivational and coping strategies, such as behavioral activation strategies, goal-setting, motivational interviewing, social support, and peer engagement, cognitive restructuring approaches may help mitigate the impact of depression.3Future research should investigate whether these or other interventions that explicitly address the identified psychological predictors improve treatment response in remote care settings.

Future research should also validate these results in independent cohorts to strengthen external generalizability, assess long-term outcomes, and explore additional domains such as functionality or quality of life for a more comprehensive understanding of treatment response. In addition, investigating the impact of specific program modifications addressing psychological characteristics (eg, fear-avoidance beliefs) may further optimize engagement and outcomes in digital rehabilitation. Identifying predictors of adherence and exploring how psychological characteristics influence engagement also represent future research opportunities.

This study showcases for the first time in a digital rehabilitation setting the critical role of fear-avoidance beliefs (β = −0.04 to 0.15, OR = 0.86) and depression (β = −0.03 to 0.14, OR = 0.85) as consistent psychological predictors of pain outcomes after the DCP. These findings emphasize the importance of adequate patient stratification and tailored, multimodal approaches that address both fear-avoidance beliefs and depression symptoms to enhance recovery in remote rehabilitation.

D.J., A.C.A., and F.C. are employees at Sword Health. X.T. receives scientific advisor honorarium from Sword Health.

Supplemental digital content associated with this article can be found online athttp://links.lww.com/PR9/A334.

The authors thank the team of physical therapists responsible for the management of participants. They acknowledge the contributions of Maria Molinos in data acquisition and data validation, and Ana Paula Pereira for the valuable discussions and theoretical insights. The authors also extend their appreciation to Sword Health, Virgílio Bento, and Fernando Correia for their support and for providing the infrastructure and resources needed to conduct this study.

This work was supported by Sword Health Inc. and also developed within the scope of project nº 62—“Responsible AI,” financed by European Funds, namely the Recovery and Resilience Plan—“Componente 5: Agendas Mobilizadoras para a Inovação Empresarial,” included in the NextGenerationEU funding program.