To compare measurements of skin perfusion pressure (SPP) and transcutaneous oxygen pressure (TcPO2) to predict postamputation wound healing according to amputation level.

This study was conducted as a prospective two‐centre, head‐to‐head study.

Fifty‐two patients had SPP, TcPO2measured (below and above the knee), and toe and ankle blood pressure measurements taken before major amputation. Paired measurements of SPP and TcPO2were used to compare the methods. We found overall poor agreement between SPP and TcPO2measurements, with crude agreement below the knee in 32 of 45 limbs (71%) and above the knee in 17 of 23 limbs (74%), with κ values of 0.32 and 0.13, respectively. Among the 29 patients whose SPP measurements below the knee indicated healing potential, seven were amputated above the knee. Blood pressure measurements above the cut‐off values (30 mmHg for the toe and 80 mmHg for the ankle, above 40 mmHg SPP and TcPO2values), were seen as an indicator of high healing potential.

We found poor (71%–74%) crude agreement between SPP and TcPO2, concerning measurements above and below the knee, using the established diagnostic cut‐offs for predicting a high probability of postamputation wound healing. We determined that SPP and TcPO2evaluate different physiological properties of the microcirculation and cannot be interchanged. Additionally, we found that the actual amputation level is often chosen at another level than that suggested by SPP and TcPO2, indicating that the choice is based on a multitude of factors, including clinical, paraclinical and patient‐related parameters.

Atherosclerosis is a condition that causes stenosis of the arteries, leading to cardiovascular disease with high morbidity and mortality including major amputation (Fan et al.,2022).

Vascular disease affecting the lower extremities is called peripheral arterial disease (PAD). PAD causes reduced blood perfusion and thereby reducing both macro‐ and micro‐circulation, leading to exercise‐related pain in the legs (intermittent claudication), rest pain, ulcers and tissue loss, which ultimately may lead to amputation.

To determine the level of amputation (toe, forefoot, below‐knee or above‐knee), a large number of factors should be considered, including comorbidity, pain, infection, extent and degree of tissue loss, anatomy of the threatened limb, functional ability, potential prosthesis use and, most importantly, the probability of successful postamputation wound healing (Czerniecki et al.,2019). Wound healing after amputation is dependent on adequate vascular perfusion (Bunte et al.,2018; Greenhalgh et al.,2003; Smidt et al.,2017); thus, a preoperative assessment of vascular perfusion is needed.

Several different methods exist for the prediction of postamputation wound healing, ranging from simple measurements of toe and ankle pressure to measurements of SPP and TcPO2. The methods evaluate different physiological properties of tissue viability; toe and ankle pressures evaluate macro‐circulation in terms of blood pressure in the arteries, whereas the SPP provides a measurement of micro‐circulation via blood pressure in the capillaries. TcPO2evaluates microcirculation by means of the actual oxygen supply to the skin.

Toe and ankle pressure, SPP and TcPO2have been validated for the assessment of postamputation wound healing in several studies and are widely used before assessing the amputation level (Andrews et al.,2013; Arsenault et al.,2012; Bone et al.,1981; Fife et al.,2009; Holstein et al.,1977; Schwartz et al.,1982; Thøgersen et al.,2022). However, some institutions do not conduct preoperative measurements.

Although these methods have been shown to possess adequate diagnostic accuracy for the prediction of wound healing using validated specific cut‐off values, only a few studies with a limited number of patients have compared the methods and have shown that the methods are not interchangeable at the patient level (Brownrigg et al.,2016; Yamada et al.,2008), probably due to the different physiologic mechanisms they address.

The aim of the present study was to compare measurements of SPP and TcPO2to predict postamputation wound healing.

The present study was conducted as a prospective head‐to‐head comparison study at two study sites (Regional Hospital Viborg and Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark). Consecutive patients were eligible if they were referred for an SPP measurement before major amputation of the lower limb as part of routine clinical practice. Patients were excluded if they were unable to provide informed consent or were under the age of 18. Patient inclusion was conducted from June 2019 to June 2022. During the inclusion period, there were periods with no patient screening due to COVID‐19‐related restrictions and limited personnel to conduct the investigations during holidays. Before the examinations, patients were asked about pre‐existing risk factors (Table1), and their medical records were examined for current status.

All equipment was serviced according to company specifications and used according to the department and manufacturer's guidelines. All examinations were performed by experienced technologists with extensive training in the use of the two types of equipment (for SPP and TcPO2measurements, respectively).

SPP was measured laterally on the extremity, 10 cm below and above the knee. At all the measuring sites, the skin was examined to determine the optimal location of the photoplethysmography sensor. The skin was examined for discolouration, visible veins, and underlying oedema. After a suitable location was found, the skin was cleaned with alcohol disinfectant, after which the sensor was fixed with medical tape. A pressure cuff was placed around the sensor and was inflated to 250 mmHg. The cuff was then slowly deflated, and the SPP was recorded. If the initial SPP measurement was below 40 mmHg, an additional measurement was performed 10 cm above the knee. This is in accordance with both departments' procedures. All SPP results were available for the clinical departments for amputation level evaluation.

TcPO2examinations were conducted via a PeriFlux 6000 (Perimed, Stockholm, Sweden). The machine was calibrated before use and the Clark electrode was heated to 45°C and maintained this temperature during the examination. One probe was placed at the exact same location as the SPP sensor and another probe was placed at the medial side at the same height. As with the SPP measurements, the skin needed to be intact, without discolouration or visible varicose veins and preferably without underlying subcutaneous oedema. After a suitable site was found, the fixation ring was placed and secured with medical tape around the edge of the ring. Three drops of contact fluid were placed in the ring, and the probe was then securely placed in the ring. After all the probes were secured, the measurements followed the guidelines of the producer of the apparatus.

For all the TcPO2measurements, the mean value of the two measurements at the same level was used in the data analysis. For both SPP and TcPO2, only measurements from the extremity considered for amputation were included in this study. The TcPO2results were not available for use by the clinical departments.

Systolic toe and ankle blood pressure were measured at Viborg via a PeriFlux 6000 (Perimed, Stockholm, Sweden), and examinations at Aalborg were performed via the Falcon/PRO system (Viasonix, Ra'Anana, Israel). Both machines use pressure cuffs distal of the measuring site to induce vascular compression and laser Doppler probes to register blood flow after cuff deflation.

Toe pressures were measured at the patients' first toe, where available. If the first toe had been amputated, the second toe was used. In the case of a toe pressure of 10 mmHg or below, the examination was repeated, with the patient in a sitting position, and adjusted for hydrostatic pressure (Gornik et al.,2008). All ankle‐ and toe measurements were available for the clinical departments for amputation level evaluation.

Based on results from a meta‐analysis (Arsenault et al.,2012), we categorized the included lower limbs into two groups: postamputation wound healing potential with TcPO2≥ 40 mmHg and non‐healing potential with TcPO2< 40 mmHg. Similar categories were made concerning the SPP. Additionally, lower limbs with systolic toe pressure of ≥30 mmHg were categorized to have high postamputation wound healing potential. In contrast, ankle pressure measurements have less clearly defined cut‐off values for predicting wound healing. In the present study, an ankle pressure of ≥80 mmHg was chosen as an indicator of high wound healing potential based on the study by Yamada et al. that included more than 200 patients (Yamada et al.,2008).

Follow‐up was conducted using the electronic patient journaling system. Information regarding amputation, level of amputation, wound healing after 3 months and any complications during healing (e.g., infection or the need for reamputation) was recorded. The amputation wound was considered fully healed if the patient was not readmitted to the hospital or referred to the outpatient clinic due to insufficient wound healing within 3 months after the amputation.

The data are presented as the means and standard deviations (s.d.) or medians and ranges as appropriate. All paired measurements were treated as individual data points regardless of amputation level. Agreement in the diagnostic classification (healing potential vs. nonhealing potential) was analyzed using the aforementioned cut‐off points and calculated by Cohen's kappa. The kappa value was categorized according to the recommendation of Landis and Koch (Landis et al.,1977). Figures were produced in GraphPad Prism (Vers. 6.07, GraphPad Software, US), and the statistical calculations were performed in STATA (Vers. 18.5, StataCorp, US).

The study was assessed by the local ethical committee, and all patients signed informed written consent forms to participate according to the Helsinki declaration.

A total of 52 patients (median age 74.5 years, range 36–93 years) were included. In the present population, 28 patients (65%) had diabetes, 22 patients (43%) had chronic kidney failure, and 16 patients (31%) had prior vascular surgery. Further demographics are presented in Table1. Twenty‐four of 52 patients (45%) underwent amputation above the knee, 18 patients (36%) underwent amputation below the knee, three patients (6%) underwent minor amputations, and seven patients (13%) did not undergo amputation.

In total, we obtained 45 paired SPP and TcPO2measurements performed below the knee and 23 paired SPP and TcPO2measurements above the knee. Toe pressure measurements were performed and paired with the SPP 35 times below the knee and 17 times above the knee. The TcPO2and toe pressure measurements were paired 36 times, below the knee, and 18 times above the knee. Paired SPP and ankle measurements below the knee were obtained 23 times, and TcPO2and ankle pressure measurements below the knee were obtained 24 times. All missing data were due to factors such as prior amputation, excessive patient discomfort, or technical issues. A summation of measurements based on each technique and level is presented in Table2.

When the predefined established cut‐offs for a high probability of postamputaion wound healing were used, the (TcPO2≥ 40 mmHg and SPP ≥ 40 mmHg) measured below the knee were consistent in 32 of the 45 limbs (71%) (Figure1). The Cohen kappa coefficient showed an agreement ofκ= 0.32 (95% CI: 0.01–0.63). For measurements above the knee level, TcPO2and SPP agreed in 17 of the 23 limbs (Figure2), withκ= 0.13 (95% CI: −0.29–0.56). When comparing toe blood pressure measurements to TcPO2measurements below the knee, 18 of 36 methods agreed, withκ= 0.31 (95% CI: 0.05–0.57). The corresponding numbers for ankle pressures ≥80 mmHg compared with TcPO2below the knee level were in agreement in 17 of 24 limbs, withκ= 0.42 (95% CI: 0.05–0.78). All the agreements are presented in Table3.

Paired skin perfusion pressure (SPP) and transcutaneous oxygen pressure (TcPO2) measurements below the knee. Cut‐off limits for probable wound healing are marked in bold lines.

Paired skin perfusion pressure (SPP) and transcutaneous oxygen pressure (TcPO2) measurements above the knee. Cut‐off limits for probable wound healing are marked in bold lines.

Agreement in healing potential for skin perfusions pressure (SPP), transcutaneous oxygen pressure (TcPO2), toe and ankle pressure.

Data points comparing TcPO2and SPP, with toe pressure and ankle pressure below the knee, are presented in Figures3,4,5,6.

Paired toe pressure and skin perfusion pressure (SPP) measurements below the knee. Cut‐off limits for probable wound healing are marked in bold lines.

Paired toe pressure and transcutaneous oxygen pressure (TcPO2) measurements below the knee. Cut‐off limits for probable wound healing are marked in bold lines.

Paired ankle pressure and skin perfusion pressure (SPP) measurements below the knee. Cut‐off limits for probable wound healing are marked in bold lines.

Paired ankle pressure and transcutaneous oxygen pressure (TcPO2) measurements below the knee. Cut‐off limits for probable wound healing are marked in bold lines.

Among the patients amputated above the knee (n= 24), none were registered with failure to heal after 6 months of follow‐up. Among the patients amputated below the knee (n= 18) or who received minor amputations (n= 3), a total of one in each category failed to heal (5.5% and 33.3%, respectively). Given the low frequency of failed healing after amputation, the data did not allow for a more detailed exploration of the predictive capabilities of the investigated methods, with healing used as a reference.

Despite having SPP measurements indicating wound healing potential below the knee, several patients were amputated above the knee (Figure7). We found that of the 30 patients with SPP values greater than 40 mmHg below the knee, seven were amputated above the knee, 15 were amputated below the knee, three had a minor amputation, and five were not amputated. One patient with a below‐the‐knee amputation (Toe pressure: 27 mmHg, ankle pressure: 81 mmHg, SPP: 45 mmHg, and TcPO2: 58 mmHg) and one patient with a minor amputation (Toe pressure: 20 mmHg, ankle pressure: 111 mmHg, SPP: 65 mmHg, and TcPO2: 53 mmHg) did not achieve complete wound healing. Among the 16 patients with SPP values ≥ 40 mmHg, 12 were amputated above the knee, three were amputated below the knee, and one was not amputated. All 15 patients with low SPP values who underwent amputation achieved complete wound healing.

Skin perfusion pressure (SPP) measurements below the knee and amputation levels.

This study, which was performed in a clinical setting in which experienced laboratory technicians were used as observers, revealed that the methods used for predicting wound healing are not fully interchangeable. We found a poor to slight correlation between TcPO2and SPP using the established diagnostic cut‐offs for predicting a high probability of wound healing. There were, however, indications that having a toe pressure of >30 mmHg or ankle pressures of >80 mmHg was indicative of a TcPO2reading >40 mmHg, thus predicting a high probability of wound healing. Additionally, we found that the actual amputation level is often chosen at another level than that suggested by the SPP and TcPO2, indicating that the choice is based on a multitude of factors, including clinical, para‐clinical and patient‐related parameters. Overall, our study revealed a low rate of amputation failure regarding non‐healing wounds, which disallowed further exploration of the optimal diagnostic cut‐off for the investigated methods.

SPP and TcPO2cannot be expected to yield directly correlated results, as they target different factors that can compromise wound healing. For a wound to heal, there is a need for adequate perfusion to allow the delivery of nutrients and oxygenation to the tissue. Low oxygen tension is possible despite sufficient perfusion, for example, caused by insufficient blood oxygenation due to pulmonary factors, anaemia, excess oxygen consumption due to inflammation, or an increase in the diffusion barrier due to oedema or microvascular pathology (Fife et al.,2009). This could explain why a number of our patients had reduced TcPO2levels despite a SPP reading >40 mmHg. Conversely, stenosis in vessels can lower blood flow, thereby resulting in a reduced SPP value, but could still theoretically yield sufficient TcPO2values because of ample oxygenation. Another possible explanation could be sources of variation in the measurement technique, for example, probe placement or poor signals due to low perfusion or oedema.

Studies have shown the diagnostic potential of SPP and TcPO2measurements as primary methods for the prediction of wound healing (Arsenault et al.,2012; Pan et al.,2018). However, only a few studies have compared TcPO2directly with SPP, although both methods are widely used in clinical settings. Yamada et al. (2008) included 211 patients who underwent SPP, TcPO2and Ankle‐Brachial‐Index examinations and reported an overall good correlation between the investigated methods. Another study by Falstie‐Jensen et al. (Falstie‐Jensen et al.,1989) used SPP and TcPO2in relation to wound healing after major amputations, but no direct comparison of the examinations was conducted. The group was not able to establish an optimal TcPO2cut‐off for wound healing, but the authors concluded that clinical factors are important for successful wound healing.

The diagnostic cut‐off values for assessing the wound healing potential of TcPO2has been challenged in two systematic reviews (Lowry et al.,2017; Wang et al.,2016), which reports that the quality of the available studies is poor, and the definite wound healing cut‐off values are not achievable based on the available studies. Additionally, both reviews agree that good microcirculation is needed to achieve optimal wound healing, but were unable to draw definite conclusions regarding which examinations of microcirculation should be conducted. The conclusion is primarily due to the heterogeneity and lack of standardization of the studies included in the reviews. In the present study, we used dichotomous cut‐off values for determining wound healing potential for both methods. This approach was chosen as it represents the clinical use of the methods even though it is a simplification of a continuous measurement and do not take into account that some patients might have measurements close to the cut‐off value as seen in the present study.

Studies exploring the diagnostic potential of TcPO2have revealed that no TcPO2threshold could yield a 100% postamputation healing rate, indicating that other factors should also be considered when determining the amputation level (Noori et al.,2022). In general, having a nontraumatic amputation performed is indicative of overall poor health status. This is illustrated by the very high mortality rate in this group of patients (Thorud et al.,2016). The high mortality rate indicates that even if a perfect method for determining the optimal amputation level is found, many patients would not survive more than 1 year independently of the postamputation wound‐healing.

The amputation level should be determined through a combination of clinical, perfusions and vascular examinations (Dwars et al.,1992). Notably, a proportion of the patients in the present study underwent amputation at a higher level than at the lowest level, with good healing potential assessed by SPP or TcPO2. This shows that the measurements of SPP or TcPO2are only a part of the evaluation and are not the deciding factor. The specific reasons for the choice of a high amputation level were not explored in this study but were likely based on the clinical evaluation with the main focus on the wound healing potential as well as the evaluation of patient mobility after amputation, including the potential for using a limb prosthesis. Nonetheless, a remarkably low proportion of patients included in this study experienced healing failure following major amputation and none of the patients with SPP < 40 mmHg—though only slightly below the cut‐off—experienced non‐healing, indicating that other factors, for example, tissue looking vital during amputation is indicative of healing. Likewise, two patients with SPP > 40 mmHg did not heal. In one case, the patient had a forefoot amputation conducted. In this patient, the toe pressure (20 mmHg) predicted low healing probability, but the ankle pressure (111 mmHg) showed a high chance of wound healing. In this case, a forefoot SPP measurement or a TcPO2conducted at the amputation level, could have been a better predictor for post‐amputation healing. This is not the case with the other non‐healing patient. In this case, all measurements predicted good healing probability. The reasons for the lack of healing could be found in other factors (e.g., smoking, poor nutritional health or lack of exercise).

Another study on SPP performed at the same department for patients who underwent below‐knee amputation from 2009 to 2013 reported a 13% failure rate with a need for re‐amputation within 90 days, whereas only 5.5% failed to heal in the present study (Smidt et al.,2017). This could be caused by a more conservative approach when choosing the amputation level or by selection bias in the present study, where excluded patients because of inability to consent to participation, e.g., due to pain or drowsiness due to the use of (relevant) analgesics, could be more prone to have low wound healing potential. It could also be caused by the study design, in which the amputation level was not dictated by a given method, but by the surgeon's clinical decision, which might be influenced by the SPP. A design in which the amputation level was decided by one of the used methods by randomization would have entailed a patient population size that was out of the scope of this study.

Another limitation of the present study is the relatively low patient population. This might in part be due to the fact that only patients able to provide informed signed consent were included in the study both reducing the number of patients enroled and potentially leading to selection bias as the most vulnerable patients might not be included due to, for example, pain, poor performance status or somnolence due to pain treatment. Moreover, patients with obvious healing potential (e.g., younger individuals, traumatic induced wounds and no previous history of cardiovascular disease) were likely to undergo amputation without previous examination of SPP or distal limb pressure. Though the equipment used for SPP measurements in the present study has been discontinued, the method is still in use due to the development of a new probe by another company (Thøgersen et al.,2022).

The SPP and TcPO2methods for determining the healing potential after amputation have poor agreement are not interchangeable, as they evaluate two different physiologic properties of the microcirculation. In general, high systolic toe pressure or ankle pressure unanimously indicates high SPP or TcPO2values, but the present study also demonstrated that evaluation of microcirculatory properties is only one of several clinical, paraclinical and patient‐related factors determining the final level of amputation.