To assess Labor companionship utilization and Healthcare Providers Perceptions in Gondar Public Health facilities 2023.

A mixed study design was conducted from December 1/2022 to January 30, 2023. We used simple random sampling techniques (lottery method) to select health facilities and systematic random sampling techniques to select study participants. Semi-structured questionnaires were employed. Data were entered into kobo collect software and analyzed by Stata version 14. Variables with p value ≤ 0.2 were entered into a multivariable logistic regression model andp-value < 0.05 were significant and reported with Adjusted odd ratio (AOR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). For qualitative data purposive sampling technique was used and face to face interview guide were employed. Data were transcribed, translated, and thematically analyzed by using open code software 4.03.

The magnitude of labor companionship utilization was 11.3%( 95% CI; 8.9%, 14.3%). Urban residence (AOR = 2.26, (95% CI: 1.08, 4.7)), Primiparous (AOR = 2.3, (95% CI: 1.16, 3.6)), previous history of abortion (AOR = 2.39, (95% CI: 1.15, 4.9)) and good knowledge of women about labor companionship (AOR = 2.26 (95% CI: 1.2, 5.8)) were statistically significant. The main themes that emerged as barriers to the practice of labor companionship were narrow delivery room space, absence of a partition in delivery room, overcrowding of women in one delivery room (privacy issue), lack of awareness on community and health care provider`s on labor companionship.

The magnitude of labor companionship utilization is low. Urban residence, Primiparous, history of abortion, and having good knowledge on labor companionship were statistically significant. Narrow delivery room space, absence of a partition in delivery room, overcrowding of women in one delivery room(privacy issue), lack of awareness on community and health care provider`s on birth companionship were main barriers. Thus to meet international recommendations that every woman is offered a companion of her choice during labor, the need for multi-layered interventions includes creating private spaces using partitions or curtains to ensure conducive delivery rooms in ways that facilitate the presence of labor companionship.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12884-025-07911-7.

Labor companionship is refers to non-pharmacological aspects of care provide continuous support, encouragement, respect and continuous physical, and emotional support to a woman during childbirth by their preferred person ADDIN EN.CITE [1,2]. It is as a core element of care for improving maternal and neonatal health outcome that every woman is offered to use her choice of companion while in labor ADDIN EN.CITE [3].

Maternal and neonatal mortality is a global challenge that requires a multidimensional strategies [4]. Globally overall 295, 000 maternal deaths occurred annually. Of these, sub-Saharan Africa alone estimated 66% of the estimated global maternal deaths [5].

World Health Organization (WHO) launched critical targets that 90% of births to should be attended by skilled birth attendant to reducing preventable maternal deaths [6]. It recommends on companions of choice during childbirth adopted to introduce policies to the health services that include representatives of maternal health care providers, facility managers and women themselves [7].

According to FIGO guideline of 2015 on mother friendly care has a written policy that encourages women to have at least one person of their choice to be with her throughout the labor process ADDIN EN.CITE [8]. In Ethiopia, government was taken different measurements to improve institutional delivery but more than 50% of all child births are not assisted by skilled personnel [9].

Previous studies shown that continuous support during childbirth have great benefit [10] and improves birth outcomes by enhancing the physiological process of labor as compared with women undergoing labor alone [10]. Beside to this, continuous support has clinically meaningful benefits, including improved maternal quality of care [11,12], higher self-esteem, coped well during labor and encourage earlier initiation of skin-to-skin contact, and breast feeding [12].

Despite of, all those importance of child labor companionship, its practice is still a major problem in developing countries including Ethiopia and little is Known about the utilization of labor companionship [13].

In previous study conducted in northern India, 93% of health care providers were awarded on labor companionship [14] in Brazil 18.8% [15],in Britain 30% [12], in Brazil the presence of companions during labor was 70.1%, during delivery 32.7%, and during the postpartum period was 61.3% % [16], in Nepal 19% [11], in Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria and Myanmar, 50.4% [17], in Tanzania, 44.7% [18], in Nigeria 22.1% [19], in Nigeria 75% [20], in Kenya about 88% of women were accompanied by someone from their social network to the health facility, 82% of women desire companionship during labor and 37% women desire during delivery [21],in Arba-minch town, 13.8% of mothers [13], in West Shao Zone 19.5% [22], in Debre Markos town,14.6% [23].

From associated factors maternal age [21], educational status [11], marital status [21], employment status [11,21], resident ADDIN EN.CITE [11,21,24], complication during pregnancy ADDIN EN.CITE [18,25], Number of pregnancy and number of delivery ADDIN EN.CITE [25,26], wanted pregnancy [27], presence of ANC visit and getting birth preparedness and complication readiness plan counseling during ANC visit [21], ANC visit [27], delivery place [21],Previous history of labor companionship utilization [23] were significant associated with labor companionship.

According to previous studies suggested that choice of labor companion by women were family members [17], including their mother 70%, husband 69%, sister 46% [14,21], most women were happy when their companions were allowed to stay with them during labor [21].

There is a lack of empirical evidence on barriers to practice labor companionship post-partum women`s, health care provider`s point of view in Ethiopia including particular to this study area. Therefore, this study aimed to assess utilization, influencing factors and to explore women’s perception towards labor companionship. This is important because it provides input for improving the quality of care provided to mothers during labor and childbirth. Besides, the study will helpful for health program planners and policy makers to plan targeted intervention, change policies and allocation of resources appropriately. The conceptual framework shown (Fig.1).

Conceptual frame work to assess Labor companionship utilization and Healthcare Providers Perceptions in Gondar Public Health facilities 2023 adapted from ADDIN EN.CITE [13,21,23].

An institution-based mixed study design was conducted from December 1/2022- January 30, 2023.

The study was conducted at Gondar town selected public health facilities. Gondar town is located in the Amhara Region of Ethiopia, specifically in the Central Gondar Zone. It’s situated in the northwestern highlands of Ethiopia, north of Lake Tana and southwest of the Simien Mountains. The city is about 727 km from Addis Ababa and 120 km from Bahir Dar, the city of the Amhara region. It is at 1203’N latitude and 37,028’E. Approximately the total population lives in Gondar town were 450, 000. The average delivery services at Gondar public health facilities in one month 1600. The town has one comprehensive specialized referral hospital and eight health centers. These are: University of Gondar Comprehensive Specialized Hospital, Gebrael health center, Tseda health center, Azezo health center, Mintiwab health center, Blajig health center, Weleka health center, Poly health center, and Maraki health center.

All women who gave birth in Gondar town public health facilities.

All women who gave birth in selected Gondar town public health facility during data collection period.

Women who gave birth in selected Gondar town public health facility during data collection period.

Post-partum women whose labor was not attended in the selected health facility and elective cesarean section were excluded.

For the second objective by taking CI; 95%, Power 80%, and odds ratio from different literature calculated by Epi-info version 7 shown below (Table1).

From the above sample size calculation we had taken the largest sample size i.e. 316.Then since we used a Multi-stage sampling technique, with design effect 1.5. So 316 * 1.5 = 474, adding 10% non-response rate and the finally the minimum sample size was 522. For qualitative study we conducted 8 IDI from post-partum women and two FGD from health care providers.

Simple random sampling techniques (lottery method) was used to select Health facilities and Systematic random sampling techniques was used to select study participates. There were One referral hospital and eight health centers found in Gondar Town Health facilities. Among these UOGCSRH, Poly health center, Azezo health center and Maraki health center were selected by lottery method. We use proportional allocation formula to select the appropriate sample in the selected health facilities. The delivery coverage per month at UOGCSRH (755), Poly health center(162), Azezo health center(121) and Maraki health center(153) women.

WhereWhere ni= Total sample size for each health facilities n= Final sample size, 522 Ni= Monthly total delivery in each health facilities N= Monthly total number of delivered women in all selected health facilities 1191.

The sampling procedure was by calculating a constant k=3 and we were take the average delivery services at selected public health facilities in one month 1191 with total minimum sample size 522 then k=1191/522=2.28 in every 3rdinterval. The first participant was selected by using lottery method and the rest was selected every 3 interval (Fig.2).

For qualitative study we used purposive sampling technique to select post-partum women.

Socio-demographic factors; age, marital status, education, occupation, husband education, husband occupation, and residence.

Obstetric factors; Parity, complicated pregnancy, complicated delivery, previous history of abortion, and Status of current pregnancy.

Health Service Related factors; presence of ANC visit, Informed about labor companionship, counseling on BPCRP, desire for labor companionship and knowledge on labor companionship.

Labor companionship; continuous support provided to laboring women in all moments of labor and delivery process by their preferred companion. It may be provided by family member, a partner, or other [7].

Utilization of companionship: - Yes if laboring women accompanied by her preferred person starting from home to provide continuous support and stay with her till a minimum to the end of first stage of labor in the health facilities, otherwise No [21].

Knowledge; Participants were asked Eight items questions measure knowledge on labor companionship.

The response of participants in each item was coded as “Good knowledge” if they answered to the items correctly and get score above the median value and “Poor knowledge” if they below the median score [28].

For quantitative study a pre-tested semi-structured interview questionnaire was entered and coded to kobo collect v2022.1.2, collected by four trained midwifery with one supervisor. The questionaries’ had three parts Part -One; Socio demographic characteristics −8 items. Part -two; Obstetrics related factors-15 items. Part -Three; Knowledge related to companionship −8 items. Part -Four; Health Service Related factors-8 items. The questionaries’ were standardized; the reliability test was checked using Cronbach alpha the value was 0.8. Data were coded and entered to Kobo collect software and exported to Stata version-14 for further analysis. Variables with a p- value of ≤0.2 was entered into a multivariable logistic regression model. Variablesp-value<0.05 were taken as statistical significant and AOR with 95% CI was reported. Hosmer-Lemeshow test had insignificant with p value of 0.7. In all variables this variance inflation factor was less than 10.

For qualitative study interview guide were prepared. An interview was conducted in Amharic, audio-recorded, and simultaneously transcribed verbatim and retranslated into English. A coding scheme was thematically analyzed using open code software version 4.03. The codes were categorized sub-themes and main-them were merged.

The questioner was pre-tested with 5% [26] of the participants at Debre Tabor referral Hospital one week prior to the actual data collection. Two day intensive training on the data collection tool, was provided for data collectors and supervisors. The questionnaires were translated to Amharic to make it understandable by the study participants and then were retranslate to English. Trust worthiness of the qualitative data was checked by; transferability, Credibility. Dependability and Conformability.

A total of 522 women who gave birth were included making a response rate of 100%. Of these the mean age of women was 28±4.1 years and half (50.57%) of them with the age range of 25-29 years. More than two-third (67.64%) of respondent were lived in urban area (Table2).

More than half of women (54.79%) were primiparous. Among multiparous women, 69(13.22%) of women had at least one previous history of abortion. Regarding to most recent previous pregnancy, 34 (14.4%) of women had complication during pregnancy. From women who had recent previous complication (47.06%) of women had preeclampsia and/or eclampsia. Among the respondent (92.79%) of women delivered by SVD for last recent previous pregnancy followed by C/S (Table3).

Majority of women 212 (89.83%) had got ANC follow up for last recent previous pregnancy. From the respondent (17.79%) women were delivered at home (Table4).

From the respondent, 146(27.97%) women had good knowledge about labor companionship (Fig.3).

The magnitude of labor companionship utilization at Gondar town public health facilities was 11.3%(95% CI; 8.9%, 14.3%) (Fig.4).

The magnitude of labor companionship utilization was low which is assisted by qualitative findings from the women, narrate that they didn`t get labor companion with the reason of health facilities and health provider do not allowed entering birth companion to beside of laboring mother.

“….This University of Gondar hospital was not allowed. So I don’t see any family from the beginning to the end of my labor. I am suffering alone.” (IDIW-Participant-8).

Some respondents also reported that if the companioned person was health professional or if they have a relative in that area of health facility, they have to get birth companion during their labor process unless it is difficult.

“My husband is a health professional,they bring things what I need because he knows what I want” (IDIW-Participant4).

Of those a companioned women, more than two third 45(76.27%) of post-partum women were accompanied until the end of first stage of labor and 14(23.73%) were continued to accompanied till delivery (Fig.5).

From those who utilized a labor companions, (59.3%) of post-partum women were accompanied by their mother/mother-in-law, (30.5%) by their husbands followed by sisters and family health professional. In labor ward, 98.8% of them were accompanied by their preferred companion. This quantitative finding also nourished by qualitative finding that, most of the women preferred for birth companion were their mothers because the mother supports in every activity.

“I chose my mother because; my mother loves me very much. I want her to come. My mother has given birth and she knows the situation of my birth. I will become strong when my mother near my side” (IDIW-7).

A total of fifteen variables were eligible for regression analysis to identify factors associated with labor companionship utilization. On bi-variable binary logistic regression nine variables had an association with labor companionship utilization. However, after controlling confounders; residence, previous history of abortion, parity, and knowledge of women were statistically significant (Table5).

Women who came from urban area were 2.26 times more likely to utilize a labor companion compared to women from rural area (AOR=2.26, (95% CI: 1.08, 4.7)). And those women who had previous history of abortion were 2.39 times more likely to use a labor companion compared to their counterparts (AOR=2.39, (95% CI: 1.15, 4.9)).

Being primiparous were 2.3 times more likely to use labor companion as compared to multipara women (AOR=2.3, (95% CI: 1.16, 3.6)). Women who had good knowledge on labor companionships was 2.26 times more likely to use labor companion (AOR= 2.26 (95% CI: 1.2, 5.8)) as compared to those women who had poor knowledge on labor companionship.

To explore further and in-depth understanding of the factors for labor companionship qualitatively approach were conducted. As a result, participants described as health care provider’s denial and health facilities not allowed to enter birth companion in labor ward were main factors. In qualitative finding the overarching themes, sub theme of women for the analysis of the data IDI from post-partum women and FGD from health care providers were shown (Supportive File 2.docx).

In qualitative study the finding show that all participants perceived well regarding to companionship during labor and delivery as respondent describe labor companionship is necessary for women due to various kinds of support provided by the companions to these women in physical and moral perspectives.

The most common reason for desiring a labor companion was to have someone readily available to attend to their needs like carrying a child, keeping mothers to clean and helps to going to the bathroom.

The other reason for desiring a labor companion was to have someone readily available to attend to their needs like providing food, soft drink, and to buy medicine.

Participants need companion to meet their informational needs by telling them what to do, and helping them make decisions, they were not in a state to make decisions on their own during labor.

Most respondents reported that, they wanted the companion around them in order to have someone who could remind them later of what happened during labor.

Emotional support was on the whole mentioned as a reason for desiring a companion and crucial “If there is a person and when you have a person around me,my anxiety will decrease a little”.

Most of the women preferred for birth companion were their mothers because the mother has given birth before and experienced for the situation of birth and supports in every activity resulting in the best companion in labor.“….I need my mother,she tells me to be strong,she encourages me,and she makes me bear my pain.”(IDIW- participant-2).

Most of the women narrate that the factors for labor companionship was health facilities do not allowed entering the birth companion to beside of laboring mother especially in hospital setting.

Other women narrate that health care provider do not allowed entering the supported person to beside of laboring mother.

Most of women who had to get companions during labor and delivery expressed their gratitude because they helped them through the journey and felt safe with them nearby and in contrast they felt sad when they lonely.“I am very happy when my husband was with me(IDIW-Participant-4).

The women suggest to health facility, must allowed for labor companionship and even if it is difficult to separate delivery room for each woman to protect privacy, should better to prepare partition by screen.“… If there is no room for the parents the room is covered with a curtain,” (IDIW-Participant-1).

Some of women commented to health care provider, they must give respectful and companionate care for each woman.

In this study the magnitude of labor companionship utilization was 11.3%, among women who had companions. The finding of this study was not stick with the WHO recommendation states that, all women must have access to have a continuous support by companion during labor and delivery [2]. Our study findings was also consistent with previous study conducted at Arbaminch 13.8% [13]. This might be due to similar study setting both studies were conducted in public health facilities, used similar sampling method and techniques [23].

In contrast, it was lower than a study south Wollo, 19.9% [28], West Shoa Zone, Central Ethiopia,19.5% [22], Nepal,19% [11], East New Britain, 30% [12], in Brazil,18.8% [15], A multi nation Survey (Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria and Myanmar),50.4% [17], Tanzania, 44.7% [18] and Kenya,82% [21].

The possible explanation for this discrepancy might be due to socio-cultural and demographic differences of study participants in terms of educational level, norms and cultures between the societies [29], differences in healthcare policy and administrative protocol at the health facilities [30], difference in sample size and study setting [21], difference in health institution set up, health administrative barriers [30]. The health policy of other countries is committed to practice labor companionship which is feasible and well accepted by health providers and government officials [18].

In our study most of women narrate that they didn`t get birth companion during labor due to health facilities related barriers including narrow delivery room, privacy and voluntariness of the health facilities to enter birth companion. This finding is supported by the study conducted in Burkina Faso [31].

In this study women who were come from urban area were 2.26 times more likely to utilize a labor companion compared to counter parts. This finding is consistent with a study conducted in Kenya [21]. This might be due to women lived in urban more likely utilize ANC [32], had high media access easily gets information on labor companionship and birth preparedness and complication readiness plan [23].

Being Primi-para were 2.3 times more likely to utilize labor companion compared to multipara women. This is in agreement by a previous study conducted in Debere markos [23], Arbaminch [13], Ghana [26]. This could be Primiparous women perceived more likely to have complication during labor [29], had no experience of the childbirth process, and fearing of their labor [33].

Those women who had previous history of abortion were 2.39 times more likely to utilize a labor companion compared to their counterparts. This is supported by a previous study conducted in Tanzania [18]. The possible explanation might be women who had previous abortion, perceives that the complication may happen again [13,18], that enhances more utilize labor companion.

Women who had good knowledge on labor companionship was 2.26 times more likely to utilize a labor companion compared to those women who had poor knowledge on labor companionship. This is consistent with previous study in Debre Markos town [23].The possible explanation could be women recognized about the role of the labor companionship, and know about companionship utilization is a component of human right, they might be choose their preferred companion ADDIN EN.CITE [33–35].

Among those who utilized labor companion, 98.8% of them were accompanied by their preferred companion (mother). This finding was Supported by previous study in three Arab countries [32], India [14], A multi nation Survey (Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria and Myanmar) [17], Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria, Myanmar and Kenya [17,21]. This might be mothers were experienced in supporting and provide care for the women and newborn [21,36].

From this qualitative finding most of the women narrate that both health facilities and health provider did not allowed to enter the birth companion to beside of laboring mother especially in hospital setting. The barriers were lack of provider’s awareness, lack of community awareness, facility level (infrastructure and limited space), and privacy issue. This study is supported with study conducted in south Africa [31,37], midwives narrates barriers to utilize companion can be classified, limited space in the labor and delivery wards, no private rooms.

In our study, 88.8% women had future desire for labor companionship utilization consistent with a study conducted in Debre Markos and Rwanda [23,36]. This might be that mothers that have a desire to use labor companionship more likely to express their feelings to the maternal health care providers by means of their companion [33]. Most of women wanted to have a companion stay with them during labor and delivery, otherwise they feel lonely. This findings is in lined with previous study conducted in Kenya and Uganda [21,35].

Most post-partum women who desire birth companion for reason various activities like for physical support, instrumental support, and informational support. This is highlighted similar benefits in previous study in Srilanka, Rwanda [30,36], south Africa [37] midwives stated that companion gives some forms of support can be physical, psychological and emotional, informational and non-pharmacological pain relief by massaging the laboring woman [38]. Addressing these challenges through targeted policies can improve maternal and neonatal outcomes, reducing mortality rates by exercising labor companionship. Ultimately, these findings call implementing a more integrated and accessible health system that prioritizes labor companionship utilization to reduce maternal and neonatal mortality.

Key strengths include the triangulation of qualitative research method, multicenter study and multiple data sources that helps to insights the perspectives and experiences of labor companionship based on their understanding. However, the study had the following limitations. Firstly the nature of the study design (cross-sectional) does not allow establishing temporal relationships. Secondly recall bias may have influenced mothers’ ability to accurately remember maternal and child health services received. Thirdly social desirability bias, stemming from self-reported information, may also have affected data validity. Fourthly the study conducted only in urban public health facilities, may not generalize to all public health facilities due to exclusion rural public health facilities. Finally heterogeneity may face by factors such as type of health facilities between hospital and health center that the service provision might be different.

In this study the magnitude of labor companionship utilization was low. Urban residence, Primiparous, previous history of abortion, and having good knowledge on labor companionship were statistically significant. Most of the women and health care providers perceived that, narrow delivery room space, absence of a partition in delivery room, overcrowding of women in one delivery room(privacy issue), lack of awareness on community and health care provider`s on birth companionship were main barriers. Thus to meet international WHO recommendations every woman is offered a companion of her choice during labor and birth, suggest the need for multi-layered interventions includes creating private spaces using partitions or curtains to ensure conducive delivery rooms in ways that facilitate the presence of labor companionship.

A clear written policies allowing companions during labor, enforce privacy measures like curtains should be developed in order to standardize the implementation of labor companionship, future delivery rooms should be constructed as wide as possible to accommodate the birth companions.

Additionally health care providers start to implement labor companionship for all women at all times and provide client education regarding labor companionship to all pregnant women during antenatal care and enhancing their awareness during counseling on ANC follow up.

Researchers are also encouraged to conduct prospective cohort studies for stronger evidence in labor companionship utilization by incorporating rural public health facilities and other concerning bodies; such as traditional birth attendant, their partners, community leaders, religious leaders and HEWs for generalization.

Supplementary Material 1. Ethical clearance obtained from University of Gondar.

Supplementary Material 2. Participants profile and the themes on qualitative finding about labor companionship.

Supplementary Material 3. English version questionaries’ and interview guide.

I would like to acknowledge our study participates and co authors for reviewing the manuscripit.

All authors reviewed the revised manuscript. All authors declared that no conflict of interest exist.