Gestational diabetes mellitus affects almost 18 million pregnancies worldwide, increasing by >70% in the past 20 years. DNA methylation has been associated with maternal hyperglycemia and type 2 diabetes risk in offspring. This study hypothesized that hyperglycemia during pregnancy influences DNA methylation changes at birth that mediate metabolic risk in offspring. Cord blood samples (n= 112) were obtained from women with normal (n= 43), impaired (n= 31), and low (n= 38) glucose tolerance enrolled in the Hong Kong field center of the Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) study. Differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were identified using methylation sequencing and evaluated for their association with offspring metabolic dysfunction. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis assessed the predictive value of DMRs for the classification of maternal glycemic status. These DMRs were assessed in human β-cells and pancreatic ductal epithelial cells in response to hyperglycemic stimuli. Methylation sequencing identified 19 methylation biomarkers in cord blood associated with maternal hyperglycemia, which correlated with offspring metabolic abnormalities. Incorporating the 19 DMRs improved the prediction of offspring β-cell dysfunction at 7, 11, and 18 years of age from area under the curve (AUC) scores ranging from 0.53 to 0.68 using clinical factors alone to AUC scores ranging from 0.71 to 0.95. Validation in human cell models confirmed that hyperglycemia influences methylation-dependent gene expression. This study demonstrates that DNA methylation biomarkers in cord blood predict offspring metabolic dysfunction, highlighting their potential as early indicators of diabetes risk. The findings align with methylation-mediated regulation in human pancreatic cells.

Maternal hyperglycemia is linked to 19 cord blood DNA methylation biomarkers that predict offspring metabolic dysfunction.

These methylation changes, associated with maternal glycemic status, improved the prediction of β-cell dysfunction at 7, 11, and 18 years of age compared with clinical factors alone.

Validation in human β-cells and pancreatic ductal epithelial cells confirmed that hyperglycemia influences methylation-dependent gene expression.

These findings highlight the role of epigenetic modifications at birth as early indicators of diabetes risk, suggesting that in utero hyperglycemic exposure may mediate long-term metabolic outcomes in offspring.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) accounts for >80% of hyperglycemia in pregnancy (HIP) cases (1). This has major health consequences for the mother and child, with trends increasing in prevalence across diverse populations (1,2). The International Diabetes Federation reported a higher prevalence of HIP in South East Asia (28.0%) compared with North America (20.7%) and South and Central America (13.7%) (3). The differences in estimates are attributed to a lack of consensus on GDM diagnosis, with variations in screening approaches, ancestral genetic diversity, and environmental and social factors (4).

While HIP and GDM are associated with significant morbidities for both the mother and child, the genomic underpinnings of the conditions remain poorly understood, aside from a proposed shared genetic etiology with type 2 diabetes (T2D) (5–8). More recently, the largest existing genome-wide association study (GWAS) investigating GDM identified nine new loci associated with genetic risk. Gene mapping showed that the genetics of GDM risk exists in two categories that are associated with1) polygenic risk of T2D and2) gestational contributors to disease risk (9). While the results highlighted genes associated with islet cells, glucose homeostasis, and placental expression, none of the existing GWAS assessed the role of genomic methylation and mothers with hyperglycemia in pregnancy. DNA methylation is highly studied epigenetic mechanisms by which cells regulate genome stability and gene expression. It is increasingly recognized for its potential as a biomarker (10). While there is increasing interest in DNA methylation as it pertains to diabetes and its complications, more comprehensive evaluation of DNA methylation using sequencing approaches remain relatively understudied, partly attributed to the popular use of arrays studying GDM (11).

To determine the epigenetic signature of hyperglycemia in pregnancy, we performed cord blood methylation sequencing (methyl-seq) of 112 participants enrolled in the longitudinal Hong Kong field center of the Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) study. We hypothesized that cord blood DNA methylation at specific genes is associated with hyperglycemia in pregnancy and future metabolic risk in the offspring. We observed that significant methylation changes were associated with a long-term impact on offspring metabolism. We examined the generalizability of hyperglycemia influencing gene methylation in human β-cells and pancreatic ductal epithelial cells. Finally, we assessed the association of DNA methylation indices with future risk of metabolic dysfunction in the offspring at 7, 11, and 18 years of age. These results indicate a strong association between cord blood DNA methylation following maternal hyperglycemia and offspring β-cell function.

All participants were enrolled through the Hong Kong field center of the HAPO study. Inclusion criteria and assessments have been described previously (12). Each mother underwent a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) between 24 and 32 weeks’ gestation, with glucose levels blinded to clinicians and mothers. Consequently, no treatment of hyperglycemia was administered during pregnancy. Cord blood samples were collected within 5 min after delivery. DNA was extracted using the Gentra Puregene Blood Kit (QIAGEN) and stored at −80°C. This study included mother-offspring pairs from the Hong Kong field center of the HAPO study, with offspring followed up to age 18 years. Study protocols for recruitment and follow-up have been previously reported (12–15). Maternal glucose exposure was assessed during pregnancy using glucose area under the curve (GAUC) values from OGTT. Mothers with an area under the curve (AUC) below the median (GAUC <12.85) were classified as having normal glucose tolerance (NGT), those with an AUC between the median and quartile 3 (Q3) (≥12.85 to <14.45) were classified as having impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), and those with an AUC ≥14.45 were classified as having low glucose tolerance (LGT).

For the current study, 112 samples were selected based on the availability of high-quality DNA sufficient for methyl-seq. Specifically, only samples with ≥1 µg of intact DNA and complete maternal glucose OGTT data were included. The distribution across glucose tolerance groups (NGT, IGT, and LGT) was guided by GAUC quartiles to ensure representative stratification.

Glucose tolerance was defined using maternal OGTT AUC values from the full cohort (N= 1,621). Quartile thresholds were as follows: Q1 (≤11.5), median (12.85), and Q3 (≥14.45). Participants in this study were grouped accordingly as follows: NGT (GAUC <12.85;n= 43), IGT (≥12.85 to <14.45;n= 31), and LGT (≥14.45;n= 38).

DNA methylation profiling was performed using methyl-binding domain enrichment sequencing (methyl-seq) (10). Library preparation used NEBNext Ultra Kits with 10 PCR cycles. Libraries were pooled (4-plex) and sequenced using Illumina HiSeq 2500 (150-bp paired end) at Novogene Co. Ltd. (Beijing, China). Data were processed using software tool/alignment algorithm BWA-MEM (Burrows-Wheeler Aligner–Maximal Exact Matches), peak calling tool/alignment algorithm MACS2 (Model-based Analysis for ChIP-Seq, version 2), and the R/Bioconductor software package ChIPseeker. Peaks were filtered to exclude artifacts and blacklisted regions, retaining those present across samples. Methylation data were adjusted using a generalized linear model (GLM) for maternal C-peptide, age, BMI, smoking, and neonatal measurements (e.g., skinfold sum, head circumference, length, fat mass, gestational age, sex, cord serum C-peptide) (16) (Supplementary Fig. 1). Cell type heterogeneity was corrected using expression of CD19, CD14, and CD3D in the GLM (17). Differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were identified by pairwise comparisons among NGT, IGT, and LGT groups using edgeR. DMRs atP< 0.001 were evaluated using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis (18), and those with AUC >0.65 were refined by least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression (19). Refined DMRs were validated via ROC analysis for prediction of offspring insulin sensitivity and β-cell function at 7, 11, and 18 years of age. Binary outcome stratification enabled performance evaluation for long-term prediction.

Read quality was assessed using FastX (version 0.0.13) with trimming at quality threshold 20. Reads were aligned to human genome build 38 using BWA-MEM (20). Genomic annotations were assigned using ChIPseeker with GRCh38.101 (21), and peak quantification used bedtools multicov (22). Peaks with mean read coverage >10 were retained.

The count matrix was analyzed with edgeR using GLMs to account for technical and biological variability (16). Corrections included maternal age, BMI, C-peptide, smoking, and birth traits (e.g., head circumference, length, skinfold, fat mass, sex, cord C-peptide, gestational age). Cell type proportions were estimated via expression of CD19, CD14, and CD3D and corrected using an R-based cell type deconvolution algorithm (17). CpG sites within 2 kb of marker transcription start sites (TSSs) were normalized and used. Pairwise contrasts (LGT vs. NGT, IGT vs. NGT, and LGT vs. IGT) were assessed with a threshold ofP< 0.001.

DMRs identified by edgeR were evaluated with ROC analysis using ROCR (18). DMRs with AUC >0.65 were retained. Significance was determined via permutation testing, comparing observed AUCs to a null distribution to identify DMRs likely to perform above chance.

LASSO-selected methylation biomarkers were evaluated using ROCR to classify glucose tolerance (1 = LGT, 0 = IGT/NGT). The AUC assessed how well the DMRs distinguished LGT from IGT/NGT.

Families from the Hong Kong HAPO field center were invited for follow-up at 7, 11, and 18 years. Participants provided informed consent and underwent standardized assessments, including medical and family history, maternal smoking/alcohol use, and childhood lifestyle, via questionnaires. Ethics approval was granted by the Joint Chinese University of Hong Kong–New Territories East Cluster Clinical Research Ethics Committee.

Follow-up data were used to validate DMR performance. Data were available for 94 participants at 7 years, 85 at 11 years, and 55 at 18 years. Metabolic outcomes included HOMA of β-cell function (HOMA-B) and HOMA2-B, HOMA of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), C-peptide–to–insulin ratio (CPRI) (hepatic insulin clearance), insulinogenic index (early insulin response), GAUC (total glucose exposure), disposition index (DI) (β-cell/insulin sensitivity interaction), and DI-120 (late-phase β-cell function). HOMA2-B of insulin (HOMA2-INS) and HOMA2-B of C-peptide (HOMA2-B-CP) reflected insulin- and C-peptide–based β-cell measures, respectively. All outcomes were dichotomized at the median for binary classification, enabling performance assessment by ROCR.

Primary human β-cells (EndoC-βH5) from Human Cell Design were cultured per the manufacturer’s protocols (23). Cells were seeded at 1 million/well in six-well plates and exposed to low (0.5 mmol/L), normal (5.5 mmol/L), or high (15.5 mmol/L) glucose for up to 3 days. Human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells from AddexBio were cultured in keratinocyte serum-free media with supplements, as previously described (24). RNA and DNA were extracted for methyl-binding domain capture quantitative PCR (methyl-qPCR) and gene expression profiling. Significance was assessed via two-tailed Studentttest.

Methyl-qPCR was used to quantify methylation by comparing target amplification in bound/unbound fractions after MethylMiner assay (10). A methylated-control primer normalized interassay variability. Primers targeting DMRs were designed with Primer3 (150–350 bp), as listed inSupplementary Table 4.

Total RNA was isolated using a Direct-zol RNA Miniprep Kit (Zymo Research). cDNA synthesis used the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Primers were designed with Oligoperfect Designer. qPCR was performed using PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix and QuantStudio 7 Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Thermal cycling included 50°C for 2 min, 95°C for 2 min, and 40 cycles of 95°C for 5 s and 65°C for 30 s.

Cycle threshold values were measured during exponential phase. Methylation data were normalized to spike-in methylated control; gene expression was normalized to H3F3A. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM. Two-tailed Studentttests were used to determine significance of glucose treatment effects.

Data sets and resources are available upon request (R.C.W.M. for GDM study and A.E.-O. for epigenetic indices).

The study cohort comprised 112 participants from the HAPO study who were categorized into NGT (n= 43), IGT (n= 31), and LGT (n= 38) groups. Clinical characteristics of the participants are described inSupplementary Table 1. Methylation profiling was performed from cord blood DNA, with the experimental workflow outlined inFig. 1A. We determined that cord blood DNA methylation was associated with IGT and LGT during pregnancy. Pairwise comparisons (LGT vs. NGT and IGT vs. NGT) identified a total of 1,912 DMRs with a significance threshold ofP< 0.001 (Fig. 1B). Notably, 74% of the DMRs exhibited a loss of methylation in the IGT and LGT groups compared with the NGT group during pregnancy. Genomic mapping showed that the majority of DMRs were located ≥5 kb from the TSS, predominantly within the gene body, and more specifically in the intronic regions, compared with other genomic features, such as promoters, exons, and CpG islands (Supplementary Fig. 2AandB).

Use of DNA methylation biomarkers yields biomarkers associated with robust performance and accuracy in diagnosing maternal hyperglycemia.A: Summary of the experimental design and EdgeR workflow. DNA was isolated from 112 cord blood samples, and deep sequencing was performed on methylated-DNA enriched using Methyl-Miner. Differential methylation analysis was conducted using pairwise comparisons of three groups: NGT, IGT, and LGT. DMRs were identified using EdgeR with a significance threshold ofP< 0.001.B: Differential methylation associated with IGT and LGT in pregnancy. Volcano plot of EdgeR results. The methylated regions are visualized through their relative log-fold change (logFC) vs. −log10(Pvalue). The horizontal line is −log10(0.001), the cutoffPvalue used to identify DMRs associated with maternal glucose tolerance.C: Localization of DMRs associated with maternal hyperglycemia during pregnancy. Manhattan plot of AUC scores of candidate biomarkers from EdgeR analysis. A total of 1,912 DMRs were individually tested for glucose tolerance classification accuracy using ROC analysis to calculate the AUC. Potential biomarkers were selected based on specific criteria, including AUC > 0.65 per tested contrast and DMRs with more than four CpG sites. Biomarkers with an AUC > 0.65, as indicated by a red dashed line, are colored according to the contrast in which they were found to be significantly differentially methylated. The binomial model used ROC to test the AUC based on which contrast it was differentially methylated in. Thex-axis indicates the approximate position of the DMR in the genome (AUC > 0.65 andP< 0.001).

ROC analysis of the 1,912 DMRs was used to identify methylation biomarkers (Supplementary Fig. 3A). To classify cord blood IGT and LGT methylation indices, we examined 160 DMRs with an AUC >0.65, with each DMR containing more than four CpG sites. The chromosomal distribution of these 160 DMRs are shown inFig. 1Cwith a comprehensive listing shown inSupplementary Table 2. Refined DNA methylation mapping using LASSO identified 19 methylation biomarkers with high confidence (Supplementary Fig. 3B).

Specifically,CACNA1E,AGBL4,MAPT, andTMEM266showed a gain of methylation, whileKATNAL1,TAF4B, andFRAS1exhibited a loss of methylation in the LGT group compared with control participants (Table 1). The remaining three were associated with long noncoding RNAs, namelyLIX-AS1,LINC02558, andLNC-IUR(Ensembl identifier ENSG00000245552). When considered together, the 19 methylation biomarkers demonstrated exceptional predictive power, with an AUC of 0.95 and an accuracy of 0.88 at a highly significantP= 2.02e-07 (Fig. 2A). Additionally, when the model was refined to include only biomarkers associated with a loss of methylation, the predictive performance remained robust, with an AUC of 0.86 and accuracy of 0.84 at aP= 1.89e-05.

Summary of candidate biomarkers after LASSO regression analysis. The loci represent the ranges determining the DMR position on human genome build 38. Shown are the AUC and accuracy scores for diagnosis of IGT or LGT during pregnancy. FC, fold change; lncRNA, long noncoding RNA; NA, not available.

Integration of DNA methylation biomarkers provide robust prediction of LGT during pregnancy.A: DNA methylation indices of GDM. ROC curves were generated for the combination of 19 candidate biomarkers to diagnose LGT (n= 38, binomial model = 1) from the collective IGT and NGT groups (n= 74, binomial model = 0). The black line represents all biomarkers included in the model, while the red and green lines denote biomarkers with gain or loss of methylation, respectively.Pvalues were computed in R package CARET using a one-sided binominal test.B: Workflow methylation-mediated gene expression. The refined 19 biomarkers were prioritized for validation in hyperglycemic cell models and assessed by targeted methods such as methyl-qPCR (methylation) and real-time qRT-PCR for gene expression.C: Validation of methylation-mediated gene expression in human β-cells following hyperglycemia. Left: Methylation assessment was conducted using methyl-qPCR forFRAS1,KATNAL1, andCACNA1E. The bar graph shows the individual methylation levels in cells exposed to low glucose (LG) (0.5 mmol/L), normal glucose (NG) (5.5 mmol/L), and high glucose (HG) (15.5 mmol/L) for 3 days. DNA methylation fold change was calculated using methyl-qPCR data for LG (n= 3), NG (n= 3), and HG (n= 2) adjusted to methylated-DNA spike in control. The significance was calculated by comparing LG with NG and HG using a Studentttest. *P< 0.05, **P< 0.01, ***P< 0.001. Error bars indicate the SEM. Right: The mRNA expression levels ofFRAS1,KATNAL1, andCACNA1Eassessed by real-time qRT-PCR (adjusted toH3F3A). Significance was calculated by comparing LG with NG and HG using a Studentttest. *P< 0.05, **P< 0.01. Error bars indicate the SEM.D: Validation of candidate methylation-mediated gene expression in human pancreas ductal epithelial cells following hyperglycemia. Left: Methylation assessment was conducted using methyl-qPCR. Bar graph shows the individual methylation levels for candidate methylation biomarkers in cultured cells exposed to NG (5.5 mmol/L) and HG (25.5 mmol/L) for 7 days. DNA methylation fold change was calculated using methyl-qPCR data for NG and HG normalized to methylated-DNA spike in control. The significance was calculated by comparing NG with HG using a Studentttest. **P< 0.01. Error bars indicate the SEM (n= 3). Right: mRNA expression ofFRAS1,KATNAL1, andCACNA1Ewere also assessed using real-time qRT-PCR (adjusted toH3F3A). Significance was calculated by comparing NG with HG using a Studentttest. *P< 0.05. Error bars indicate the SEM (n= 3).

The relevance of cord blood methylation was also assessed in human endocrine cells (Fig. 2B). Comprising the islet of Langerhans, the β-cell is considered to play a key role in the pathogenesis and progression of hyperglycemia in pregnancy and GDM. We created a model of clinically relevant hyperglycemia and assessed DNA methylation, including mRNA abundance of the diabetes-associated biomarkers that mapped toFRAS1,KATNAL1, andCACNA1E. Consistent with the observations from cord blood DNA (Supplementary Fig. 4), hyperglycemia reduced methylation of theFRAS1andKATNAL1genes in human β-cells, whereas methylation of theCACNA1Egene was elevated following hyperglycemia (Fig. 2C, left). Furthermore, methylation changes influenced by hyperglycemia in β-cells were inversely associated with gene expression levels (Fig. 2C, right), suggesting a potential regulatory relationship. However, these observations are correlative, and functional validation is required to determine causality. Because hyperglycemia would influence adjacent pancreatic cells, we also investigated methylation changes in pancreatic ductal epithelial cells.

Consistent with our findings in cord blood and β-cells, we observe methylation-dependent changes (Fig. 2D, left) in human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells following hyperglycemia (Fig. 2D, right). Taken together, these results suggest that observed changes in DNA methylation are likely to be coordinated and exhibit cell type–specific patterns influenced by glucose, which are linked to pancreatic cell function. Notably, these patterns align with those observed in cord blood and are associated with hyperglycemia during pregnancy.

The performance of the 19 methylation biomarkers was assessed along with offspring clinical factors for the prediction of offspring metabolic outcomes at 7, 11, and 18 years of age (Table 2andSupplementary Table 3). At age 7, methylation biomarkers demonstrated strong predictive ability for several key metabolic outcomes, including β-cell function (AUC = 0.71,P= 0.013), HOMA-B (AUC = 0.78,P= 0.00047), insulinogenic index (AUC = 0.74,P= 0.014), HOMA-IR (AUC = 0.80,P =2e-06), and glucose tolerance (AUC = 0.83,P =9e-08). In all cases, methylation biomarkers consistently outperformed offspring CFs, including β-cell function (AUC = 0.61,P= 0.38), HOMA-B (AUC = 0.66,P= 0.30), insulinogenic index (AUC = 0.59,P= 0.60), HOMA-IR (AUC = 0.64,P= 0.038), and glucose tolerance (AUC = 0.67,P= 0.0083). At age 11, neither methylation biomarkers nor clinical factors demonstrated strong predictive values for HOMA2-B-CP (AUC = 0.73,P= 0.16, and AUC = 0.59,P= 0.78, respectively). Nevertheless, methylation showed a significant improvement over clinical factors in predicting the corrected insulin secretion index (CPRI) at age 11 (AUC = 0.71,P= 0.0057, vs. AUC = 0.55,P= 0.22). At age 18, methylation biomarkers exhibited strong predictive power for CPRI (AUC = 0.94,P= 2.3e-07), HOMA-B-INS (AUC = 0.85,P= 0.00075), and insulin DI (AUC = 0.86,P= 0.00022). Taken together, these results suggest that methylation indices outperformed clinical factors alone for predicting long-term offspring metabolic outcomes.

Offspring clinical factors include cord blood glucose and C-peptide and offspring birth weight and birth fat mass.

*Median based on larger HAPO study and applied to selected samples.

In this study using a sequencing-based approach to methylation profiling, we had several notable findings. In addition to identifying several DMRs associated with maternal hyperglycemia, we highlighted the potential link between these methylation markers and hyperglycemia in pregnancy. The demonstration of methylation changes in pancreatic islet cells in a hyperglycemic model highlights the functional relevance of the key genes regulated by methylation. The top 19 methylation markers predicted offspring β-cell function in longitudinal follow-up, highlighting the potential role of methylation changes in mediating the long-term metabolic effects in offspring following exposure to hyperglycemia in pregnancy.

Our study investigated the impact of maternal hyperglycemia on offspring outcomes by examining maternal hyperglycemia beyond the current definitions of GDM. This is in line with findings from the HAPO follow-up study and our 18-year follow-up study, which highlighted the long-term impact of maternal hyperglycemia, examined as a continuous trait, on offspring glycemia (15,25).

By using glucose during OGTT as a continuous measures, we included women with altered glucose levels who did not meet the current diagnostic criteria for GDM but were still at risk for long-term complications (26), as well as having offspring at increased metabolic risk. This approach aimed to identify a larger group of at-risk individuals who may not be diagnosed according to the current diagnostic thresholds of GDM. Similar to the findings from the long-term follow-up of the offspring, we were able to identify long-term consequences following maternal hyperglycemia that may not be apparent if restricted to current diagnostic thresholds of GDM.

We believe that this approach is novel and clinically relevant. Despite international efforts, there is disagreement around diagnostic thresholds for GDM diagnosis that are likely to contribute to differences in prevalence and clinical outcomes. The HAPO study has previously shown that mild glucose abnormalities can negatively impact maternal and offspring health (12). Our study builds on those findings by offering a more detailed characterization of maternal glucose tolerance. By integrating AUC values from a cohort of 1,621 women in the HAPO study, we defined three glucose tolerance groups: NGT (<12.85), IGT (≥12.85 and <14.45), and LGT (≥14.45). This inclusion allowed for a more comprehensive assessment of maternal glucose tolerance and its impact on offspring health.

Our results show that DNA methylation differs significantly across a range of glucose tolerance levels, including those that do not meet the current diagnostic criteria for GDM. These findings support the hypothesis that mild maternal glucose dysregulation results in lasting methylation changes implicated in offspring health. By linking DNA methylation with long-term metabolic risk, our study offers new insights into the potential of epigenetic biomarkers for identifying individuals at risk for metabolic dysfunction in childhood. Furthermore, the identification of significant methylation changes at relatively mild degrees of maternal hyperglycemia adds to the ongoing debate regarding diagnostic thresholds for GDM.

We identified 19 methylation biomarkers in cord blood that were strongly associated with maternal hyperglycemia and were predictive for offspring metabolic dysfunction at 7, 11, and 18 years of age. Furthermore, some of these genes have been previously associated with diabetes development and β-cell dysfunction, such asMAPT,AGBL4,TAF4B,CACNA1E,FRAS1, andKATNAL1. First, the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene encodes for tau protein and has a major role in the intracellular trafficking of vesicles in pancreatic β-cells implicated in T2D (27). In pancreatic islets,AGBL4, also known asCCP6, encodes for cytosolic carboxypeptidase 4, which mediates the deglutamylation of target proteins to form tubulins involved in insulin secretion (28). Several studies have previously demonstrated a relationship betweenABGL4and diabetes, particularly in the context of sulfonylureas, with one study identifying reduced expression ofABGL4in patients with T2D (29). This is consistent with the gain of methylation observed for theAGBL4in our cord blood assessment. Relevant to β-cell regulation,TAF4Bencodes for TATA-box binding protein associated factor 4b, a transcriptional coactivator that regulates the expression of genes involved in glucose sensing and insulin secretion (30). TheCACNA1Egene encodes the Cav2.3 voltage-gated calcium channel involved in insulin secretion. The increase in intracellular calcium concentration triggered by glucose-induced depolarization of pancreatic β-cells activates exocytosis, resulting in insulin release (31).FRAS1is involved in the pathogenesis of diabetes complications. It was recently linked with the progression of end-stage kidney disease (32). In a previous study,KATNAL1expression was associated with T2D and correlated negatively with insulin secretion (33). GWAS has determined thatKATNAL1,CACNA1E, andAGBL4are associated with T2D (34).

To translate the relevance of DNA methylation changes observed in cord blood, we assessed clinically relevant models of hyperglycemia in human pancreatic cells because of the strong association between gene methylation and β-cell dysfunction. In nondiabetic human β-cells, we observed reducedFRAS1andKATNAL1gene methylation when exposed to hyperglycemic conditions. Conversely,CACNA1Emethylation was elevated following hyperglycemic exposure. The observations were also validated in human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells. These results are consistent with our findings in cord blood samples from mothers with IGT and LGT. Taken together, these results show proof of concept that hyperglycemia influences DNA methylation of key genes involved in glucose metabolism and insulin secretion, and these changes may serve as early biomarkers for identifying offspring at risk for β-cell dysfunction. This study further emphasizes that DNA methylation of maternal hyperglycemia is perhaps not unique to cord blood but captures similar signaling pathways in response in pancreatic exocrine cells.

Earlier studies have highlighted the link between maternal hyperglycemia and offspring glycemia and β-cell function (13,35). Our study shows that cord blood DNA methylation can serve as a predictor of future β-cell dysfunction in offspring exposed to hyperglycemia in utero. Compared with traditional clinical factors, such as newborn weight, fat mass, cord glucose, and C-peptide levels, DNA methylation demonstrated predictive ability. We observed that changes in DNA methylation patterns at birth were associated with key indices of β-cell function measured later in childhood. These indices included HOMA-B, CRPI, and HOMA-IR. Additionally, dynamic measures of β-cell function, such as the insulinogenic index, which measures early insulin response to glucose, GAUC, and the DI, a composite measure of insulin sensitivity and secretion, also showed a strong association with the methylation markers.

A key strength of our study is the comprehensive methylation profiling using a sequencing-based approach, which provided an in-depth comprehensive survey of methylation changes compared with the methylation arrays commonly used. We investigated a broader range of maternal hyperglycemia, beyond current definitions of GDM, allowing us to capture the influence glycemia has on gene methylation. The availability of longitudinal follow-up with detailed metabolic evaluation has facilitated our longitudinal modeling, which provided insights into how in utero hyperglycemia influences long-term metabolic outcomes, while mechanistic studies linked these changes in DNA methylation to changes in gene expression. The use of cord blood offers a valuable snapshot of the intrauterine environment, providing insight into fetal exposure to maternal hyperglycemia. However, we acknowledge that some of the observed methylation differences may not be exclusively induced by maternal hyperglycemia. Not all epigenetic marks are fully reprogrammed during early embryogenesis, and certain DMRs may be inherited from the parents. DNA from the mothers or fathers was not assayed in this study, limiting our ability to determine whether the DMRs are de novo or preexisting. This distinction is important, particularly in the context of transgenerational epigenetic inheritance, which is increasingly recognized in the pathogenesis of metabolic disorders. Future studies incorporating maternal DNA, and where feasible, paternal DNA, at the time of enrollment could clarify the heritable versus environmental components of the methylation patterns associated with hyperglycemia in pregnancy. Similarly, because cord blood is collected at birth, it reduces potential confounding factors such as postnatal exposures that may influence offspring outcome. This study is the first major sequencing effort that has identified methylation indices relevant to the newborn, while also providing prognostic implications on long-term metabolic health for the offspring. Despite these insights, the molecular mechanisms underlying the observed methylation changes remain poorly understood. Future mechanistic studies are needed to determine whether these changes are by DNMT-mediated de novo methylation, passive demethylation during DNA replication, or active TET-mediated demethylation by 5-hydroxymethylcytosine intermediates. Clarifying the mechanistic basis of these changes could provide targets for therapeutic modulation and deepen our understanding of the plasticity of the fetal epigenome in response to maternal glycemic status.

Our study has several limitations. The sample size and use of a single cohort limit the generalizability of our findings, and further validation in genetically diverse populations are necessary. A larger validation study will likely enhance the performance of our methylation indices of maternal hyperglycemia. We also excluded individuals with severe hyperglycemia, which may influence the applicability of our results. Additionally, mothers were not treated for hyperglycemia during pregnancy according to the blinded protocol of the HAPO study; therefore, detailed medication histories were not available for analysis. However, mothers with preexisting diabetes or clinically significant comorbidities were excluded from the study cohort. Relevant maternal characteristics, such as smoking status, BMI, and C-peptide levels, were collected at baseline and incorporated as covariates into the methylation model. Nevertheless, the potential influence of unmeasured maternal exposures or medications on fetal methylation patterns cannot be fully excluded and represents a limitation of the current study. While we prioritized identifying subtle glucose dysregulation, the inclusion of subthreshold glucose levels raises the potential for false-positive results. Because the maternal assessments were conducted at 24–32 weeks of gestation, our findings may not be applicable for early GDM. Given the difference in profiling platforms used, we were also not able to compare our findings with methylation studies using array-based technologies (9,11). Maternal hyperglycemia is often influenced by external factors, such as socioeconomic status, lifestyle behaviors, and environmental stress, which may have a confounding effect. Although we have done our best to control for known confounders, further studies with larger and more diverse cohorts are necessary to refine thresholds of maternal hyperglycemia associated with methylation changes. Additionally, despite applying a stringentP< 0.001 threshold for DMR discovery and AUC >0.65 for ROC filtering, we acknowledge the risk of false-positive results due to multiple testing across time points and metabolic traits. Despite these limitations, our study highlights the potential of epigenetic markers for predicting metabolic risk in offspring. Finally, because DNA methylation is thought to be tissue specific, it would be of interest for future research to assess multiple tissue types relevant to the pathophysiology of GDM and assess the immediate and long-term influence of maternal hyperglycemia. While this aspect should be considered, this study demonstrates a close correspondence of maternal hyperglycemia and cord blood gene methylation with methylation-dependent expression of theCACNA1E,FRAS1, andKATNAL1genes in β-cells and pancreatic ductal epithelial cells.

In conclusion, using a methylation sequencing approach has identified novel gene targets in cord blood that are predictive of future β-cell dysfunction in offspring exposed to maternal hyperglycemia. Furthermore, the pathophysiological significance of DNA methylation in cord blood was assessed in human pancreatic β-cells, including and ductal epithelial cell models, showing a strong association for DNA methylation in response to hyperglycemia. Our study the expands the current understanding of the epigenetic effects due to hyperglycemia and highlights potential mechanistic links to long-term metabolic dysfunction in the offspring.

This article contains supplementary material online athttps://doi.org/10.2337/figshare.29236478.

Acknowledgments.The authors thank the participants, researchers, and others engaged in the Hong Kong HAPO study.

The funding sources had no role in the design of the study, interpretation of the data, or the decision to publish the results.

Prior Presentation.Parts of this study were presented in abstract form at the 26th Diabetes and Cardiovascular Risk Factors–East Meets West Symposium, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, 5–6 October 2024.

This study was supported by RGC General Research Fund grant 14118718. Follow-up of the HAPO Hong Kong field center was supported by RGC General Research Fund grant 14102719. Additional partial support was provided by Health and Medical Research Fund grant 18190741 for the follow-up study, National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Senior Research Fellow grant APP1154650, NHMRC Clinical Trials and Cohort Studies Grant APP2014763, and JDRF Australia grant 3-SRA-2024-1593-A-N.