This study compared an automated deep learning algorithm with certified human graders from the Vienna Reading Center (VRC) in identifying intra- (IRF) and subretinal fluid (SRF) in OCT scans of patients treated for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD), diabetic macular edema (DME) and branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO). Multicenter clinical trial data from the VRC imaging database was used for this post hoc analysis. OCT scans were analyzed using a validated algorithm (RetInSight, Vienna, Austria) to compute IRF and SRF volumes. These fluid volumes were compared to fluid presence graded by trained and experienced graders of the VRC. 6898 OCT scans were analyzed for fluid volumes and presence of IRF and SRF. For nAMD/DME /BRVO in the central millimeter: the overall concordance for the detection of IRF and SRF between the algorithm and manual grading reached an AUC of 0.94/0.92/0.98 and 0.89/0.95/0.92, respectively. This deep learning approach showed a high concordance with human expert grading for detection of IRF and SRF and provides precise volumetric information across different retinal fluid-associated diseases. Thus, automated fluid quantification is a feasible tool for standardized treatment decision support and disease monitoring in clinical practice at the highest human expert level.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-13019-x.

The introduction of high-resolution OCT in clinical routine has led to a paradigm shift in guiding treatment decisions in retinal diseases like neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD), diabetic macular edema (DME) or retinal vein occlusion (RVO). These prevalent diseases are characterized by an exudative condition leading to accumulation of retinal fluid resulting in loss of vision1. Current standard-of-care for macular edema consists in repeated intravitreal injections of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) drugs2–4. Re-treatment decisions are mainly based on identification of OCT-derived biomarkers such as central subfield thickness (CST), intraretinal (IRF) and subretinal fluid (SRF). Despite the traditional use of CST-associated endpoints in clinical trials, recent study findings do not support the use of CST as outcome measure for quantification of exudative activity. Pawloff et al. demonstrated a moderate correlation between CST and IRF and SRF for DME and RVO and a weak correlation especially in nAMD5. A more distinct focus on IRF and SRF as the predominant fluid-related entities is supported by numerous studies, demonstrating the significant association of retinal fluid accumulation with disease activity, visual function and prognosis6–10. Unfortunately, due to the excessive amount of OCT data collected in every day routine, manual quantification of these biomarkers is not feasible. Even qualitative assessment of retinal fluid is time-consuming and challenging for retinal specialists in clinical routine. Furthermore, studies demonstrated the unsatisfying agreement between treating ophthalmologists and reading center evaluations in terms of objectively and reproducibly identifying retinal fluid11. Even at a reading center level reader agreement may be imperfect among expert graders12,13. These challenges drew attention to artificial intelligence (AI)-based algorithms providing a reproducible and fully automated identification, localization and quantification of fluid volumes in routine OCT images14,15.

The rise of AI has altered image analysis in ophthalmology. Mainly, deep learning (a subfield of machine learning based on convolutional neural networks) allows accurate identification and standardized quantification of retinal fluid with high reliability16. Deep learning approaches demonstrated excellent accuracy for differential detection of retinal fluid types across the most prevalent exudative macular diseases15,17,18. This led to a series of studies applying automated fluid algorithms in OCT19,20. Roberts et al. revealed an association of SRF presence with lower baseline best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), but with good response to anti-VEGF therapy in DME21. Michl et al. investigated the specific anatomical response of IRF/SRF to anti-VEGF therapy in a large dataset of patients with nAMD, DME and RVO1. In addition, Schmidt-Erfurth et al. demonstrated the application of automated quantification of fluid volumes in a large clinical nAMD trial22.

Most important for the translation of AI technology to clinical care is, however, proof that automated evaluation is equivalent to the assessment by experienced human experts. The aim of this study was therefore to systematically evaluate the performance of a validated AI-based quantification algorithm in comparison with the highest level of human expert graders applying a tight evaluation protocol in the setting of a Central Reading Center (CRC) in detecting intraretinal and subretinal fluid in different retinal regions on OCT scans of the major diseases nAMD, DME and branch RVO (BRVO).

This study was a post hoc analysis of data from the Vienna Reading Center (VRC), the Duke Reading Center and the Ophthalmic Image Analysis (OPTIMA) image database of patients under approved treatment for nAMD, DME and BRVO. Spectral domain OCT (SD-OCT) imaging data used for this study was prospectively collected during randomized multicenter clinical trials: TREND23(Ranibizumab in Treat-extend and Monthly Regimens in Patients With nAMD;NCT01948830), DRCR.net Protocol T study24(Comparative Effectiveness Study of Intravitreal Aflibercept, Bevacizumab, and Ranibizumab for DME;NCT01627249) and BRIGHTER25(Efficacy and Safety of Ranibizumab With or Without Laser in Comparison to Laser in BRVO;NCT01599650). All studies were conducted in accordance with the declaration of Helsinki and the principles of Good Scientific Practice. Study protocols were reviewed and approved by independent ethics committees or institutional review boards at each center. Informed consent was obtained from all participants and/or their legal guardians. This post hoc analysis was approved by the ethics committee of the Medical University of Vienna (Application number: 1246/2016). The sponsor of each respective trial provided the data, but the analyses, content and conclusions presented here are solely the responsibility of the authors and have not been reviewed or approved by the sponsors.

From the image databases mentioned above, a total number of 6898 OCT scans from Cirrus OCT (Carl Zeiss Meditec, 167 Dublin, CA, USA), consisting of 128 B-scan with a resolution of 1024 × 512 pixels, comprising a volume of 6 × 6 × 2 mm³, and Spectralis OCT (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany), consisting of 49 B-scan with a resolution of 496 × 512 pixels and covering 20 × 20 degrees (5,7 × 5,7 mm) of the posterior pole, were available for the study. All OCT scans were analyzed by trained human experts and were processed by automated fluid quantification. No evaluated scans were excluded due to insufficient image quality or other reasons.

Each set of the 6898 OCT volume scans were analyzed by Central Reading Center. Evaluation was performed by experienced and trained graders according to a standardized protocol using custom reading center software. Applying an ETDRS Grid, set at the foveal center, graders evaluated the presence or absence of IRF and SRF in various retinal regions (Fig.1). For the nAMD cohort, presence of IRF was determined in the central 1 mm (CMM), 3 mm and 6 mm areas, the parafoveal and perifoveal ETDRS ring regions and in the total field of view (TotalFoV) as well as SRF in the CMM and in the TotalFoV. OCT scans from the DME cohort were evaluated for IRF in the CMM and in the TotalFoV as well as SRF in the CMM. For the BRVO cohort presence of IRF and SRF was evaluated in the CMM area and in the TotalFoV. Two graders performed the evaluation of the individual tasks and disagreements were adjudicated by a third senior grader.

Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) grid. Illustration of the nine macula regions of the ETDRS grid. Fluid grading and quantification was performed for the central 1mm (red), 3mm disc area (circumscribed by the middle blue ring), 6mm disc area, (circumscribed by the outer blue ring), parafoveal ring region (yellow), perifoveal ring region (green) and for the total field of view (entire ETRDS grid + magenta area).

OCT scans were segmented for the volume of subretinal and intraretinal fluid using a validated, automated deep learning-based fluid segmentation algorithm (RetInSight, Vienna, Austria), previously described and evaluated15. This segmentation algorithm was developed for nAMD and RVO with different study data from the Vienna Reading Center database and then later adapted for DME with 16 cases from the Protocol T study. In brief, a deep learning approach, based on convolutional neural networks, was applied to classify and assign each voxel to 1 of 4 classes: IRF, SRF, retina or background; then the total of voxels, classified as fluid, is measured in nanoliters for each of the predefined regions; applying the same ETDRS grid, fluid volumes were computed for the CMM, 3MM, 6MM, parafoveal, perifoveal region and the entire OCT volume scan (TotalFoV)22. Foveal centerpoint positions, determined by a Central Reading Center, were also applied for the automated quantification to ensure the same a- and b-scan position on the ETDRS grid.

To evaluate the performance of the human experts and the deep learning algorithm in terms of identifying presence or absence of IRF and SRF, regression models were computed for every localization. Presence of fluid was defined as the dependent variable and the fluid volume determined by the automated quantification as the explanatory variable. Their receiver operating curves (ROC) were drawn and the area under the curve (AUC) was calculated. The fluid volume corresponding to every respective cut-off and the total accuracy, sensitivity and specificity was calculated. Optimal cut-off points for highest concordance with human experts regarding retinal fluid presence were calculated according to the Youden-Index26, which is defined as the cut-off point yielding the largest sum of sensitivity and specificity. Additionally, true positives (TP), false positives (FP), false negatives (FN) and true negatives (TN) for IRF and SRF in the CMM were calculated for cut-off points of 1/5/10/20 nanoliters.

For better understanding of fundamental differences between human experts grading and automated quantification we performed error analysis. All scans with no fluid in CMM according to expert grading but with fluid volume of more than 20nL in CMM determined by automated quantification were identified. This was done for IRF and SRF individually. A retinal specialist, masked to the results of human and AI evaluation, examined all determined scans for the presence/absence of IRF/SRF in CMM. Furthermore, he determined the main confounding factors for the discrepancy between human and AI based on his experience with human graders of CRCs and AI algorithms.

In case of the DME and nAMD cohorts, which include follow-up visits, logistic regression models were calculated under the assumption that observations are independent. As a sensitivity analysis, the same models were calculated using only the observations of each patient at baseline. Additionally, a 95% confidence interval for the area under the curve (AUC) was calculated by repeatedly sampling one observation of each patient and calculating the AUC of the ROC curve of the resulting model. This was done one thousand times for each instance. The confidence interval of the AUC was then defined as the interval between the 2.5 - and the 97.5 percentile of the obtained AUCs. Fluid volumes are described by their medians and interquartile range (IQR) throughout the manuscript. Statistical analysis was done using R, version 3.6.1 or higher.

A total of 6898 OCT scans from 1047 patients under approved anti-VEGF treatment for nAMD, DME and BRVO (n= 190, 591, 266, respectively) were analyzed for presence and quantity of intra- and subretinal fluid by experts from a Central Reading Center and the automated fluid algorithm. Representative examples of fluid segmentations are displayed in Figs.2and3.

Automated fluid segmentations examples I. Representative OCT B-scans with fluid segmentation performed by the automated fluid quantification algorithm, showing intraretinal fluid (IRF) in yellow and subretinal fluid (SRF) in blue, brighter coloring indicating a higher probability of fluid.AnAMD eye with large pigment epithelial detachment and great amount of IRF and SRF,BDME eye presenting several smaller and larger IRF cysts and extensive SRF,CBRVO eye with several IRF cysts and a small area of local SRF.

Automated fluid segmentations examples II. Representative OCT B-scans with disagreement between expert grading and automated quantification regarding fluid presence/absence. Automated segmentation for intraretinal fluid (IRF) is shown in yellow and subretinal fluid (SRF) is highlighted in blue, brighter coloring indicating a higher probability of fluid.AnAMD eye presenting bacillary layer detachment (BALAD) with SRF but no IRF in the central 1mm (CMM) according to expert grading (EGIRF−SRF+) compared to the IRF and SRF volume computed by the Fluid Segmentation (FSIRF+SRF+),BnAMD patient with EGIRF+SRF−and FSIRF−SRF+in CMM,CDME patient with EGIRF+SRF+and FSIRF+SRF−in the CMM,DBRVO patient with EGIRF+SRF−and FSIRF+SRF+in the CMM.

According to human expert grading, IRF and SRF in the CMM was present in 20.15% and 14.10% of eyes, respectively. The fluid segmentation algorithm determined a median fluid volume of 8.59nL (1.80–34.60) for IRF and 8.18nL (0.67–34.83) for SRF in the CMM. If human experts graded fluid to not be present, automated quantification determined a median fluid volume of 0.00nL (0.00–0.00) for IRF and 0.00nL (0.00–0.00) for SRF. Results of the logistic regression models provided the following performance metrics for IRF and SRF in the CMM: An AUC of 0.936/0.849, accuracy of 0.884/0.892, and an optimal cut-off point of 0.42nL and 0.27nL, respectively. When applying a cut-off point of 1/5/10/20 nanoliters for fluid volume results of IRF and SRF in the CMM, consensus with expert grading regarding fluid presence/absence (true positive and true negative) was reached in 91/90/89/86 (%) and 86/83/80/76 (%) respectively (Fig.4).

Confusion matrix for different cut-offs points. Illustration of true negative (dark green), true positive (light green), false negative (red) and false positive cases (salmon) for different cut-off points for the nAMD, DME and BRVO cohort in the CMM, displayed for intraretinal und subretinal fluid individually: demonstrating the challenge to determine a best fitting cut-off point for clinical implementation of an AI algorithm dependent of disease and fluid compartment.

According to human expert grading, IRF and SRF secondary to DME in the CMM was present in 89,61% and 14.10% of eyes, respectively. The fluid segmentation algorithm determined a median fluid volume of 39.66nL (9.98–98.34) for IRF and 13.14nL (4.15–46.39) for SRF in the CMM. If human experts graded fluid to not be present, automated quantification determined a median fluid volume of 0.00nL (0.00-0.38) for IRF and 0.00nL (0.00-0.13) for SRF. Results of the logistic regression models provided the following performance metrics for IRF and SRF in the CMM: An AUC of 0.917/0.952, accuracy of 0.885/0.917, and an optimal cut-off point of 1.39nL and 1.3nL, respectively. When applying a cut-off point of 1/5/10/20 nanoliters for fluid volume results of IRF and SRF in the CMM, consensus with expert grading regarding fluid presence/absence (true positive and true negative) was reached in 89/82/77/67 (%) and 91/95/93/92 (%) respectively (Fig.4).

According to human expert grading, IRF and SRF in the CMM was present in 97.61% and 96% of eyes, respectively. The fluid segmentation algorithm determined a median fluid volume of 106.08nL (62.21-161.93) for IRF and 36.04nL (11.10-68.51) for SRF in the CMM. If human experts graded fluid to not be present, automated quantification determined a median fluid volume of 0.06nL (0.01–1.31) for IRF and 0.34nL (0.00-3.90) for SRF. Results of the logistic regression models provided the following performance metrics for IRF and SRF in the CMM: An AUC of 0.975/0.916, accuracy of 0.861/0.865, and an optimal cut-off point of 40.99nL and 9.49nL, respectively. When applying a cut-off point of 1/5/10/20 nanoliters for fluid volume results of IRF and SRF in the CMM, consensus with expert grading regarding fluid presence/absence (true positive and true negative) was reached in 99/97/96/92 (%) and 74/81/86/85 (%) respectively (Fig.4).

ROC´s of the logistic regression models are displayed in Fig.5. Further descriptive fluid statistics for each disease and localization are summarized in Table1. Performance results of the logistic regression models for all available ETDRS fields and fluid types are provided in Table2. All scans were captured with a Cirrus OCT (Carl Zeiss Meditec, 167 Dublin, CA, USA) or a Spectralis OCT (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) device with a ratio of 1098/3748, 878/908, 118/148 for the nAMD, DME and BRVO cohort, respectively. Results of logistic regression models depend on the deployed OCT device are provided in the supplementary material (Tables S1–S3).

ROC curves of the nAMD, DME and BRVO cohort. ROC curves of the logistic regression models for performance of the human experts and the automated fluid quantification (in terms of identifying presence or absence of retinal fluid) for nAMD, DME and BRVO cohort, displayed for intraretinal und subretinal fluid individually. They exhibit excellent concordance for IRF and good concordance for SRF with a small superiority of IRF in the total field of view compared to the central millimeter.

Descriptive statistics for intraretinal (IRF) and subretinal fluid (SRF) presence (human expert grading) and volumes (automated quantification) in the central mm (CMM), 3 mm, 6 mm, parafoveal and perifoveal area and in the entire scan (TotalFoV) for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD), diabetic macular edema (DME) and branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO).

Results of the logistic regression models providing area under the curve (AUC) with confidence interval (CI), optimal cut-off point, accuracy (ACC), specificity (SPC), and sensitivity (SEN) for the quantification of intraretinal (IRF) and subretinal fluid (SRF) presence (human expert grading) vs. fluid volume (automated quantification) in the central mm (CMM), 3 mm, 6 mm, parafoveal and perifoveal area and in the entire scan (TotalFoV) for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD), diabetic macular edema (DME) and branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO).

In eyes where human experts did not grade IRF in the CMM but automated quantification determined more than 20nL IRF in the CMM (n= 37), the retinal specialist agreed with the result of the human evaluation in 27% of the cases and in 73% of the cases with the automated quantification. Main confounders for the discrepancy in the nAMD cohort were bacillary layer detachment (86%), subretinal hyper-reflective material (39%), in one case retinal pigment epithelial tears and in another case full thickness macular hole. In the DME and BRVO cohorts, severely reduced image quality was the main reason for differences in evaluation.

In eyes where human experts did not grade SRF in the CMM but automated quantification determined more than 20nL SRF in the CMM (n= 26), the retinal specialist agreed with the result of the human evaluation in 77% of the cases and in 23% of the cases with the automated quantification. Main confounders for the discrepancy were massive intraretinal cysts penetrating almost all retinal layers or poor image quality in the nAMD cohort, also reduced image quality and hard exudates in the DME cohort and mainly shadowing effects in the BRVO cohort.

There were no statistically relevant differences between results of the logistic regression models under the assumption of independent observations and the observations at baseline only. Furthermore, calculated AUC values were within the estimated confidence intervals, which suggests that there are no meaningful effects of follow up visits.

Our comparative analysis demonstrated the application of an AI-based algorithm for fluid quantification across a large dataset of retinal diseases, including nAMD, DME and BRVO. The algorithm showed high concordance with human experts from a Central Reading Center in identifying retinal fluid, offering promising implications for clinical practice.

Central subfield thickness (CST) has been a primary biomarker for monitoring retinal diseases, accessible on early time-domain and all modern OCT systems. However, its clinical utility is limited due to an unsatisfactory correlation with visual acuity27–29and retinal fluid, particularly in nAMD5. This limitation diminishes its effectiveness in guiding treatment decisions. Despite this, CST is used as the disease activity assessment criterion and secondary efficacy objective in most large clinical trials30. However, the thresholds used for retreatment decisions vary widely from 25 to 75 μm, a comparison with averaged or selected previous CST values as well as “and/or” combinations with change in CST together with BCVA loss31–33.

Recent studies emphasize the importance of compartment-specific biomarkers such as IRF and SRF in personalizing treatment strategies6–8. These biomarkers are particularly valuable in individualized treatment regimens like “treat and extend” (T&E) or “pro re nata” (PRN), which gained wide acceptance34–36(55% of physicians preferred T&E and 14% PRN in 2020)37. In clinical practice, some physicians make re-treatment decisions based on results of the slit lamp examination, visual acuity changes, previous responses to anti-VEGF drugs, patients’ considerations and wishes, fluorescein angiography, OCT and recently OCT-angiography (OCTA) biomarkers.

However, physicians often rely heavily on OCT imaging alone38. A reliable interpretation of OCT scans is dependent on the clinician’s time, training, and available software tools (meaning the ability to evaluate the entire OCT scan and not only the popular paper printout of the foveal center b-scan). In the absence of standardized reading protocols and image graders in routine practice, the sheer number of OCT scans generated every day, obviously imped a thorough manual assessment of retinal fluid. This explains to some extent the observation of worse visual outcomes in the real-world practice compared to results achieved in most randomized trials14,39,40.

In the CATT trial experience Toth et al.11reported that the ability of retinal specialist to detect retinal fluid is imperfect, yet it still matches with Central Reading Center results in the majority of cases. Interestingly, identification of retinal fluid did not always lead to initiation of re-treatment, resulting in potential undertreatment41. Factors contributing to these discrepancies include lack of standardized guidelines, physicians experience42or incorrect CST values due to segmentation errors, especially in morphologically altered retinas43.

Automated AI-based tools address these challenges by providing standardized, reproducible measurements of retinal fluid. Documented reports of fluid volumes per visit can be stored, compared during long-term follow-up, guide re-treatment decisions, strongly supporting an efficient disease monitoring. In addition, such algorithms can distinguish between different fluid compartments, which is clinically significant since studies suggest that IRF has more detrimental impact on visual acuity, while some SRF may be tolerable9,14,44. Nevertheless, larger fluid volumes independent of fluid type are correlated with progressive loss in BCVA45. Furthermore, fluctuations in retinal fluid during the maintenance phase of anti-VEGF treatment in nAMD have been linked to worse visual outcomes, underscoring the importance of timely detection and management46.

Implementation of quantitative algorithms in a real-world setting requires an equal or better performance for detection of retinal fluid compared to the current standard-of-care in the hands of standard ophthalmologists different from retinal specialists and expert graders of CRCs. In a previous study, Keenan et al. compared the performance of retinal specialists in detecting fluid presence in AMD eyes with an automated quantification algorithm, showing a higher level of accuracy for the AI tool even in an environment of advanced human expertise47.

Results of our automated quantification achieved comparable levels of accuracy. The overall concordance with human experts in terms of identifying retinal fluid in the nAMD/DME/BRVO cohort was high with AUC values in CMM of 0.94/0.92/0.98 for IRF and 0.89/0.95/0.92 for SRF. These results align with previous findings, indicating that AI can match or exceed human performance in detecting retinal fluid48. Our results were mostly independent of the investigated disease type, macular region or OCT device used. When no fluid was graded by the human experts, the median fluid volume determined by the AI tool was close to zero and would most likely be clinically irrelevant. This demonstrates AI’s ability to detect even small amounts of retinal fluid, indicating a good sensitivity.

In our error analysis, we identified the main reasons for major differences between human and automated evaluation for correct identification of retinal fluid. Despite the use of clinical trial data, reduced image quality was the most common confounding factor for both human and AI. While this is not surprising, it highlights the importance of quality control and proper training when using retinal OCT images. Interestingly, the main reason for discrepancies in the detection of IRF in the CMM in the nAMD cohort was bacillary layer detachment (BALAD). Our human experts assessed BALAD predominantly as SRF whereas the automated quantification segmented BALAD partly as SRF and partly as IRF. A key OCT feature of BALAD includes a division at the level of the hyporeflective myoid zone, resulting in unique cystic intraretinal space49which could be considered as IRF. Nevertheless, there is currently no clear consensus as to what type of fluid the inner space of BALAD should be evaluated as. At the time of grading of nAMD scans (during the year of 2015) BALAD had not been established in OCT grading terminology, thus none of the readers had been familiar with this structure.

Results of our optimal cut-off points for highest concordance with human experts for IRF and SRF were low for nAMD and DME and much higher for BRVO. This supports human expert’s ability to plausibly grade fluid presence even at a low fluid volume level. Nevertheless, human performance is tight to fluid amounts and different thresholds were found to guarantee optimal performance for physicians.

Strengths of our study include precise and standardized assessment of IRF and SRF by experienced image graders of a Central Reading Center and a large protocol-controlled data set across the most common retinal diseases. On the other hand, a limitation and a strength at the time was the use of high-quality study data. It is reasonable to expect worse image quality in a real-world setting which may impact the performance of any automated algorithm. Nevertheless, Gerendas et al.14already demonstrated a reliable performance of the fluid segmentation algorithm in a large real-world dataset of nAMD patients allowing the expectation that our conclusions may be maintained in the real-world. Another limitation was the high percentage of fluid positive cases in the BRVO cohort due to missing follow-up visits, which could have led to a higher accuracy in the regression model. Similarly, the percentage of fluid positive cases was different in the three disease cohorts and fluid volumes are usually not normally distributed. This could have led to over- or underestimation of the optimal cut-off points. Furthermore, the segmentation algorithm analyzed a small proportion of the scans used during its development (less than 0.5%), which may have introduced minimal overfitting. While this is a retrospective, hypothesis-generating study and the limitations are considered acceptable, future prospective studies should address these concerns to ensure more robust results.

This study highlights the potential of AI-based fluid quantification to transform the management of retinal diseases. The fluid segmentation algorithm demonstrated high concordance with expert human graders across the most common fluid associated retinal diseases and provided precise, reproducible volumetric information of intra- and subretinal fluid localization. The accessibility of automated fluid quantification tools performing at the level of expert readers is a promising step to support physicians with different levels in professional education in the demanding management of millions of individuals, allowing standardized documentation and potentially saving time to efficiently cope with increasing workloads.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.