COVID-19 is a contagious respiratory infection. This disease affected the healthcare system globally due to its complications related to vascular morbidity and mortality. There is a pathophysiological connection between COVID-19 and deep vein thrombosis (DVT). The blood hypercoagulability, venous stasis, and endothelial dysfunction in patients with COVID-19 have been associated with a higher risk of developing DVT. In this systematic review, 15 studies were selected to determine if COVID-19 can be taken as an independent risk factor for DVT. The search was done to determine studies analyzing the incidence of DVT in patients with COVID-19. The studies chosen were observational studies between 2020 and 2025.

COVID-19 affected more than 770 million people and caused approximately seven million deaths globally. COVID-19 is a highly contagious respiratory infectious disease caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. Its clinical manifestation may vary from an asymptomatic or mild presentation to pneumonia or severe acute respiratory distress syndrome [1].

This virus has raised public concern in the health department due to its vascular complications. It has been associated with deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolism, and arterial thrombosis. Several studies have investigated the incidence of venous thromboembolism in patients with COVID-19, reporting rates as high as 14.7% [1].

DVT is an intravascular coagulation, or when a blood clot occurs in the deep system of veins of the body [1]. The most important risk factors for DVT are a history of a previous venous thromboembolism, the presence of a neoplasia, thrombophilias, pregnancy, smoking, travel that involves long distances, immobilization, and obesity [2].

Virchow’s Triad describes the components involved in the pathophysiology of DVT: hypercoagulability, venous stasis, and endothelial dysfunction. COVID-19 poses a risk for DVT because it generates all of these conditions. This study aimed to determine the association between COVID-19 and DVT [3].

Endothelial dysfunction is seen in COVID-19 when the virus infects endothelial cells through the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, leading to a malfunction in the enzyme and causing the accumulation of angiotensin II. This generates an injury on the vascular endothelial cells because it leads to the expression of adhesion molecules (like tissue factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1) and reduces the anticoagulant function of thrombomodulin. These changes facilitate the formation of vascular thrombus by creating a hypercoagulability environment. At the same time, they generate more inflammation that contributes to more plasma concentrations of fibrinogen and plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 [3].

The inflammatory response and the platelets trigger the release of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) and an increase in neutrophil count. These NETs also disrupt the epithelial barrier. Cell-free DNA and myeloperoxidase (MPO)-DNA correlate with the number of neutrophils; so, in the COVID-19 inflammation that predisposes to DVT, they appear increased [4].

As well, interleukins and interferon type I are elevated in the proinflammatory state of COVID-19, increasing the risk for DVT. Interferon type I and virus RNA strands can cause the entry of the coronavirus into the cytoplasm of macrophages and activate an inflammasome. This leads to a secretion of interleukin-1-beta and interleukin-8, which activate macrophages and cause more procoagulant effects [4].

On the other hand, during the inflammation, endogenous anticoagulant components (such as tissue factor pathway inhibitor, antithrombin, and protein C) are reduced, leading to an even more hypercoagulable state [4].

The objective of this systematic review is to determine the incidence of DVT in this hypercoagulable state of COVID-19.

This review was developed according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines of 2020 [5]. The databases used were PubMed and ScienceDirect. The research was based on the keywords “COVID-19” AND “Deep Vein Thrombosis,” and it was done on June 24, 2025. On the initial search, a total of 4,900 articles were obtained. Of these, all those studies that were not written in English, were duplicated, or were published before 2020, were excluded. Afterwards, a manual screening process was done, according to full-text availability, title, and inclusion and exclusion criteria, so the results were reduced to a total of 15 articles, as shown in Figure1.

The search was done to determine studies analyzing the incidence of DVT in patients with COVID-19. The studies chosen were those between 2020 and 2025.

The criteria used to select the studies were articles written in English and conducted on humans, dates of publication between 2020 and 2025, full texts, and articles based on case-control, cohort, and observational studies.

The articles that were excluded were those published in another language, published before 2020, based on case reports, research articles, or systematic reviews; the non-full-text articles available; those involving other populations that were not adults; and those based on other types of thrombosis that were not DVT or on the effects of COVID-19 vaccines.

The risk of bias was determined by two of the authors using the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale of Studies (NOS). The NOS establishes a star system that ranges from a total of 0 to nine points, based on three major components: selection of the population studied, comparability between the groups, and the ascertainment of the outcome of interest for cohort studies. According to this scale, a very good study is equal to nine points, a good study has a total of seven to eight points, a satisfactory one is represented by a total of five to six points, and an unsatisfactory study ranges from 0 to four points [6].

A total of 4,900 articles were found: from ScienceDirect and from PubMed. Of those, 4,145 studies weren’t within the time frame chosen between 2020 and 2025, weren’t written in English, were systematic reviews, meta-analyses, or other types of studies other than the ones chosen, or weren’t open access, so they were excluded from the investigation. Afterwards, the studies were manually screened according to their titles and abstracts, so the search was reduced to a total of 15 articles included in this review.

Out of these 15 articles, 11 were retrospective studies, and four were prospective studies. Nine of them involved a population of the United States of America, two were from Spain, two were from China, and two were from Italy.

The quality of the information and the risk of bias were established with the NOS scale. According to this one, of the 15 studies analyzed, a total of one was seen as a very good study, 11 were good ones, and three were satisfactory. These findings are represented in Table1[6].

According to this scale, a very good study is equal to nine points, a good study has a total of seven to eight points, a satisfactory one is represented by a total of five to six points, and an unsatisfactory study ranges from 0 to four points [6].

DVT has a significant incidence in COVID-19 patients. The importance of studying this association lies in the fact that DVT has a significant impact in terms of the outcomes of the patients; it elevates the time that critically ill patients rely on mechanical ventilation, it increases the time that people spend in the hospitals, and it influences the morbidity and mortality of the patients [2].

In this systematic review, 15 articles were studied, and it was confirmed that there is a relationship between COVID-19 and DVT. The incidence of DVT in COVID-19 patients was between 3% and 47.5%, depending on the study. However, all of them stated that due to the hypercoagulability condition that coronavirus disease generates, it predisposes a greater risk for DVT.

The COVID-19 infection propagates an inflammasome-dependent pyroptosis of epithelial cells, where proinflammatory cytokines (interleukin-6, interferon-gamma, and interleukin-1-beta) are released, causing endotheliitis and liberation of the von Willebrand factor, facilitating the formation of thrombus. As well, the infection of the virus itself disrupts the endothelial cells [1]. This hypercoagulability, dysfunction in the endothelium, and venous stasis are the conditions that predispose COVID-19 as an independent risk factor for DVT.

Rali et al. determined that the incidence of venous thromboembolism in COVID-19 patients was 3.5% and the incidence of DVT was 9.5%. However, they recognize that their results might show a lower incidence rate than expected because the population under their study had received thromboprophylaxis. As well, they observed that admission D-dimer levels of more than 1500 ng/mL, intensive care unit admission, and the need for mechanical ventilation were associated with a higher risk of DVT in a COVID-19 context [7].

Another study that showed a similar prevalence was the one by Jimenez-Guiu et al., in which DVT was found in 10.5% of the COVID-19 patients. Their research is based on the hypercoagulable and inflammatory state generated when exposed to this respiratory disease, in which there is an increase in D-dimer, C-reactive protein, and von Willebrand factor and a decrease in antithrombin [8].

Along with an increase in D-dimer and the other risk factors associated with a higher prevalence of DVT, Erben et al. demonstrated that Black/African Americans have the highest risk of developing DVT when infected with COVID-19. This was shown with a 16.2% incidence of DVT in people belonging to this race affected by this respiratory disease. However, the number of patients taken into consideration in this article was mainly White patients (79.2%), and only 12.7% involved Black/African American patients, so there is a certain bias regarding these results [9].

Choi et al. revealed an incidence of 5.46% of DVT in COVID-19. As seen before, they observed that elevated D-dimer levels, Black race, need for supplemental oxygen, and higher platelet count were associated with a higher occurrence of DVT. They divided the levels of D-dimer according to low (when D-dimer is less than 1000 ng/mL), intermediate (1000-7500 ng/mL), and high (more than 7500 ng/mL) probability of suffering DVT in a COVID-19 context. As well, they also concluded that the Black race is the most vulnerable to DVT in COVID-19 because they have a higher prevalence of comorbidities (like obesity, diabetes, and hypertension), and they may have sickle cell traits [10].

This low rate of DVT in COVID-19 patients was also observed in the publication of Al-Samkari et al., where the results showed 4.8% of venous thromboembolism and 3% of DVT in COVID-19 patients. Nevertheless, they clarify that the results might have been underestimated because there was no uniform protocol to proceed with images in all patients with suspected venous thromboembolism and because thrombotic events may not have been diagnosed [11].

As well, they created the following equation for the probability of DVT in male COVID-19 patients[12].

Marini et al. compared the incidence of DVT in COVID-19 patients versus the risk of DVT in those who didn’t suffer from the infection. They concluded that DVT was seen in 33.8% of the cases that tested positive for COVID-19 and in 12.4% of the non-COVID-19 ones. This conclusion reveals that there is a higher risk of DVT in COVID-19 [13].

The findings of the 15 studies reviewed are summarized in Table2.

In conclusion, DVT has been shown to have an incidence from 3% to 4.8% (as the lowest documented) and up to 47.5% (as the highest percentage seen in the studies) in patients with COVID-19. Most of the 15 studies reviewed in this systematic review suggested that there is a strong association between COVID-19 and DVT. As well, they determined that patients with elevated D-dimer were the highest predictor correlated to DVT in the context of COVID-19 due to the hypercoagulability and inflammatory state that this represents. The mortality surrounding DVT in COVID-19 patients is the main reason why studies should raise awareness on the importance of thromboprophylaxis and in determining the further relationship between DVT and COVID-19.

Data are available on reasonable request. The data are stored as de-identified participant data which are available on request to Daniela Secades (drasecades@gmail.com).