Alzheimer’s disease (AD) impacts over 55 million individuals worldwide and remains the leading cause of dementia (60–70% of cases). By 2050, South and Southeast Asia are projected to have an older adult population more than double, bearing a major share of Alzheimer’s disease burden. This will exert a heavy strain on healthcare systems, particularly in resource-limited countries where support and infrastructure are already stretched. Despite this, no review has yet explored the regional epidemiology and associated risk factors in this context. Thus, this study protocol outlines to synthesise prevailing evidence from these densely populated regions, particularly low- and middle-income nations within South and Southeast Asia.

This review will include studies that reported epidemiological characteristics including prevalence, age of onset, mortality, and risk factors of AD and related dementias comprising in South and Southeast Asian regions. Studies published in any language from inception to date will be extracted from PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, EMBASE and APA PsycNet, following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) and Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) guidelines. We will also search grey literature sources and screen the reference lists of the articles selected for full-text review to identify additional relevant studies. Observational studies including case–control, cohort, and cross-sectional designs reporting desired outcomes will be included and appraised for quality assessment with the modified Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (mNOS). The included articles will be appraised by two independent reviewers, with a third resolving any conflicts. Pooled estimates of prevalence, age of onset and mortality will be analysed using random effect meta-analysis (REML) model. Associated risk factors, including modifiable and non-modifiable will be narratively synthesised. Forest plots will be used to visualise the findings, and heterogeneity across the included studies will be assessed using theI² and Cochrane’sQstatistics. Potential publication bias will be assessed using a funnel plot along with the Begg’s and Egger’s tests. Sensitivity and subgroup analyses will also be conducted to assess the robustness of pooled estimates and to explore potential sources of heterogeneity. Statistical analysis will be conducted using Rstudio (v.4.3.2) and GraphPad Prism V.9.0.2.

The systematic review is focused on the analysis of secondary data from published literature; thus, no ethical approval will be needed. The protocol will follow international standard guidelines, findings will be reported in a reputed journal and disseminated through (inter)national conferences, webinars and key stakeholders to inform policy, research and AD management strategies.

This study will explore the epidemiology of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (AD/ADRDs), it’s associated factors, and subgroup variations across South and Southeast Asian regions.

The review will adhere to high-quality international guidelines, including Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P), Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) and modified Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (mNOS), with independent, blinded review and oversight.

Inter-rater reliability among reviewers will be evaluated at each review stage, using Cohen’s kappa and percentage agreement, with a third reviewer ensuring impartiality.

Excluding studies that do not specify clinically diagnosed AD/ADRDs cases may limit data from South and Southeast Asia, potentially affecting comprehensive regional prevalence estimation of all-cause dementia and it’s clinical subtypes.

In addition, variability in the study design, diagnostic criteria, assessment tools, and individual quality of studies may impact comparability and generalisability, introducing methodological bias.

While population ageing is a global phenomenon, with every country witnessing a peak both in the proportion and number of older individuals. AD poses a significant and escalating public health challenge.18Between 2015 and 2050, the global share of people aged over 60 is expected to double from 12% to 22% in future.19Currently, AD has lower incidence rates in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) compared with the western world and often starts at an earlier stage of life.10The burden of AD will be particularly concerning in LMICs, with ~80% of cases expected to occur there by 2050, exerting a significant disease burden on the entire healthcare system.6 19 20South and Southeast Asia, comprising 25.3% and 8.5% of the global population, respectively, are projected to undergo the most significant rise in older adult population.21This projected rise in AD cases is anticipated to place a substantial disease burden on respective healthcare infrastructure.22By the next 25 years, geriatric people in these regions are forecasted to be doubled, with an increase of 312 million.23 24Consequently, LMICs are expected to bear nearly 37% of the world disability burden from AD/ADRDs, with South and Southeast Asia accounting for 20% and 17%, respectively.12In spite of the growing burden, research on AD in LMICs remains sporadic and limited compared with high-income countries (HICs).25To date, there is a scarcity of systematic exploration and no meta-analysis has previously focused on the epidemiology and associated risk factors particularly in South and Southeast Asian regions. This gap in evidence synthesis impedes the development and design of targeted interventions. Moreover, current global estimates are largely drawn from HICs, while these regions suffer from underdiagnosis, limited surveillance system, and scarcity of epidemiological data. AD case rates across the countries are depicted infigure 1, highlighting the disparity and the urgency for region-specific evidence. Therefore, this study protocol outlines a comprehensive methodology for systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiological characteristics of AD/ADRDs including prevalence, age of onset, mortality, as well as associated risk factors among South and Southeast Asian population.

The primary objective of this study is to review relevant literature systematically from inception to 1stMay 2025 and conduct a meta-analysis to estimate the epidemiological characteristics of clinically diagnosed AD/ADRDs cases including pooled prevalence, age of onset and mortality among the population in South Asia and Southeast Asia.26In addition, the study aims to investigate the geographical variations in the prevalence, age of onset, and mortality of AD/ADRD cases in these regions. It will also explore both modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors associated with this disease.

By estimating the pooled prevalence, age of onset and mortality rates, geographical differences, and associated risk factors across different economic settings,26the study will allow for regional comparison and contribute to broader insights into the epidemiological burden of the disease (figure 1). The findings will emphasise the urge for addressing the growing disease burden, addressing all key determinants to guide future prevention, early detection, and intervention strategies in these regions of the world.

Population (P): individuals residing in South Asia and Southeast Asia.

Exposure (E): being clinically diagnosed as AD/ADRDs.

Comparison (C): there will be no comparison group in this study.

Outcome (O): epidemiology of AD/ADRDs including pooled prevalence, age of onset, mortality along with associated risk factors (both modifiable and non-modifiable) across these regions.

Guided by the PECO framework, this review will answer the following research question: ‘What is the epidemiology of AD and it’s associated risk factors among South and Southeast Asian population?’.

This review will adhere to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Protocols (PRISMA-P 2015)28and the Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE)29guidelines. It will strictly follow their respective checklists to ensure methodological rigour, transparency, and consistency throughout the review process including study selection, inclusion, data extraction, quality assessment, and data analysis. The review will include empirical longitudinal studies including case-control, cohort, and cross-sectional studies that will meet pre-defined eligibility criteria published from inception to date. Eligible studies must assess patients with AD/ADRDs using standardised, validated assessment tools, and report the epidemiology including prevalence of AD/ADRDs, age of onset of the disease, mortality and/or explore associated risk factors. Included articles quality will be assessed using modified Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (mNOS).30The protocol for this study has been registered with PROSPERO31under the registration number CRD 420251047105.

The eligibility (both inclusion and exclusion) criteria for selecting relevant articles for the review are outlined as follows intable 1.

AD, Alzheimer’s disease; ADRDs, Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias ; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating; HDS, Hasegawa Dementia Scale; DSM IV, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; NIA-AA, National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer’s Association; NINCDS-ADRDA, National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke-Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association; NINDS-AIREN, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke-Association Internationale pour la Recherche et l’Enseignement en Neurosciences.

The information for this study will be sourced from a comprehensive range of reputable databases, including PubMed (via NLM), Scopus (via Elsevier), CINAHL (via EBSCOhost), EMBASE (via Elsevier) and APA PsycNet (via APA). Additionally, to ensure the quality of the review, the research team will comprehensively search reference lists of included studies (citation chaining) as well as grey literature, to identify potential eligible studies reporting the desired outcomes.

To ensure a comprehensive and systematic search, a detailed search strategy has been formulated consulting with a librarian and expert in systematic reviews for selected bibliographic databases in combination with Medical Subject Headings, truncated and phrase-searched key-terms, appropriate filters for specified databases. The search strategy has integrated keywords focused on (“Alzheimer’s disease” OR “Alzheimer’s dementia”) (“Epidemiology” OR “Prevalence”) (“Risk factors” OR “Associated factors”) (“South Asia” OR “Southeast Asia”) (“Observational studies” OR “Cross-sectional studies” OR “Case-control studies”). A preliminary key search string for the predefined databases is outlined intable 2and strings for each mentioned database are included as a supplementary file (online supplemental file 1).

Boolean operators (AND, OR, NOT), truncations and database-specific filters will be applied to refine and enhance the search results. There will be no language restriction during the search of relevant literature to reduce the language bias and increase comprehensiveness of the included studies.

This review will aim to assess the epidemiology of AD/ADRDs, specifically focusing on prevalence, age of onset, mortality and associated risk factors, across South and Southeast Asian countries.

The review will include individuals from the general population of South and Southeast Asia, regardless of age, ethnicity or gender diagnosed for clinical AD/ADRDs, based on the clinical diagnosis of the expert neurologists and/or validated assessment tools.

We will include studies that have investigated both modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors associated with AD/ADRDs as exposures.

In the designed study, we will have no comparator/control group.

Understanding the epidemiology (prevalence, age of onset, mortality) and risk factors of AD/ADRDs among South and Southeast Asian population.

To ensure a comprehensive and unbiased inclusion of studies on epidemiology and risk factors on AD/ADRDs, the study team will go through a multistage screening process. Study selection will be mainly conducted in two stages: (1) titles and abstracts screening using Rayyan web-based application, and (2) full text of articles screening based on the eligibility. In each of the stages, conflicts will be discussed and mitigated by a third reviewer. A record of reasons for excluding individual studies will be documented. Studies screened during the first stage will only undergo the full-text screening phase. The entire article selection process will be documented in the PRISMA flow diagram28(figure 2). To ensure that only studies of sufficient quality, and direct relevance to the research question will be included for the final synthesis. The method will help streamlining the selection process, and improve co-ordination among the reviewers. A visual overview of the entire article screening and study selection process is illustrated infigure 3.

After identifying eligible studies, reviewers will extract desired data using a structured, predesigned data extraction form. This form will capture key study information, including author details, publication year, study methodology, sample characteristics, geographical aspects, study settings and participant demographics such as age, gender and diagnostic criteria for AD/ADRDs. The extraction will focus on the data related to prevalence, age of disease onset, mortality and associated risk factors of AD/ADRDs, encompassing modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors. For the main outcome of interest effect measure will be extracted as prevalence proportion (% and n/N; where, n = number with the outcome, and N = total sample size) along with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). For the associated risk and protective factors, odds ratios (ORs) or risk ratios (RRs) with 95% CIs (adjusted or unadjusted), including correspondingp-value, will be extracted. Relevant details regarding diagnostic criteria and assessment tools will also be extracted and categorised according to severity levels (e.g., mild/moderate/severe) as extracted. Where applicable, additional information on disease severity, age of onset, mortality, comorbidity and functional status will also be extracted. Two reviewers will extract data using standardised Microsoft Excel spreadsheet, with a third reviewer verifying accuracy and completeness. The final dataset will be prepared, cross-checked and analysed using R statistical software (v.4.3.2) to facilitate a thorough and transparent synthesis of results.

This study protocol does not directly involve individual patients, caregivers, members or public organisations. The study relies exclusively on data from previously published studies.

Sensitivity analyses will assess the robustness of pooled estimates for AD/ADRDs prevalence. Specifically, studies identified as low quality during the assessment process will be excluded to determine whether study quality significantly affects the overall findings. This approach will be applied to meta-analyses of the overall outcome by re-running the analyses without low-quality studies, to assess changes in the pooled estimates and CIs. REMLs38will be used to compare differences in pooled effect sizes. If substantial variations are observed, this may indicate that study quality has a significant influence on the overall results of the review.

To ensure a rigour and quality in the assessment process, two reviewers will assess the risk of bias following pre-designed appropriate assessment tool. A mNOS tool,30with a total score of 10 allocated across relevant sections, will be incorporated to assess the study quality. According to the total score, included studies will be categorised as high (0 to ≤ 3), moderate (4 to 6) and low risk (≥ 7 to 10). However, studies rated either high, moderate or low risk will be considered for final inclusion.30Key domains of quality assessment include: (A) selection: sample representativeness, sample size, (B) comparability: study design or analysis and (C) outcome: assessment of outcome and statistical analysis.I² statistic, which is interpreted as low (≤ 25%), moderate (> 25% to < 75%) or high (≥ 75%) of heterogeneity. In cases of substantial heterogeneity, an REML will be used, and prediction intervals will be reported to account for between-study variability.36Furthermore, inter-rater reliability agreement between independent reviewers will be assessed at each stage of the review process (title/abstract screening, full-text review, extraction and risk of bias assessment) using both Cohen’s kappa statistic and percentage agreement. A kappa value ≥ 0.60 and percentage agreement ≥ 80% (above moderate agreement) will be considered acceptable, indicating substantial agreement among reviewers.39Any conflict at any stage will be resolved through discussion or adjudication by a third reviewer to ensure methodological rigour, comprehensiveness and overall consistency.

For instances where relevant information will be missing, the study team will reach out to the corresponding author via email to obtain clarification of finally included studies. If efforts to retrieve the necessary data are unsuccessful, the incomplete data will be excluded from quantitative analysis, but available factors will be included for narrative synthesis. The lack of such data and its potential impacts will be addressed in the review’s discussion section.

A comprehensive search strategy will be conducted systematically using relevant keywords and concepts. Boolean operators, truncations, co-occurrence terms, filters and explode functions will be used to optimise the efficiency and precision of the search (figure 5). A preliminary systematic search using the key search terms, conducted in PubMed on 1stMay 2025, retrieved 114 potentially relevant studies from this region. After applying eligibility criteria during the screening process, eligible studies will undergo systematic data extraction and organisation for quantitative synthesis. The summary findings will be demonstrated using a table consisting of all the extracted data. Where appropriate, a subgroup analysis will be performed in accordance with the outcome to address heterogeneity among the studies. In case, where meta-analysis will not be feasible, particularly regarding the risk factors, a narrative synthesis will be carried out to summarise and analyse the findings concerning targeted outcomes of AD/ADRDs across the regions.

The systematic review is currently at it’s initial phase, which involves refining the research question, formulating the search strategy and identifying appropriate databases and searching potential grey literature. The authors are in the process of finalising the searches and titles, abstracts screening phases. However, the entire review process, including searching, data synthesis, data extraction, quality assessment, data analysis and manuscript preparation is expected to be completed within the next 10-12 months. This timeline has been designed to ensure a comprehensive and methodologically sound exploration of the available evidence. A detailed timeline outlining the key milestones of the systematic review project is presented in the accompanyingtable 3.

Submit to a reputed international peer-reviewed journal.

Y1Q1=Year (Y)1, Quarter (Q)1(January to March, 2025) of the reporting period 2025–2026.

mNOS, Modified Newcastle-Ottawa Scale ; Q, Quarter; Y, Year.

This study aims to synthesise existing evidence from longitudinal and observational studies, to estimate the epidemiology and pooled prevalence of AD. It will also investigate and analyse demographics, clinical and contextual risk factors associated with AD/ADRDs. This area has remained under-researched in this region compared with HICs.42Studies involving patients across different age groups, assessment tools and settings both urban and rural from all countries within South and Southeast Asia will be included, regardless of healthcare infrastructure or institutional affiliation. While global prevalence estimates of AD continue to rise (13.8 million by 2060),8particularly in LMICs, region-specific evidence remains limited, especially under-represented and under-invested in Asian countries.25 43Geographical disparities contribute to~1.05% of the variation in mortality related to AD/ADRDs, along with other environmental exposures.44However, both non-modifiable factors,45and modifiable ones, including pre-existing conditions, unhealthy lifestyle choices, environmental exposures7and limited access to AD care are expected to play significantly influencing the disease progression in these complex and multifactorial disorder.6Gender disparities have also been observed globally, with women often showing higher prevalence rates of cognitive decline.46By comparing regional data to the global trends and including the secular trend, this review seeks to determine whether the epidemiological patterns align with or diverge from broader global findings. Thus, the findings can provide actionable insights for comparing AD/ADRDs burdens and prioritising future research tailored to the unique demographic and socio-cultural context.

This study will comprehensively evaluate and synthesise evidences from longitudinal and observational studies, while analysing subgroup variations within populations across the regions. This study will adhere to internationally recognised methodological standards, to ensure a rigorous approach to study selection, extraction of outcome variables, reporting and assessment for quality. Two reviewers will conduct articles screening and data extraction in a blinded manner, with a third reviewer providing oversight to maintain the objectivity and resolve discrepancies.

Several potential limitations may also warrant consideration. First, there might be substantial heterogeneity in study designs, diagnostic criteria and methodological quality across included studies. This may pose challenges to statistical pooling and compromise the uniformity of findings. To address this, we will conduct subgroup analysis. Second, we may face variations in the sample sizes, assessment tools and associated factors which may influence reporting pooled prevalence rates and identify risk factors, potentially limiting the generalisability of results across diverse cultural and healthcare settings, which will be addressed using sensitivity analysis by excluding studies with high risk of bias. Thus, sensitivity analyses and subgroup comparisons will be conducted to explore the sources of heterogenicity, robustness of the findings and address studies’ limitations. Third, since the review tends to exclude studies reporting all causes of dementia without specifying the number of clinically diagnosed AD/ADRDs cases, there may exist a paucity of eligible studies regarding epidemiology and risk factors of AD from desired regions or countries. This could be another potential limitation in comprehensively ascertaining the overall region-specific prevalence rate. Additionally, the reliance on self-reported or caregiver-reported data in many studies may introduce recall or reporting biases. To enhance the robustness and credibility of the findings, studies with missing or incomplete data will be excluded.

Summary findings of the study will have potential impact for future research and clinical practices. This study will provide region-specific evidences to better understand and quantify the disease burden on epidemiology and key risk factors of AD/ADRDs. By synthesising data on key outcomes, this study may exert valuable remarks into the growing burden of AD/ADRDs, where~66% of patients live in LMICs, yet only around 10% of studies have adopted a population-based design to date.25The findings of the study may attract global funders like Global Brain Health Institute and Alzheimer’s Society (UK) to conduct more explorative research in LMICs including South and Southeast Asian regions to compare with the global diversity. Moreover, the findings will highlight the critical gaps in AD research within LMICs and emphasize the need for increased funding and focused attention. It will also encourage the global dementia research community to prioritise these under-represented regions, reinforcing their importance to the broader research agenda for the associations. Ultimately, this study supports regional efforts to address AD/ADRDs by addressing key risk factors and improving health-related quality of life for both affected individuals and their respective family members and caregivers, in line with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG 3), on health and well-being for all.

icddr,b acknowledges with sincere appreciation the unconditional support of its core donors, the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) and Canada.