Sepsis is a pressing global public health issue, particularly among patients admitted to intensive care unit (ICU), and it is linked to a high incidence of morbidity and mortality. Current understanding of bacterial profiles, antibiotic resistance patterns, and the magnitude of Extended-Spectrum Beta-Lactamase (ESBL) and Carbapenemase (CP) producing isolates in critically ill patients is vital for implementing strong management approaches tailored to combat antibiotic resistance and improve patient outcomes.

A prospective cross-sectional study was carried out involving 149 patients admitted to ICU with a presumptive diagnosis of sepsis at Jimma University Medical Center (JUMC) from October 2023 to October 2024. A structured questionnaire was administered to collect baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients. Blood samples were aseptically collected and analyzed using standard microbiological technique to identify bacterial isolates. The Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion method was employed to conduct the antimicrobial susceptibility test. The MASTDISCS®Combi AmpC and ESBL detection discs D68 C, and Combi Carba plus disc system D73C were used to examine ESBL and CP production, respectively.

Bacterial pathogens were isolated from 33 patients, representing an isolation rate of 22.1% (95% CI: 16.2–29.6%). Gram-negative bacteria (GNB) accounted for the majority of the isolates, 25/33 (75.8%), withEscherichia coli, 6/25 (24%) being the predominant species. Administering antibiotics before sample collection was associated with a lower likelihood of culture positivity (AOR: 0.05, 95% CI: 0.01–0.38;p= 0.004). In contrast, prolonged stay in the ICU was positively associated with culture positivity (AOR: 1.13, 95% CI:1.02–1.24;p= 0.02). Gram-negative bacteria exhibited a particularly high resistance to third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins, ranging from 66.7 to 80%. ESBL and CP producers accounted for 11/25 (44%) and 12/25(48%) of GNB, respectively. Additionally, 80% ofStaphylococcus aureusisolates were methicillin resistant. Overall, about a third of all isolates, 11/33 (33.3%) were multidrug resistant strains.

The study shows a significant burden of MDR pathogens among critically ill sepsis patients, characterized by high prevalence of ESBL, CP, and MRSA. These findings underscore the urgent need to strengthen antibiotic stewardship and infection prevention strategies to curb resistance in ICU environments.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12879-025-11474-5.

Sepsis remains a significant public health challenge characterized by a life-threatening organ dysfunctions following a dysregulated host response to infection [1]. In 2017, the estimated global incidence of sepsis cases was 49 million and sepsis-related deaths accounted for 11 million. The World Health Organization has identified sepsis as a critical health concern, urging for better awareness and improved management approaches [2].Sepsis incidence and mortality rates differ by regions, with resource limited countries bearing the greatest burden (LMIC) [3]. A global review of intensive care unit (ICU) data indicated that sepsis affected 29.5% of ICU-admitted patients, with an ICU mortality rate of 35.3%, the highest being observed in Africa [4]. A recent meta-analysis in sub-Saharan Africa reported that sepsis prevalence in ICU patients was 31%, with a mortality rate of 46% [5].

Bacteria are the leading cause of sepsis, though viruses and fungi can also contribute to a significant proportion [6]. A recent scoping review from ICUs of LMIC reported that gram-negative bacteria (GNB), includingAcinetobacter baumannii(24%),Pseudomonas aeruginosa(16%), andKlebsiella pneumoniae(15%) constituted for the highest proportion of isolates [7]. Among gram-positive bacteria (GPB),Staphylococcus aureusand Enterococcus species predominate. Worldwide data in 2020 revealed that GNB were predominant in Eastern Europe (78%), Africa (78%), and Asia and the Middle East (76%), withKlebsiellaspecies (27%),Escherichia coli(25%),Pseudomonasspecies (24%), andAcinetobacterspecies (17%) being the most common. On the other hand, GPB were most prominent in North America (46%) [8], highlighting the variability based on geographical regions.

Several factors play a role in the development of bacterial sepsis among ICU-admitted patients. Age of the patient, invasive procedures in the ICU such as central venous catheter and mechanical ventilation, immunocompromisation, prolonged stay in the ICU, previous hospitalization, and presence of comorbidities are factors that increase bacterial infection in critically ill patients [8–11].

Management approaches for sepsis include early fluid resuscitation and empirical antibiotic therapy [12]. However, antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has increasingly become a serious threat in LMICs, exacerbated by overuse or inappropriate use of antibiotics, ultimately diminishing the effectiveness of commonly available antibiotics [13]. Multi-drug resistance (MDR) is one of the reasons for the growing incidence of sepsis in the ICUs due to exposure to different invasive procedures, prolonged ICU stay, and use of broad-spectrum antibiotics [14,15]. A study from an Indian tertiary hospital ICUs showed that GNB isolates exhibited a higher resistance to various classes of antibiotics.E. coliexhibited resistance to second-generation cephalosporins (95% in adults and 96% in children), beta-lactams (95% in adults and 63% in children), fluoroquinolones (95% in adults and 81% in children), and cotrimoxazole (85% in adults and 78% in children).Klebsiella spp.isolated from adults showed resistance rates of 75% to aminoglycosides, 100% to second-generation cephalosporins, 94% to beta-lactams, 92% to fluoroquinolones, 88% to carbapenems, and 83% to cotrimoxazole [16]. On the contrary, a study from Uganda reported the highest susceptibility rates to amikacin, vancomycin, and imipenem and the lowest susceptibility rates to cephalosporins, ciprofloxacin, and gentamicin [17].

Furthermore, the rise of ESBL and CP releasing GNB aggravated the existing challenges of AMR, as their resistance to multiple antibiotics severely limits treatment options [18,19]. Prior studies revealed that the prevalence of ESBL-releasing isolates in Ethiopia ranged from 24.8–66%%, while CP-producing isolates ranged from 5.2 to 34.7% [20–24]. A meta-analysis of ESBL and CP-producing GNB in urinary tract infections in Ethiopia reported a prevalence rate of 30.9% and 15.1%, respectively [25]. Furthermore, a meta-analysis on CP-producing Enterobacteriaceae from human clinical samples in Ethiopia reported a prevalence rate of 5.4% [26].

ICU setting is often regarded as the focal point of infections due to various reasons including the vulnerability of the patients secondary to the dysregulated immune system, the high risk of infection through multiple invasive procedures, duration of ICU stay, and exposure to several drugs that may affect normal flora [27]. However, in a low-resource ICU setting, there is limited data as to the bacterial profiles, antibiotic resistance patterns, and burden of ESBL and CP-producing species. Current understanding of bacterial profiles and antimicrobial resistance patterns, as well as ESBL and CP-releasing isolates in critically ill patients, is essential to design and implement an appropriate management approach. Thus, the current study assessed bacterial profiles, antimicrobial resistance patterns, and the proportion of ESBL and CP-producing isolates.

A prospective cross-sectional study was carried out among ICU-admitted adult and pediatric patients at Jimma University Medical Center (JUMC) from October 2023 to October 2024. The medical center is located in the Oromia Region, Jimma Zone, Jimma City. JUMC is the largest health facility in the southwest part of Ethiopia with an 800-bed capacity, with a catchment population of 20 million. The Medical center has four ICUs, including medical, surgical, emergency, and pediatric ICUs, with a total of 48 beds.

The study included patients older than one month who were admitted to medical, surgical, emergency, and pediatric ICUs during the study period. Only those with presumptive diagnosis of sepsis and who provided consent/assent were enrolled. The diagnosis of sepsis was made by an attending physician based on clinical judgment by incorporating clinical presentations, laboratory findings, and radiological evidence. The presence of a suspected or confirmed infection together with new signs of organ dysfunction, such as hypotension, altered mentation, tachypnea, or reduced urine output were considered for clinical diagnosis. Additionally, laboratory analyses including complete blood count (CBC), procalcitonin, C-reactive protein, and organ function tests were utilized.

Patients who could not provide blood sample were excluded from the study.

The sample size calculation was based on a single population proportion formula (Zα/2)2P (1- P)/d2). The prevalence of sepsis in ICU was obtained from a previous study in Addis Ababa that reported 26.5% sepsis prevalence [28]. Accordingly, n= (1.96)2* 0.265(1-0.265)/(0.05)2=299. The final sample size after applying finite population correction was calculated as nf = n/1 + n-1/N. Considering the total annual ICU admission of 300 patients, the final sample size is, nf= 299/1 + 299-1/300 = 150. A convenient sampling technique was used to recruit study participants in all ICUs.

Socio-demographic and clinical data were collected using a structured questionnaire (supplementary file).

Nurses in the ICUs collected the blood samples for culture, ensuring proper site disinfection before puncture with 70% alcohol and 2% iodine tincture. Two bottles of blood, 10 ml each for adults aged 18 years and older, 5 ml each for children and adolescents older than two years, and 2–3 ml each for children between 1 month and two years of age, were collected into bottles containing Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) and transported to microbiology laboratory. The bottles were incubated at 37°c for seven days, and they were checked daily for the existence of turbidity, hemolysis, gas production, and/or coagulation of broth. Sub-cultures were made after 24 h on a sheep blood agar plate (SBAP), a chocolate agar plate (CAP), and a MacConkey agar plate (MAP). The plates containing BAP and MAP were incubated under an aerobic condition at 37°c and were inspected after 24–48 h, while the plates containing CAP were incubated for 72 h at 37 °C in a candle jar, maintaining a CO2concentration of 5–10%. On the seventh day, the blood bottles that showed no bacterial growth were confirmed as culture negative.

Pathogen identification from sub-cultured plates was undertaken by inspecting their unique characteristics, including colony morphology, Gram stain, and specific biochemical reactions. Biochemical tests undertaken for GNB included the indole test, carbohydrate fermentation reaction in Kligler’s Iron Agar (KIA), citrate utilization, motility test, lysine decarboxylase, urease test, hydrogen sulphide (H2S) and gas production, and oxidase test. GPB were examined using catalase, coagulase, the Pyrrolidonyl Aminopeptidase (PYR) test, the Christie–Atkins–Munch-Petersen (CAMP) test, optochin, and the Bacitracin test.

All blood culture isolates were evaluated for antimicrobial susceptibility using the Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion method on Mueller-Hinton agar (MHA) plates in accordance with the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute’s (CLSI) 2024 guidelines [31]. Freshly isolated 2 to 5 pure colonies from MAP, BAP, or CAP were picked and applied into 5 mL sterile nutrient broth, and homogenized by mixing the suspension before transferring into sterile normal saline using a sterile pipette. After matching the turbidity with 0.5 McFarland standards, a sterile swab was immersed into the suspension, with excess inoculum carefully removed by pressing it against the tube’s sides. Then the swab was placed to the center of the MHA plate and evenly spread across the medium. Once the inoculated plates were dried at room temperature for 3–15 min, the antibiotic discs were positioned on MHA using sterile forceps maintaining a 24 mm distance between each disk and 15 mm from the border, and incubated for 24 h at 35–37 °C. The diameter of the inhibition zone surrounding the disc was determined using a sliding metal caliper, and break points were interpreted based on the 2024 CLSI guidelines.

Antibiotic discs that were used for GPB were: Gentamicin (CN) (10 µg), Penicillin-G (P) (10 IU), Vancomycin (30 µg), and cefoxitin (CXT) (30 µg). Cefoxitin disk diffusion test was employed to identify methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus(MRSA). For GNB, the antibiotics used were: Ampicillin (AMP) (10 µg), Amoxicillin-Clavulanic Acid (AMC) (30 µg), ceftazidime(CAZ) (30 µg), Cefotaxime (CXT) (30 µg), Ceftriaxone (CRO) (30 µg), cefepime (CFP) (30 µg), Ciprofloxacin (CIP) (5 µg), Chloramphenicol (C) (30 µg), Amikacin (AMK) (30 µg), Gentamicin (CN) (10 µg), piperacillin (PIP) (10 µg), piperacillin tazobactam (TZP) (100/10µg), Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SXT) (1.25/23.75 µg) and Meropenem (MER) (10 µg), Ertapenem (10 µg), and Aztreonam (30 µg). The results were interpreted by measuring the inhibition zone as sensitive, intermediate, and resistant based on the standardized 2024 CLSI guidelines [29].

The MASTDISCS®Combi AmpC and ESBL detection discs D68 C (Mast Group Ltd., UK) were used to examine AmpC and/or ESBL enzyme production phenotypically. The MASTDISCS®Combi AmpC and ESBL detection discs have a four-cartridge system, each cartridge containing 50 discs: cefpodoxime 10 µg discs (cartridge A), cefpodoxime 10 µg + ESBL inhibitor discs (cartridge B), cefpodoxime 10 µg + AmpC inhibitor discs (cartridge C), and cefpodoxime 10 µg + ESBL inhibitor + AmpC inhibitor discs (cartridge D).

A bacterial suspension adjusted at 0.5 McFarland scale were streaked in to MHA. Then each one of the four discs were placed on to the agar, maintaining adequate spacing between the discs to facilitate formation of visibly defined zones of inhibition. After incubation at 35–37 °C for 18 to 24 h, the diameter of any observed zones of inhibition were measured and documented in millimeters (mm).

The results were interpreted following the manufacturer’s instruction [30]. An ESBL was identified when there was a zone difference of at least 5 mm between discs B and A or between discs D and C. A zone difference of ≥ 5 mm between disc C and disc A, or between disc D and disc B, was recorded as a blaAmpC. Conversely, a zone difference of ≥ 5 mm between discs D and C and < 4 mm between discs A and B was considered as indicating the existence of both an ESBL and a blaAmpC. The lack of both a blaAmpCand an ESBL was noted when all zones differed by less than 2 mm.E. coliNCTC 13,351 (ESBL positive), andE. cloacaeNCTC 13,406 (AmpC positive) were used as positive control, andE. coliATCC®25,922 as negative control. A brief tabular interpretation rules are presented in the supplementary files (Table2).

The MASTDISCS®Combi Carba plus disc system D73C (MAST-Carba plus; Mast Group Ltd., UK) commercial combination disc assay was used to examine CP production phenotypically. All strains exhibiting resistance or intermediate resistance to carbapenem drugs, or resistance to either third-generation cephalosporins or cefoxitin, were analyzed following the manufacturer’s instructions [31,32].

MASTDISCS®Combi Carba plus is a five-cartridge system, each cartridge containing 50 discs: penem discs (cartridge A), penem + MβL inhibitor discs (cartridge B), penem + KPC inhibitor discs (cartridge C), penem + AmpC inhibitor discs (cartridge D) and temocillin + MβL inhibitor discs (cartridge E). The system detectsKlebsiella pneumoniaecarbapenemase (KPC), Metallo-β-lactamases (MβL) and OXA-48 carbapenemases activity produced by Enterobacteriaceae, as well as the differentiation of KPC from Amp C-producing isolates. The temocillin disc along with MβL inhibitor (cartridge E) increases the discrimination of OXA-48 by avoiding the mistake of MβLs erroneously identified as OXA-48.

Initially, a 0.5 McFarland inoculum of the organism was adjusted and evenly applied over the surface of MHA plates. Using sterile forceps, the five discs were placed onto the inoculated medium, maintaining adequate spacing to facilitate the formation of distinct inhibition zones. Following incubation at 35–37 °C for 18 to 24 h, the diameter of any zones of inhibition were measured and documented in mm discounting any micro-colonies within the zone.

The results were interpreted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions [31]: comparison of the zone of inhibition of the penem disc (A) was made against the zone of inhibition of the penem plus inhibitor discs (B, C, and D). If only disc B showed a zone difference of ≥ 5 mm compared to disc A (C-A and D-A should be < 5 mm), the organism was recorded as exhibiting MβLs activity. Similarly, if only disc C had a zone difference ≥ 5 mm compared to disc A (B-A and D-A should be < 5 mm), the organism was reported as exhibiting KPC activity. When both discs C and D exhibit a zone difference of ≥ 5 mm relative to disc A, AmpC production with porin loss is suggested; disc B-A should have a zone difference of < 4 mm. If there are no synergistic effects between discs A, B, C, and D, and disc E shows diameter of the inhibition zone of ≤ 10 mm, OXA-48 CP production was reported.K. pneumoniaeNCTC 13,438 (KPC positive),K. pneumoniaeNCTC 13,440 (MBL positive) andK. pneumoniaeNCTC 13,442 (OXA-48 positive) were used as positive controls, andE. coliATCC®25,922 as negative controls. A brief tabular interpretation rules are presented in the (supplementary files Table 3).

The questionnaires were initially developed in English, translated into Afaan Oromoo and Amharic, followed by back-translation into English to ensure accuracy. A training was conducted for data collectors. SOPs were strictly followed during pre-analytical, analytical, and post-analytical stages. The quality of culture media and antimicrobial susceptibility were checked using American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) standard reference strains, includingE. coliATCC 25,922,S. aureusATCC 25,923, andP. aeruginosaATCC 27,853. Quality control for the antimicrobial disc was conducted in accordance with the standards set by the Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI) laboratory and CLSI protocols. The principal investigator conducted daily reviews to ensure the completeness of data and adherence to laboratory procedures. All blood culture results were reviewed by an experienced microbiologist, ensuring accuracy before proper documentation. Purified bacterial cultures were preserved in tryptic soy broth containing 0% glycerol and stored at − 80 °C.

The study included 149 ICU-admitted patients with presumptive diagnosis of sepsis. The patients had a median age of 30 years (IQR: 19.5–45); 63.8% of the participants were males. The respiratory tract was identified as the most frequent source of infection (38.2%). Respiratory comorbidities were predominant followed by malaria infection. Participants stayed for a median of 5 days in the ICU and the mortality rate in ICU was reported to be 24.4% (Table1).

The total number of bacterial isolates identified in this study was 33/149 samples (22.1%; 95% CI: 16.2–29.6%). Of these 25/33 (75.8%) were GNB includingE. coli, 6/33 (18.2%),Klebsiella spp., 8/33 (24.2%),P.alcalifaciens, 2/33 (6.1%), andPseudomonas spp., 2/33 (6.1%). About a quarter, 8/33 (24.2%) of the bacterial isolates were Gram-positives includingS.aureus, 5/33 (15.2%), and Coagulase-negativeStaphylococcus(CoNS), 3/33 (9.1%), (Fig.1).

Out of the total 25 GNB isolates, 11/25 (44%) were reported to be ESBL-producers. Among ESBL- producers,E. colicomprised the highest number at 4/11 (36.4%) whileK. aerogenes,K. ozaenae,P. stuartii,Citrobacter spp.,Klebsiella spp.,and Acinetobacter spp., 1/11 (9.1%) each. On the other hand, 12/25 (48%) of bacterial isolates demonstrated CP activity including OXA-48 activity 9/12 (75.0.%), KPC activity 2/12 (16.7%), and MβLs activity 2/12 (16.7%).E. colicomprised 4/12 (33.3%) andPseudomonas spp.,P. alcalifaciens, andKlebsiella spp., each comprised 2/12 (16.7%). Five organisms (20%) co-produced both ESBL and CP.

A total of 25 GNB were isolated from sepsis patients and tested for antibiotic sensitivity using 14 antibiotic discs. GNB showed high resistance rates to third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins, ranging from 66.7 to 80%. Meropenem and ciprofloxacin resistance was observed in 24% and 56.5% of isolates respectively. Amikacin was the most effective antibiotic, exhibiting a resistance rate of 15% (Fig.2).

A total of eight GPB were isolated and examined for antibiotic sensitivity using four antibiotic discs. From the total gram-positive isolates, 80% ofS. aureuswere resistant to penicillin and cefoxitin (as a surrogate for oxacillin). Thus, 4/5 (80%) ofS. aureuswere reported as MRSA. All of the CoNS were resistant to penicillin and oxacillin (Fig.3).

Higher resistance rate was observed among ESBL producers, against amoxicillin (71.4%), ampicillin (70%), and ciprofloxacin (70%). Meropenem was relatively effective against ESBL producers with a resistance rate of 33.3% each. Conversely, resistance rate was higher in CP-producers against meropenem (83.3%), and Piperacillin + tazobactam (75%) (Fig.4).

AMC: Amoxicillin + clavulanic acid, AMK: Amikacin, AMP: Ampicillin, AMP + SUL: Ampicillin + Sulbactam C: Chloramphenicol, CN: Gentamicin, CAZ: Ceftazidime, CEP: Cefepime, CIP: Ciprofloxacin, CTX: Cefotaxime, MEM: Meropenem, PEN: Penicillin G, SXT: Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, TZP: Piperacillin + tazobactam.

Bacterial isolates that were resistant to at least one antibiotic in three or more drug classes were labeled as MDR. The overall prevalence of MDR in the current study was 11/33 (33.3%). GPB such as S. aureus and CoNS did not exhibit multidrug resistance. However, half of theE. coli,K. ozaenae, andK. aerogenesas well as all ofPseudomonas spp.,P. alcalifaciens,Klebsiella spp., andK. pneumoniaedemonstrated multidrug resistance (Table2).

A Bivariate analysis showed that age, ICU type, days in ICU, previous hospitalization, previous antibiotics use and current antibiotics use were associated with positive culture. However, in the multivariate analysis, current antibiotic use had a significant statistical association with culture negativity (p= 0.004). On the other hand, length of stay in the ICU had a statistically significant association with culture positivity (p= 0.02) (Table3).

Sepsis is a pressing global public health issue, particularly in critically ill patients, as it is linked to increased rates of morbidity and mortality. Findings from the present study revealed that bacteria were isolated in a fifth of critically ill patients with presumptive sepsis diagnosis, and a quarter of adult ICU patients faced death outcome. Gram-negative bacteria were predominantly contributing to higher resistance rate among isolates, approximately half of them being ESBL- and CP-producing bacteria. These findings signal a serious threat to ICU patient outcomes and underscore the urgent need to strengthen antibiotic stewardship and infection prevention strategies to curb resistance in ICU environments. Bacterial isolates of 22.1% in our study was consistent with a previous study in India that reported 21% bacterial isolates from ICU admitted patients [33]. However, it was higher than the studies in Nigeria (11.8%) [34] and Poland (13.5%) [35], and lower than the studies from Saudi Arabia (28.8%) [36] and Nigeria (31%) [37]. Differences in the ICU infrastructure [7], availability of antibiotic stewardship program [38,39], and sample size might have contributed to the difference in prevalence of bacterial isolates across studies. Gram-negative predominance in critically ill patients was consistent with previous studies [33,35–37].

Moreover, ESBL- and CP-producing bacteria are significant concern in critically ill patients as their resistance to multiple antibiotics limits treatment options [40,41]. Our study presented that 44% and 48% of GNB were ESBL and CP producers, respectively. This result exceeds the proportion of previous studies that reported 17.3% [22] and 21.4% [42] ESBL producers in Qatar and India, respectively. Similarly, it was higher than the study from Ethiopia that reported 24.8% ESBL- and 5.2% CP-producers [23]. Observing a higher proportion of CP producers (48%) compared to ESBL producers (44%) is unusual and warrants careful interpretation. There was indeed overlap in our findings, with several isolates co-producing ESBLs and CP. Referral of more complicated or previously treated cases to our facility, local patterns of higher carbapenem use, or potential clonal transmission within the hospital might explain the current finding. Additionally, we acknowledge that reliance on phenotypic tests alone may overestimate CP activity, as other mechanisms such as porin loss combined with ESBL or AmpC production can yield similar results.

In our study, higher resistance rate among ESBL-producers was reported against amoxicillin, ampicillin and ciprofloxacin while meropenem was relatively effective against ESBL producers. In the previous study in China, 100% resistance to ampicillin and 54.7% resistance to ciprofloxacin was reported among ESBL producers [43]. Another study in Ethiopia reported that meropenem, amikacin, and cefoxitin were the most active antibiotic agents against ESBL-producers, with susceptibility rates of 96.7, 82.1, and 70%, respectively [44]. Furthermore, our study revealed that, CP-producers exhibited higher resistance to meropenem and Piperacillin + tazobactam. Previous studies reported higher resistance rate for cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones [45,46].

The antimicrobial susceptibility pattern showed that GNB are resistant to third-and fourth-generation cephalosporins with resistance rate ranging from 66.7 to 80%. An 80% resistance rate for cefotaxime, a 66.7% rate for ceftazidime, and a 76% rate for cefepime was observed. This aligns with findings from a prior study conducted in Northern Saudi Arabia that reported an overall resistance rates of 73.2% and 70.1% for third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins, respectively [36]. Similarly, a 70% resistance to cefepime and a resistance rate ranging from 63.3 to 72.9% to third-generation cephalosporins was reported in another study from Saudi Arabia [47]. On the other hand, a study from Vietnam reported that resistance rate for ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, and cefepime was 88%, 80%, and 75%, respectively [48]. Meropenem resistance was 24% in this study, which is lower than previous studies that reported 43% [36], and 47.1% [49] resistance rate. The fact that meropenem resistance was 24% while CP were detected in 48%, suggests that a significant proportion of isolates carried CP genes but did not yet exhibit phenotypic resistance to meropenem at the tested breakpoints. This could be due to low-level enzyme expression, the presence of less efficient CP, or coexisting mechanisms that temporarily maintain susceptibility. It also highlights the potential for silent dissemination of CP genes, underscoring the need for molecular surveillance even when phenotypic resistance rates appear lower. This finding is clinically significant and warrants close monitoring to prevent further spread and eventual expression of high-level resistance. Resistance rate for amikacin was lower in our study at 15% rate. Previous studies have indicated that amikacin was the most effective drug with lower resistance rate and higher sensitivity [36,47]. For gram-positive isolates, highest resistance was observed for penicillin and oxacillin at 87.5% rate. For gentamicin and vancomycin, a resistance rate of 37.5% and 12.5% was reported. A previous study reported a resistance rate of 67.4% and 100% to oxacillin and penicillin, respectively. However, resistance was not reported against vancomycin [50]. Four of the fiveS. aureusisolates were MRSA in the current study. MRSA is a significant concern in critically ill patients in the ICUs being responsible to increased mortality in these patients [51,52].

Multidrug resistance poses significant challenge often targeting immune-depleted and critically ill patients [53,54]. Major factors are contamination of the healthcare environment, colonization of hospitalized patients or healthcare providers by MDRAcinetobacter baumannii(MDR-AB) strain, inadequate infection control measures, prolonged ICU stays, cancer, previous ICU admissions, and prior exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics [55,56]. The prevalence of MDR in this study was 33.3%, all of which were attributed to the gram-negative bacteria. Higher MDR rate were reported among ICU admitted patients from previous studies in Uganda [17], Poland [35], and Saudi Arabia [36,47], ranging from 35.9 to 85.1%. The higher MDR prevalence observed in previous studies may be due to variations in bacterial profiles across different study regions. For instance, the research conducted in Uganda [17] and Saudi Arabia [36,47] identifiedK. pneumoniaeandAcinetobacter spp.as the predominant isolates, which significantly contributed to the MDR rate. Similarly, a study from Poland reported thatAcinetobacter baumanniiMDR represented 31.8% [35]. In contrast, our study identifiedE. colias the most frequently occurring bacteria.

The present study revealed that antibiotic use before blood culture is associated with culture negativity compared to those who did not receive antibiotics (AOR: 0.05; 95% CI: 0.01–0.38). Congruent to this finding, previous studies reported lesser culture positivity among patients who received antibiotics prior to testing with an absolute difference in percentage of positive blood culture of 11.6% [57], 12% [58] and 22.9% [59]. Logistic regression showed antibiotic use as an independent factor for culture negativity (AOR: 0.4; 95% CI: 0.3–0.6) [59]. Although obtaining blood culture before antibiotic administration is a best practice according to international guideline [60], it is not often applicable for practical reasons [61]. While the rate of positive blood culture in sepsis patients is expected to be similar within one hour of antimicrobial administration [62], the rate considerably declines afterwards [57,58].

Furthermore, our study showed that prolonged stay in the ICUs was significantly associated with culture positivity (AOR: 1.13, 95% CI:1.02–1.24,p= 0.02). Studies suggest that culture-positive patients tend to have longer ICU stays compared to culture-negative patients. This is likely due to the severity of infection, the need for targeted antibiotic therapy, and the higher risk of complications in culture-positive cases [63,64]. Delays in the onset of infection during ICU stay or evolving clinical indications from non-infectious to infectious indication, prompting the initiation of antibiotic therapy, might further explain the current finding. However, a previous meta-analysis reported that prolonged stay in the ICU is not significantly associated with culture positivity [65]. These differences are likely attributable to differences in study populations, healthcare infrastructure, the source of infection, and resistance patterns.

The limitation of this research was that it was carried out in a single hospital, involving a small sample size requiring precaution when generalizing the findings to the wider population and setting. Additionally, it relied solely on phenotypic testing, which may not fully capture all bacterial population. Full range of antibiotic agents, particularly for gram-positive bacteria, were not used in antimicrobial susceptibility test. Vancomycin susceptibility test was not conducted by the MIC test according to the standard. Furthermore, the study did not identify cases of fungemia or anaerobic bacteria due to the unavailability of appropriate media and setting.

The study reported considerable proportion of bacterial isolates predominantly GNB. Antibiotic use before culture significantly declined culture positivity while culture positivity was associated with length of stay in the ICU. Significant number of GNB were found to be ESBL- and CP- producers notably influencing the resistance rate of the isolates to a range of antibiotic agents. A third of bacterial isolates were found to be MDR, all of them attributed to GNB. These findings highlight the importance of prioritizing infection prevention strategies, implementing antibiotic stewardship programs and developing evidence-based treatment guidelines that fit to local context. Further research is warranted to conduct comprehensive and large-scale investigations into bacterial profiles, antimicrobial resistance patterns and the diverse factors contributing to antibiotic resistance in critically ill patients.

We sincerely appreciate the invaluable contributions of the Jimma University Medical Center. Special thanks go to the dedicated nurses in the Medical, Surgical, Emergency, and Pediatric ICUs for their assistance in collecting blood samples for culture and helping gather demographic and clinical data from patient records. We are also deeply grateful to the Microbiology unit at the medical center for their support in storing and analyzing bacterial isolates. Above all, we extend our heartfelt gratitude to the study participants and caregivers, whose involvement made this study possible.

“GTK” contributed to the conceptualization of the research project and its methodology; analyzed and interpreted the data; wrote original draft manuscript; and reviewed and edited the manuscript. “GA”, “ZM”, “ETA” and “EKG” contributed to the conceptualization and supervision of the research project and reviewed and edited the manuscript. “HA” performed the microbiological tests and reviewed the manuscript. “GB” and “MM” reviewed and edited the manuscript. All the authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

This study was supported through Mega Research Fund Scheme (2022–2025), provided by Jimma University research council. The funders had no role in study design, data collection, analysis, publication decision, or manuscript preparation.