The most common anterior mediastinal tumors are thymic epithelial tumors, including thymoma, and other kinds of diseases are relatively rare. Here, we report our experience in treating a patient with amyloidosis of the thymus, a very rare type of mediastinal lesion.

We experienced thymic amyloidosis mimicking a thymoma. A 66-year-old male underwent thymectomy for an anterior mediastinal tumor, which was incidentally pointed out with chest CT. The pathological examination revealed that eosinophilic unstructured substances were present around the atrophied thymic tissue, suggesting the presence of amyloid deposits. Thus, the postoperative pathological diagnosis was thymic amyloidosis. Thymic amyloidosis is extremely rare. Since other amyloid deposits were identified in the gastric mucosa of this patient, he was diagnosed with systemic amyloidosis, and chemotherapy was initiated. The patient had no progression of amyloidosis for 21 months after surgery.

To the best of our knowledge, only 8 cases of thymic amyloidosis, including the present case, have been reviewed in the literature. Although thymic amyloidosis is extremely rare, an unfavorable prognosis has occasionally been reported. In addition, thymoma and thymic amyloidosis have similar imaging findings, thus making it difficult to distinguish between them. Therefore, thoracic surgeons may need to be aware that thymic amyloidosis is included in the list of anterior mediastinal lesions.

Noninvasive anterior mediastinal lesions are usually asymptomatic and incidentally found. Among them, thymoma is recognized as the most common histology, accounting for 40% of all mediastinal lesions resected in Japan during 2021.1)Subsequently, thymic carcinomas, teratomas, and various thymic cysts are also treated as rare anterior mediastinal lesions. Of the anterior mediastinal lesions suspected to be thymomas on radiographic studies, few patients had benign, nonneoplastic lesions. However, in clinical practice, understanding the presence of such lesions is also important. Here, we report our experience of surgically treating a very rare case of thymic amyloidosis mimicking thymoma.

A 66-year-old male with a diagnosis of left cerebellar hemorrhage was admitted to our hospital. An anterior mediastinal lesion was incidentally pointed out with a chest CT. Subsequently, he was referred to our department. The patient’s medical history included hypertension, benign prostatic hypertrophy, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, acute epiglottitis, and inguinal hernia. No symptoms, including myasthenia gravis (MG), were observed. The serum anti-acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibody level was low (<0.2 nmol/L). Radiographically, contrast-enhanced CT revealed an anterior mediastinal lesion with a maximum diameter of 5 cm, which was slightly enhanced homogeneously (Fig. 1A). MRI revealed low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and iso-intensity on T2-weighted images, and a simple thymic cyst was excluded from the differential diagnosis (Fig. 1Band1C). According to the above preoperative evaluation, we suspected that this lesion was a thymoma. After the patient’s general condition had recovered from the brain hemorrhage, he underwent thoracoscopic thymectomy. The lesion did not invade the surrounding organs and was demarcated from the normal thymic tissue, although the normal thymic tissue appeared abundant for his age (Fig. 1D). The operative time was 68 min, and the amount of blood loss was 10 g. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.

The pathological examination revealed that eosinophilic unstructured substances were present around the atrophied thymic tissue. The unstructured substance stained a reddish-brown color with direct fast scarlet staining, which suggested the presence of amyloid (Fig. 2Aand2B). Polarized light microscopy revealed an apple-green color of the amyloid (Fig. 2C). Based on these findings, the anterior mediastinal lesion was diagnosed as a thymic amyloidosis. Additional whole-body examinations were performed to check for amyloid deposits in other organs. We conducted echocardiography, scintigraphy, and MRI of the heart, neurological examination, and skin biopsy, but these examinations showed no evidence of amyloid deposition. While we did not conduct a renal biopsy, amyloid deposits were found in the gastric mucosa by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. In addition, since immunoglobulin M-λ was detected by electrophoresis, he was diagnosed with amyloid light chain (AL) amyloidosis. Subsequently, daratumumab in combination with cyclophosphamide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone was initiated in the department of hematology. Twenty-one months after surgery, he is followed up every 3–4 months and has shown no significant changes in amyloidosis.

We treated a mediastinal tumor and found that the patient had systemic amyloidosis, whose initial presentation was an anterior mediastinal tumor. Localized amyloidosis accounts for 13% of total amyloidosis.2)In localized disease, deposits are limited to a single organ or tissue. In systemic disease, amyloid deposits are found in various organs, such as the heart, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, including tongue and lip, skin, nail, and bladder. The prognosis of systemic amyloidosis depends on the affected organs. Especially in cases with cardiomyopathy due to cardiac amyloidosis, a worse prognosis has been reported.

To the best of our knowledge, only 8 cases of thymic amyloidosis, including the present case, have been reviewed in the literature (Table 1).3–9)The average age of the patients was 59 years, and the female gender was predominant. The mean maximal tumor diameter was 6.7 cm. Surgical extirpation was performed in all but one patient. Among them, 3 patients with symptoms and/or a diagnosis of MG have been reported. All but one of the patients with MG were diagnosed with AL amyloidosis. Interestingly, thymic amyloidosis leads to the development of MG.5,7)Generally, thymic hyperplasia and thymoma often induce MG. However, the mechanisms by which thymic amyloidosis induces MG are not clear. Son et al.5)reported a case of thymic amyloidosis and MG and hypothesized that amyloidosis was provoked by the deposition of anti-AChR Ab-derived misfolded light chains. Chapman et al.7)reported that thymic calcification was apparent in cases combined with thymic amyloidosis and MG. Thymic calcification is frequently found in cases of thymic amyloidosis. Similarly, thymic calcification is common in thymomas. Features of CT findings of amyloidoma in various organs include low-density areas consistent with amyloid deposition and poor enhancement due to decreased blood flow caused by infiltration of amyloid into the vessel wall and organ parenchyma.10)Furthermore, organomegaly or wall thickening is also a feature of CT findings.10)However, in this case, we first suspected a thymoma because the lesion had a nodular contrast effect. In retrospect, it is possible that the area of amyloid deposition may have had a partial lack of contrast effect. Therefore, it is not easy to distinguish between thymomas and thymic amyloidosis based on their CT findings. In fact, cases of thymic amyloidosis mimicking thymoma have been reported previously. In recent years, minimally invasive thymectomies using thoracoscopic or robotic techniques have become available. Regardless of the disease, both diagnostic and therapeutic thymectomy may be recommended.

We experienced thymic amyloidosis mimicking a thymoma. Although thymic amyloidosis is extremely rare, an unfavorable prognosis has occasionally been reported in the systemic type. Thus, if thymic amyloidosis is detected, it is essential that a subsequent systemic search be performed. Therefore, thoracic surgeons may need to be aware that thymic amyloidosis is included in the list of anterior mediastinal lesions.

All authors read and approved the final manuscript and agree to be held accountable for all aspects of this case report.

The datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are included within the article.

This case report was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Aichi Medical University School of Medicine (Approval No. 2024-226). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for participation.

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.