Literature reports higher error rates in professions such as police officers and nurses during night shifts. Additionally, there is evidence of a higher rate of surgical complications and mortality rate if surgery is performed at night. Currently, kidney transplantations are performed at any time of day to minimize the cold ischemia time. Recent studies investigating the outcomes of kidney transplantation in relation to daytime have produced varying results.

A retrospective analysis was conducted on data from all patients who received a deceased donor kidney transplant at the University Medical Center Mannheim between January 1, 1997, and January 31, 2015. All recipients were followed for 2.5 y after the last kidney transplant. Daytime was divided into 2 categories: day (from 8amto 7:59pm) and night (from 8pmto 7:59am). Four operation intervals were defined on the basis of incision and suturing time (day/day, day/night, night/night, and night/day). Endpoints of primary interest were surgical complications, delayed onset of renal function requiring renal replacement therapy, transplant failure, and death.

We analyzed 363 patients who underwent kidney transplantation during our study period. The incidence of surgical complications tended to be higher at night (P= 0.054). Rates of wound infections were significantly higher when the operation started at night (P= 0.018). The rate of wound infections (P= 0.007; Fisher test) and the incidence of DFG type 2 (P= 0.002) were highest in the night/day operation interval. The analysis of graft loss and patient survival showed no significant difference between day- and nighttime surgery but a positive trend toward operation started during the daytime.

In summary, the effect of the timing of transplant surgery on long- and short-term outcomes of kidney transplantation appears to be rather minor. Hence, reducing cold ischemia time should be the primary goal to improve the outcome of kidney transplantation.

Higher error rates have been reported for professions such as police officers and nurses during night shifts. Therefore, the influence of the daytime on work performance is a topic of discussion in the literature, particularly in healthcare.12,13Studies have shown that the outcomes of operations performed at night are worse than those performed during the day.14-19A survey conducted in Switzerland reported a significantly higher rate of surgical complications and a higher mortality rate for trauma surgery during evening and night hours.15This is consistent with data from the United States, which indicated worse outcomes for general surgery performed at night.16,17Fatigue and sleep deprivation have been suggested as reasons for this.20-22Therefore, it is worth investigating whether this also applies to kidney transplantation and should be taken into consideration when scheduling surgery.

To the best of our knowledge, 4 studies from Europe and 1 from the United States have investigated the outcomes of kidney transplantation in relation to daytime in recent years.23-28However, these studies have produced incongruent results. Although 2 studies failed to show significant differences in outcomes, 1 study reported better graft survival when the transplantation was performed at night.23,25,27Contrary to this, a survey from Germany reported a higher rate of surgical complications and a shorter graft survival for operations performed at night.24To add information with regard to this important clinical question, we analyzed the influence of the time of day on short- and long-term outcomes after kidney transplantation in our center.

A retrospective analysis was conducted on data from all patients who received a deceased donor kidney transplant at the University Medical Center Mannheim between January 1, 1997, and January 31, 2015. The follow-up period was 2.5 y after the last kidney transplant. Patients who underwent a combined kidney and pancreas transplantation were excluded from the analysis. Patient data were obtained from both digital and analog patient files from the local transplant office. Donor data were retrieved from the international Eurotransplant database.29The retrospective analysis was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee II of the Medical Faculty Mannheim of the University of Heidelberg (2015-869R-MA).

To analyze the influence of the time of day on transplantation outcomes, the daytime was divided into 2 categories: day (from 8amto 7:59pm) and night (from 8pmto 7:59am). To consider the operation time, 4 more categories were defined depending on the time when the operation started (incision time) and when the transplant ended (suturing time). If surgery started and ended between 8amand 7:59pm, the operation interval was categorized as day/day. Thus, the following 3 operation intervals were defined: day/night, night/night, and night/day.

Surgical complications, delayed onset of renal function requiring renal replacement therapy, transplant failure, and death were defined as endpoints of primary interest. Surgical complications and delayed onset of renal function were classified as early complications, whereas graft failure and patient survival were categorized as late complications. Furthermore, secondary endpoints were defined as follows: surgical complications were subdivided into vascular (renal artery stenosis, renal vein thrombosis, and bleeding), ureteral (stenosis and leakage), wound infections, and the occurrence of lymphocele. Delayed graft function (DGF) was defined as the need for renal replacement therapy within the first week after transplantation. DGF can be classified as DGF1 if renal replacement therapy is needed once and DGF2 if it is needed ≥2 times within the first 7 d. Graft failure and death were defined as the time in years between transplantation and the date of graft failure or death.

To investigate the influence of confounding factors on the outcome of kidney transplantation, the following factors were analyzed: (1) recipient-related: age, presence of hypertension, diabetes (type 1 and 2), smoking status before and after transplantation; (2) donor-related: age, cause of death, final donor creatinine, expanded criteria donor status as defined by Metzger et al30; and (3) operation-related: cold ischemia time and duration of operation.

Data are presented as mean ± SD. Qualitative data are displayed as absolute and relative frequencies (%). Statistical analysis was performed using the chi-square test,ttest, variance test, z-calculation, and Fisher exact test for normally distributed parameters. Normal distribution was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Nonnormally distributed data were analyzed using the Wilcoxon and Kruskal-Wallis tests. Furthermore, logistic regression was performed on the occurrence of surgical complications and wound infections. Graft survival (return to dialysis) and patient survival analyses were performed using the Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank test. A significance level ofPvalue of <0.05 (5%) was set. Statistical analysis was conducted using SAS software (version 9.4; SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC).

Between January 1, 1997, and January 31, 2015, a total of 363 patients undergoing kidney transplantation at the University Medical Center Mannheim were included in our analysis. The mean age of the kidney transplant recipients was 53.3 y, with a range of 23 to 77 y. The male-to-female patient ratio was 2:1. The ages of the kidney donors ranged from 6 to 85 y, with a mean age of 51 y. The mean creatinine level was 1.08 mg/dL before kidney procurement. The primary cause of death was intracranial hemorrhage, which affected 191 donors (52.6%). The baseline characteristics of recipients and donors are displayed in Table1.

aNo data available for 63 patients, excluded for further analysis.

bNo data available for 99 patients, excluded for further analysis.

Surgical complications were observed in 118 patients (32.5%), with lymphocele being the most frequent complication (41 cases; 11.3%). There was a trend for a higher incidence of surgical complications when the operation began at night (38.2% versus 28.4% during the day;P= 0.054). When examining the different types of surgical complications, rates of wound infections were significantly higher when the operation was started at night (P= 0.018; Fisher test). The odds ratio on the occurrence of wound infections was 4.859 for operations started at night compared with operations started during the day (95% confidence interval: 1.314-17.969;P= 0.018). Furthermore, there were no differences in DGF between the 2 groups. The analysis of graft loss and patient survival showed a positive trend toward operations that started during the daytime. The 5-y transplant survival rate was 78.80% when the operation was started during the day compared with 72.70% when it was started at night, although this difference did not reach statistical significance. Further details can be found in Table2and Figure1.

Graft and patient survival depending on start of tranplantation surgery. A, Kaplan-Meier curve for graft survival depending on start of surgery: day vs night (P= 0.174). B, Kaplan-Meier curve for patient survival depending on start of surgery: day vs night (P= 0.126).

When considering the operation intervals, there were more wound infections when the operation began at night and ended during the day (P= 0.007). The incidence of DGF type 2 was significantly higher in the night/day operation interval group (P= 0.002). Additionally, 5-y survival and graft survival were lower when the operation started at night and ended after 8am, although this did not reach statistical significance. Detailed data are provided in Table3and Figure2.

Data are presented as number (%). Significant results are shown in bold (significant levelP<0,05).

Graft and patient survival depending on operation interval. A, Kaplan-Meier curve for graft survival depending on operation interval: night/night, night/day, day/night, and day/day (P= 0.477). B, Kaplan-Meier curve for patient survival depending on operation interval: night/night, night/day, day/night, and day/day (P= 0.346).

When analyzing the confounding factors, a statistically significant correlation was found between donor age, operation time, and occurrence of surgical complications. The mean donor age was approximately 5 y lower in the group without surgical complications (54.2 ± 14.7 versus 49.9 ± 16.7 y;P= 0.016). The operation time was approximately 13 min longer in the group of patients with surgical complications (175 ± 47 versus 162 ± 42 min;P= 0.007). The logistic regression adjusted for donor age, duration of the surgery, and time of surgery (day versus night) showed a significant effect of donor age and duration of surgery on surgical complications (odds ratio, 1.017 and 1.007). The mean cold ischemia time was 17.8 ± 6.3 h. No significant correlation was found between cold ischemia time and surgical complications. The creatinine level at the time of explantation did not affect the rate of DGF (P= 0.365). See Tables4and5for detailed data. Analyzing the occurrence of wound infections, no statistically significant correlation was found between the confounding factors. Detailed data are provided in Table6.

Table7shows the distribution of the confounding factors among the different operation intervals. There were no statistically significant differences between these intervals in terms of donor age (P= 0.109). The cold ischemia time was shortest when the operation was performed during the night/day operation interval (P= 0.019). The duration of the kidney transplantation was approximately 20 min longer than the mean value when performed during day/night operation interval (P= 0.002), whereas the rate of expanded criteria donors was lowest in this group (P= 0.030).

Contrary to these results are data from the United States, United Kingdom, and Austria that have shown no significant differences between daytime and nighttime surgical complications.25-27Our data demonstrated a slightly higher rate of DGF type 2 with day/night surgery (P= 0.002), which is similar to the data from Lonze et al.27However, it should be noted that in other studies, postoperative renal function was not influenced by the timing of surgery.26,27Similar to data from comparative studies, we did not find any differences between graft and patient survival and timing of transplant surgery.23,24,26,27However, mean graft survival was 2 y shorter when transplantation was performed at night (9.1 y compared with 11.3 y during the day), although these differences did not reach statistical significance. The rate of expanded criteria donors was significantly higher in the night and early morning hours (P= 0.03), partly explaining this trend for lower graft survival during these operation intervals. Furthermore, donor age was slightly, but not significantly higher in this group (P= 0.109) while being a significant risk factor for the occurrence of surgical complications (odds ratio, 1.017). Poorer transplant quality due to higher donor age and expanded criteria donors may have led to more surgical complications. Additionally, the duration of the surgery had a significant effect on surgical complications, whereas the mean operation time tended to be longer when the operation was performed at night. Sleep deprivation at the end of the night shift may also have contributed to the worse outcome of kidney transplantation.31-33The shortest cold ischemia time was observed when the transplantation was performed at the transition from night to day. It is well established that a shorter cold ischemia time is associated with better outcomes.26,34Significant differences in daytime-dependent influences on the endpoints of primary interest may have been masked by the comparatively short cold ischemia time during the night and early morning hours. Operation time also showed significant variation across the different surgery intervals, with the longest times occurring in the day/night and night/day intervals.