Epithelial tissue integrity is maintained through specialized intercellular junctions known to coordinate homeostatic processes. In this context, outside-in signaling and mechanotransduction through desmosomal cadherins, the building blocks of desmosomes and main stress bearers in epithelial tissue, are only starting to emerge. To better understand the dual function of desmosomal cadherins in structural integrity and cellular signaling, we here performed a systematic, unbiased review on pathogenic signaling effectors identified in models and patients with pemphigus vulgaris (PV). PV is an autoimmune blistering disorder characterized by disruption of desmosomal transadhesion through autoantibodies mainly targeting the desmosomal cadherins desmoglein (Dsg) 3 or Dsg1 and Dsg3. The survey of functionally validated pathogenic pathways published since inception in 1977 up to mid-2024 identifies 128 studies and 128 signaling molecules, highlighting a coherent network of biomechanical, bioelectrical, and biochemical signaling events. This in-depth analysis will stimulate future research as well as development of potential therapeutic applications beyond PV.

Intercellular adhesion is essential to maintain tissue integrity and intercellular communication in epithelial homeostasis1,2. Structurally, junctional cell-cell adhesion is mediated by adherens junctions and desmosomes. The adhesive building blocks of adherens junctions are classical cadherins that communicate through their plaque proteins to the actin cytoskeleton. Desmosomes are robust, tightly packed, knob-like structures that confer strongest adhesion and are built by desmosomal cadherins which act as anchoring sites for intermediate filaments. It is well established that classical cadherins detect external mechanical forces through plasma membrane deformation and molecular conformational changes, transmitted intracellularly in a process known as mechanotransduction, ultimately leading to changes in cell behavior during homeostasis and regenerative processes3–6. These outside-in mechanotransduction mechanisms are less well understood for desmosomal cadherins.

In the epidermis, the outermost layer of the skin, desmosomal cadherins, particularly Dsg3 and Dsg1 have been studied most extensively for their role as the predominant targets in the autoimmune blistering disease pemphigus vulgaris (PV). Dsg3 is mainly expressed in the basal and suprabasal layer of stratified epithelia, from where the highly complex homeostatic processes are governed7, whereas Dsg1 expression is low in basal layers and gradually increases up to the granular layer beneath the stratum corneum8. Antibody binding to these desmosomal cadherins in PV results in potentially life-threatening, basal-suprabasal loss of intercellular adhesion (acantholysis) and skin blistering8,9. It is noteworthy that anti-Dsg3 antibodies are sufficient to induce blisters in tissues lacking Dsg1 expression, suggesting that Dsg1 has a compensatory function in this disease. Whether this function pertains to interfering signaling with Dsg3 or to structurally more resilient desmosomes, or both, will be an interesting topic for future investigations. Complementing these findings, a milder and cutaneous-limited variant of pemphigus named pemphigus foliaceus (PF), which is characterized by autoantibodies targeting Dsg1 without Dsg3, results in superficial epidermal blistering within the granular and upper spinous layers where Dsg1 is the main desmoglein isoform10. The distinct expression patterns and clinical phenotypes of PV and PF underscore functional redundancies between these adhesion molecules while simultaneously highlighting Dsg-specific functions required for the homeostatic balance within different layers of the epidermis11–14. Studies on functional disruption of Dsg3 transadhesion by PV antibodies15have highlighted that desmosomal cadherins not only provide mechanical resilience, but also participate in outside-in signaling that is critical in the homeostasis of stratified epithelia in terms of stem cell maintenance, control of proliferation and differentiation as well as tissue regeneration16,17. This underlines the significance of Dsg3 and potentially Dsg1 beyond mere adhesion functions.

Seminal work on the turnover of desmosomal cadherins has indicated that upon plasma membrane delivery through the Golgi apparatus, desmosomal cadherins are stabilized by transadhesion prior to lateral incorporation into tightly packed desmosomes18–20. This extra-desmosomal cadherin pool, which can be fractionated biochemically (with 0.5–1% Triton-X 100), is characterized by absence of desmoplakin and presence of associated junctional plakoglobin (JUP), plakophilins and actin. It is believed to serve as an intermediate regulatory adhesive signaling structure during the transport to and from desmosomes8,20–25. Early research has further demonstrated that PV autoantibodies predominantly target Dsg3 expressed in the more accessible extra-desmosomal compartment at the cell surface8,9,18,24–28, while antibody binding to desmosomes occurs at later stages when these structures become functionally defective18,29,30. The implication of cell signaling in PV started to be studied three decades ago by the group of Dr Kitajima. Seconds after antibody binding, cytosolic calcium influx was recorded as the first pathogenic signaling event31. Within the first hour, the turn-over of plasma membrane exposed, antibody-targeted extra-desmosomal Dsg3 as well as JUP, a plaque protein of Dsg1 and Dsg3 and transcription factor in the Wnt pathway25,32, increase significantly, as shown by metabolic labeling, and drive pathogenic PV signaling25. Consistently, JUP knockout keratinocytes failed to respond to PV IgG by means of disruption of the desmosomal plaque and loss of intercellular adhesion, despite defective desmosomes and normal PV IgG binding24,33. Furthermore, the actin cytoskeleton machinery, including RhoA, a critical mechanotransductive regulatory molecule mediating the crosstalk between adherens junctions and desmosomes to support homeostatic processes34, was suggested to contribute to PV pathogenesis and regeneration35,36. Although these results highlight outside-in signal transduction by antibody-mediated disruption of Dsg3 transadhesion in conjunction with Dsg137, to date there has been no comprehensive analysis of the mechanotransducive effector network in PV. The latter is important to identify existing gaps in our understanding of both the effects of the pathogenic anti-Dsg3/Dsg1 autoantibodies and Dsg3/Dsg1 functions as well as to identify potentially druggable pathways for the first line treatment of PV patients.

Here we present the first comprehensive, pathogenic effector signaling network in PV based on the systematic review of literature published since inception in 1977 up to April 2024. The effector framework categorizes in three fundamental signaling modalities mediated by Dsg3 or Dsg3/Dsg1 which also typify classical cadherin and integrin mechanotransduction: biomechanical, bioelectrical, and biochemical signaling3–6. These networks highlight a dynamic and complex interplay of a variety of intricate pathogenic signaling pathways that initiate blister formation in PV and promote tissue regeneration. This proposes a model whereby effector pathways such as calcium influx are activated within seconds to minutes followed by PLC/PKC, EGFR and p38MAPK activation as well as JUP dissociation from its Dsg3 anchor. This results in fate conversion including cortical actin cytoskeletal depolymerization, mitosis, migration, compromised differentiation and junctional reductions, which leads to blistering. This is followed by regenerative processes reminiscent of mechanotransduction of the desmosomal system to adherens junctions to establish force equilibrium and epithelial homeostasis.

The systematic review will shed new light on PV and desmosomal cadherin signaling while the established framework allows for identification of unexplored hierarchy and synergies between signaling modalities, with the overarching goal to develop efficient treatment options for PV and potentially other acantholytic disorders while allowing for a more effective translation of findings across disciplinary boundaries.

A comprehensive search was performed with the focus question of “identifying signaling molecules in keratinocytes that are essential for loss of intercellular adhesion and blister formation in PV based on pharmacological or genetic manipulation (inhibition/activation; knockout/knockdown)” (see methods; flow diagram, Supplementary Fig.S1and TableS1and PRISMA checklists, Supplementary Information and Supplementary Data1). The initial search, covering all in vitro and in vivo models for PV38, yielded 11,426 articles, from which 128 articles were eligible for final assessment. The PRISMA flow diagram for identification and screening of the studies is shown in Supplementary Fig.S1, Supplementary Information. The literature review identified a total of 332 interventions with 234 unique approaches, which identified 128 signaling molecules. These signaling molecules were categorized according to three main signaling modalities: biomechanical, bioelectrical and biochemical (Figs.1–3). The most employed models in these studies were human or mouse 2D keratinocyte cultures (83 studies), the passive transfer neonatal mouse model (PTNM, 38 studies), and ex vivo human skin organ culture (30 studies). Additional models included the passive transfer adult mouse model (PTAM, 4 studies), 3D culture (2 studies), ex vivo human oral mucosa culture (1 study), and patient skin samples (1 study). A wide range of pathogenic patients and experimental IgG antibodies or antibody fractions were used to investigate the biological targets. The most commonly used PV induction methods were IgG purified from PV patients’ sera (PV IgG) (88 studies), the experimental anti-mouse Dsg3 IgG antibody AK23 (32 studies), and sera from PV patients (23 studies). Others included enzymatically digested IgG subfragments (Fab or F(ab´)2IgG fragments) of PV IgG (4 studies), Px43 scFv or other scFv (single chain variable fragment anti-Dsg1/3 cloned from PV patient; 4 studies), humanized AK23 (1 study), 4B3 (an anti-Dsg1/3 antibody isolated from patient) (1 study), the monoclonal anti-Dsg3 IgG antibody 2G4 (from humanized Dsg3 mice39against the amino terminal region EC5 of human Dsg3; 1 study), a rabbit polyclonal anti-Dsg3 antibody (1 study), and canine PV IgG (1 study). The details of the eligible studies are given in Supplementary Data1. Effectors and key effectors (the latter indicated in bold were confirmed multiple times by several PV models, approaches and laboratories) are depicted in Figs.1–3and Fig.4, respectively.

The diagram illustrates key molecular interactions and pathways which have been involved in loss of intercellular adhesion in PV, with arrows indicating the direction of interaction between molecules. Effector molecules identified and tested across various experimental PV models and antibody types are highlighted in bold, underscoring their roles in downstream signaling events leading to shrinkage of desmosomes (to the right) and blister formation. This figure provides an overview of three main biomechanical signaling cascades initiated upon antibody engagement with Dsg receptors, capturing the critical points of intervention, molecular crosstalk and consequences thereof (boxes at the bottom). This figure was created in BioRender. Hariton, W. (2025)https://BioRender.com/2iinwlr.

This figure illustrates key molecular interactions and highlights the four major signaling pathway families cooperating with Dsg1/3 to induce loss of intercellular adhesion and blistering, with arrows indicating interactions between specific molecules within the signaling cascade. Effector molecules tested across various experimental PV models and antibody types are highlighted in bold, emphasizing their roles in the biomechanical signaling process. The schematic captures the intricate web of biomechanical signaling events and consequences thereof (boxes at the bottom) following antibody engagement with Dsg receptors, identifying critical points for potential intervention and inter-molecular crosstalk. This figure was created in BioRender. Hariton, W. (2025)https://BioRender.com/opaf5k5.

The model proposes a sequence of events ranging from PV antibody binding to Dsg3 or Dsg1/3 receptors inducing loss of transadhesion, to influx of calcium from extracellular and intracellular stores, activation of cell surface receptors and their effectors through to altered transcription in the nucleus. This figure was created in BioRender. Hariton, W. (2025)https://BioRender.com/h2vc44h.

Biomechanical signal transducers from the plasma membrane to the nucleus have been identified in many biological systems5,6, of which some can be assigned to PV pathogenicity. These are the extra-desmosomal cell-cell adhesion receptor Dsg3 acting as upstream regulator of Rho GTPases and actin19,35,40, Dsg3 associated signaling molecules JUP24,25, plakophilin 1–341,42, growth factor receptors such as EGFR43and the pleotropic, stress responsive p38MAPK44. Characteristics of the 66 eligible studies are compiled in Table1and pathogenic effectors in PV are depicted in Fig.1.

Treatment modalities: Pretreatment, Intervention added before antibody application. Cotreatment, Intervention added simultaneously with the antibody. Posttreatment, Intervention added after antibody application. Model: Ex vivo, human skin organ culture. In vitro, 2D cultured keratinocyte cell lines or primary cells. PTNM, Passive transfer neonatal mouse model. PTAM, Passive transfer adult mouse model. Antibodies: mPV IgG, mucosal PV IgG. mcPV IgG, mucocutaneous PV IgG. atPV IgG, Atypical PV IgG. PF IgG, pemphigus foliaceus IgG. Preventing Pathology: ( + ) effective in preventing antibody-induced pathology, (-) Ineffective in preventing antibody-induced pathology, (x) worsened antibody-induced pathology.KDAKeratinocyte dissociation assay,NANot Available.

Dsg3 and Dsg1 have been identified as major targets in PV. In support of this clinical finding, the pathogenic impact of anti-Dsg3 and anti-Dsg1/3 antibodies can be completely abolished by removal of Dsg3 or Dsg1 antibodies from patients serum45. In line, cultured Dsg3 gene knockout keratinocytes or Dsg3-deficient mice mimic the PV phenotype in terms of blister sites and altered signaling16,46. Further supporting the unique functional role of Dsg3 and Dsg1, PV antibodies and to some extent also PF antibodies remained pathogenic after Dsg2 knockout. In agreement with these findings as well as the fact that Dsg3 is endocytosed upon PV antibody binding, Dsg3 overexpression exerted an inhibitory effect on cell sheet fragmentation in vitro47. Two other studies have demonstrated that the stabilization of Dsg adhesion, achieved by cross-linking the binding pockets of two trans-interacting Dsg3 or Dsg1 molecules, can partially mitigate the PV phenotype of intercellular gap formation, altered Dsg3 localization, loss of intercellular adhesion, and blister formation in both in vitro and in vivo models37,48. Building upon the finding on predominant targeting of extra-desmosomal Dsg3 by PV antibodies8,9,18,24–28, Nguyen et al.49have proposed that the gene knockout ofPerpis associated with a decrease in Dsg3 levels in desmosomes and concurrent increase of Dsg3 in the extra-desmosomal compartment. Consistently,Perpknockout was found to exacerbate the PV antibody-induced weakening of intercellular adhesion, an effect that was attributed to elevated levels in the extra-desmosomal Dsg3 pool (conceivably increasing the number of antibody targets). These observations also suggested that Perp plays an integral role in modulating the distribution of Dsg3 between the desmosomal and non-desmosomal compartments.

Other than desmosomal cadherins, the role of E-cadherin has also been investigated in PV. Multiple laboratories reported that the plasma membrane-bound expression and localization as well as related Wnt/β-catenin signaling were unaffected during blister initiation16,21,25,50, while a considerable increase in E-cadherin, β-catenin and JUP expression at the plasma membrane marked regenerative processes of morphological repair in a mouse model for hair follicle blistering16, suggesting mechanosensitive feedback mechanisms. Rötzer et al.21further reported that overexpression of E-cadherin was able to mitigate the PV IgG-induced fragmentation in HaCaT keratinocytes, by so far unknown mechanisms, while E-cadherin knockdown decreased desmosome formation and intercellular adhesive strength21, supporting a mutual crosstalk and direct association of these adhesion receptors34,51–53.

In mouse and human keratinocytes under homeostatic conditions, co-immunoprecipitation revealed that extra-desmosomal Dsg3 and Dsg1 also associate with p38MAPK35,59,61. Upon PV antibody binding, pathogenic activation/phosphorylation of p38MAPK has been consistently emphasized and was shown to causally link loss of Dsg3 transadhesion to proteins anchoring Dsg1/3 to the cytoskeletal, such as actin or keratin intermediate filaments, followed by loss of intercellular adhesion48,61. The four p38MAP kinase isoforms (p38α, p38β, p38γ, p38δ (MAPK14, 11, 12, 13)) as well as multiple p38 splice variants of this ubiquitously expressed MAP kinase superfamily are pleotropic responders to environmental, intracellular and pathological stresses to ensure cell survival and they exhibit distinct but also overlapping and compensatory functions62. Of interest in the context of PV is that p38MAP kinases are typically activated by mechanical insult, to phosphorylate, in case of the most studied family member p38α, over 100 protein targets throughout all cellular compartments, including the nucleus. P38MAPK targets involve transcription factors, DNA/DNA binding proteins as well as kinases and structural proteins including actin and keratins. Hence, p38MAPK regulate a wide range of processes in response to mechanical stress from transcription, chromatin remodeling, mRNA stability, cell cycle regulation and translation to protein degradation and localization, endocytosis, metabolism, and cytoskeleton dynamics including migration21,63, of which only a few processes have been assigned to PV so far. In the epidermis and other epithelial tissues, the three mainly expressed p38MAPK isoforms are p38α, p38γ and p38δ. In this context, it is noteworthy that current p38MAPK inhibitors, of interest in therapeutic approaches in PV, only effectively inhibit the p38α and p38β but not or to a lesser extent the p38γ and p38δ isoforms62. Hence, it is currently not known to which extent these isoforms operate and compensate for each other in PV, which might be the reason for some discrepant results described below.

PV IgG-induced p38MAPK phosphorylation occurs rapidly, with peaks observed as early as after 15 min64which further propagate in waves up to the final blister formation65. The studies utilizing p38α and p38β or p38α inhibitors SB202190 and EO1428, and the broad range BIRB 796 inhibitor showed significant inhibition of intercellular adhesion loss in different models and with several antibodies44,59,65–78. Interestingly, Mao et al. revealed the involvement of p38MAPK in Dsg3 internalization triggered by an experimental Dsg3/1 monoclonal antibody cloned from a PV patient79. However, conditional deletion of p38α in mouse epidermis was not sufficient to protect against this antibody-induced blistering80. A later study by Mao et al. showed that while some knockout animals developed subcorneal blisters, suprabasal blister formation was significantly decreased in mice lacking epidermal p38α71. This said, it is worth mentioning that the study by Mao et al. is the only one which addressed a specific p38MAPK isoform in PV. The result of this seminal work evokes the possibility that not only p38α but also the p38γ or p38δ isoforms contribute to PV blistering, or, alternatively, that p38γ or p38δ compensate in case of p38α deletion62. Involvement or compensation of other isoforms might also be the reason that p38α and p38β inhibitors likePD169316and SB203580 were in some cases less effective or ineffective in preventing intercellular adhesion loss. Some of these studies also concluded on p38MAPK activation down- instead of upstream of PV blistering, which however might pertain to the finding that keratin retraction/p38MAPK activation and Dsg3 endocytosis are complementary processes81. Similarly, Saito et al. discovered that SB202190 inhibited PV IgG-induced blistering and fragmentation but not the one of AK23 in vitro and ex vivo68; however, subsequent studies demonstrated its efficacy in inhibiting AK23-induced pathogenic effects70,73–75,78.

Cell-Matrix adhesion molecules constitute an important mechanosensory apparatus of epithelial cells that cross-talk to cell-cell adhesion molecules as might also be the case in PV17,82. Recruitment and activation/phosphorylation of Src to cell-cell contacts and receptor tyrosine kinases such as EGFR family members is considered a mechano-switch to tune tissue-specific functions. This includes functional deregulation of E-cadherin and integrin adhesion implicating focal adhesion kinase (FAK) downstream of RhoA activation83. Chernyavsky et al. were the first to demonstrate that Src is activated by PV IgG treatment; however, knockdown of Dsg1 or Dsg3 did not reduce Src activation84. Recently, Egu et al. showed that PV IgG, but not PF IgG, activate several Src family kinases, including Blk, Yes, Fyn, Frk, Lck, and Src85. Although numerous studies across various models have reported the beneficial effects of Src inhibition downstream of EGFR75,78,84,86–91, its efficacy was found to be antibody- and time-dependent78,90,92. However, decoupling Src from actin remodeling via the E-cadherin-based cortactin seemed not critical for epidermal blistering in an ex-vivo model in presence of anti-Dsg3 and Dsg1 antibodies as described by Kugelmann et al.90. This may suggest that the anti-Dsg1 antibodies in PV can activate rescue signaling pathways to prevent blistering. Gil et al. revealed that FAK is significantly phosphorylated at tyrosine 397/925 by PV IgG through epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation, and FAK inhibition abolished PV IgG induced blister formation in the neonatal passive transfer mouse model87. Later, they further elucidated the signaling pathways involved and showed that activation of EGFR induces phosphorylation of FAK through the neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) pathway in PV88. FAK phosphorylation at tyrosine residue 397 is considered an autophosphorylation site, while tyrosine residue 925 is Src or EGFR dependent. As EGFR and contextual Src activation play an important role in PV pathogenesis, mechanosensing through FAK activation can also be anticipated in PV93,94. Interestingly, addition of fibronectin, a binding partner of integrins and an activator of FAK to an ex vivo model of PV was found to reduce acantholysis and intraepidermal binding of the pemphigus antibodies95.

Keratins, the key components of intermediate filaments in the epidermis, play a pivotal role in the anchoring and stabilization of desmosomes and are essential for maintaining proper desmosomal adhesion and tissue integrity96,97. Furthermore, they are long known to contribute to mechanosensing for example via Keratin8/18-mediated modulation of the small GTPase RhoA82which can be controlled by p38MAPK63. The typical morphological characteristic of keratin filament retraction from cell borders is a common feature observed across all clinical phenotypes of pemphigus and can be detected in in vitro and ex vivo pemphigus models as well as in patients’ non-lesional and lesional epithelia, thus preceding bona fide blister formation. Furthermore, keratins account for the mechanical properties of keratinocytes, underscoring their critical importance in the maintenance of tissue integrity. Vielmuth et al.76found that the knockout of keratin cluster II significantly impaired intercellular adhesion compared to wild-type cells while the subsequent treatment with AK23, PV-IgG or PF-IgG did conceivably not further compromise intercellular adhesion. Although the mechanism by which the desmoplakin/keratin anchorage is compromised in PV is still largely unknown, it can be anticipated to occur through inside-out signaling under control of the many competent effectors downstream of PV antibody-mediated Dsg3/Dsg1 receptor signaling (Figs.1–3).

Studies on PV attest to the critical role of the actin cytoskeleton in regulating the crosstalk between E-cadherin- and Dsg3 to assemble and disassemble desmosomes34,98. Patel et al.27were first to address the direct causal contribution of changes in actin and tubulin cytoskeletal in PV. Using mouse keratinocytes, they demonstrated that the preincubation with inhibitors of actin (Cytochalasin D) or tubulin (Colchicine) polymerization, both individually and in combination, failed to diminish the internalization and binding of PV IgG upon stimulation with PV sera. Conversely, Gliem et al.40found that pretreatment with a 10-fold lower dose of Cytochalasin D, enhanced internalization and aggravated PV IgG induced loss of intercellular adhesion in HaCaT keratinocytes. Consistently, the incubation of cells with the actin-stabilizing agent jasplakinolide enhanced junction stability, reduced the pathogenicity in terms of PV IgG-induced sheet fragmentation and rescued Dsg3 localization at cell borders. Jennings et al.47tested another inhibitor of actin polymerization (Lantraculin D) on human keratinocytes with similar results.

A change in mechanical forces requires actin cytoskeleton re-organization, more precisely contraction of actin through the actomyosin motor proteins. The actomyosin activity can be modulated by the calcium-binding protein calmodulin, which triggers the phosphorylation of myosin light chains and the subsequent contraction of the actomyosin complex. Sánchez-Carpintero et al.99utilized the calmodulin inhibitor W-7 hydrochloride to prevent PV IgG induced blister formation in neonatal mice. Similarly, Sumigray et al.50revealed that treating mouse keratinocytes with AK23 leads to increased contractility, and knocking out Myh9 (Myosin IIA) inhibits AK23-induced cell sheet fragmentation, suggesting a role for myosin IIA and actomyosin contraction in PV loss of adhesion. Intriguingly, short-term RhoA-mediated actin contraction and PKCα activation of desmoplakin/keratin interaction was found to result in desmosome assembly.

Modulators of actin dynamics are the Rho family of small GTPases as well as cortactin, actomyosin and α-adducin, which also stabilize the junctional cortex100–102. Specifically, the Rho family of GTPases are mechano-transducers which function as highly complex molecular switches between fates by regulating actin polymerization, cell polarity, vesicular trafficking, cell contraction, and mitosis103. Accordingly, transient RhoA/Rac activation is involved in the stabilization of transadhering E-cadherin-based contacts and maintenance of Myosin II association to uphold junctional contractile force regulated, for example, by cortactin and α-adducin phosphorylation to drive the desmoplakin-keratin interaction for desmosome assembly and keratinocyte differentiation90,98,104,105. However, under mechanical tension, as introduced above, sustained RhoA activation can implicate K8/K18 and JUP recruitment to sites of cellular tension to reinforce F-actin stress fibers82while compromising desmosome plaque maturation98, a process likely implicating p38MAPK63. The subsequent loss of tension and RhoA/Rac-1 inhibition would then lead to rapid disruption of junctional integrity34,105,106.

Indicative of inhibition of Rho family members in desmosome disassembly in PV, the non-selective and selective RhoA activators CNF-1 (RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42 activators) and CNFy (RhoA) significantly reduced weakening of desmosomes in ex vivo and in vitro models in response to PV IgG35,40,72,92. Waschke et al.35also showed that CNFy increased stress fiber formation along junctions and abolished cell sheet fragmentation and desmoplakin re-organization. In a follow-up study the group further confirmed that inhibition of actin polymerization (using Lantraculin B), the target of RhoA, abolished the protective effect of this RhoA activator40. Although the above-mentioned studies used patient-derived PV IgG, Jin et al. and Rötzer et al. reported similar results with PV IgG and the pathogenic monoclonal anti-Dsg3 antibody AK2336,72,107. Additionally, Rötzer et al. discovered that the protective effect of pharmacological RhoA activation is diminished by silencing α-adducin, increasing fragmentation, compatible with the understanding that the actin-binding protein α-adducin is regulated by RhoA and PKC108to promote E-cadherin/Dsg3 interaction and stabilization at the plasma membrane preceding desmosome formation109. Intriguingly, Rötzer et al. further demonstrated that α-adducin is serine-phosphorylated, hence activated, in response to AK23 or PV IgG, and found this to occur via calcium influx and PKC72. The authors thus discussed that α-adducin activation through calcium/PKC-mediated phosphorylation represents a rescue mechanism in PV. Collectively, these studies suggested that Dsg3 antibody-mediated inhibition of Rho GTPases alters the cytoskeletal architecture in keratinocytes preceding acantholysis, potentially paralleled by a rescue mechanism involving RhoA activation and tyrosine phosphorylation of α-adducin on Ser726. Beyond pharmacological modulation of mechanical structures and mechanosensing pathways, Jin et al.36applied cyclic mechanical stretching of cell sheets. They conceivably found this to have the opposite effect than the suggested release of tension/transadhesion on Dsg3 by PV antibodies described above, namely, to reduce p38MAPK phosphorylation and enhance RhoA recruitment to cell boarders which, in line with the findings above, mitigated AK23-induced loss of intercellular adhesion. This is compatible with the concept of protective mechanisms discussed by Rötzer et al.108and potentially with regenerative mechanisms following shrinkage of desmosomes and blister formation reported in hair follicle stem cells of the adult passive transfer mouse model for PV16. However, as discussed by Jin et al.36, it can currently not be distinguished whether pharmacological Rho GTPase activation prior blistering prevents an initial Rho GTPase inhibition in PV (Table1) or strengthens the E-cadherin/actin/actomyosin complex to bear increased mechanical force and balance loss of tension at desmosomal complexes. Notwithstanding, both possibilities are indicative of inside-out signaling weakening desmosomes, urging the application of advanced longitudinal techniques to respond to these questions.

Endocytosis is a mechanosensitive process that involves precise orchestration of tightly regulated mechanical cues such as dynamic remodeling of the plasma membrane that occurs at the sub-micrometer level. Mechanistically, a range of conditions influence the membrane remodeling process including plasma membrane tension110. Signaling-wise, actin-based endocytosis can potentially implicate some of the here described key effectors in PV such as p38MAPK, RhoA, cdc42 and PKCα111,112. Delva et al.113evaluated the role of different endocytic pathways in PV IgG-induced-Dsg3 internalization. They found that caveolin-1 or dynamin II knockout did not affect AK23-induced Dsg3 internalization in cells. However, the alteration of lipid rafts via filipin or nystatin treatment drastically prevented the PV-IgG or AK23-induced internalization of Dsg3, suggesting a clathrin- and dynamin-independent but cholesterol-dependent mechanism for Dsg3 endocytosis in PV. Consistent with these findings, two other studies using another lipid raft inhibitor, methyl-β-cyclodextrin, reported similar results73,81. Interestingly, the inhibition of Dsg3 endocytosis was found to prevent the antibody-induced loss of intercellular adhesion, but did not affect keratin retraction or p38MAPK phosphorylation, indicating that these pathological phenomena may be independent processes81. Most intriguingly, Pigmentosa GTPase regulator interacting protein 1-like (RPGRIP1L) was found to specifically control the endocytosis of desmoglein but not desmocollin cadherins, and the knockout of RPGRIP1L in mice led to shrinkage of desmosomes and spontaneous development of suprabasal blisters reminiscent of PV. Furthermore, in HaCaT keratinocytes, RPGRIP1L knockdown resulted in the internalization of Dsg3 and a loss of intercellular adhesion. Notably, the treatment of RPGRIP1L knockdown cells with PV antibodies further reduced cell-cell adhesion, potentially suggesting complementary pathways114, such as described above with regards to keratin retraction/p38MAPK activation and Dsg3 endocytosis81.

The plasminogen activator enzyme (Pa) system has been linked to diverse cellular effects. Notably, Pa functions as both proteolytic enzyme (to convert e.g., plasminogen to plasmin) and signal transducer and interacts with a variety of mechanosensitive receptors, including EGFR, cadherins and integrins115. Two seminal studies by Hunziker and Morioka evaluated the role of this system in PV. Hunziker and Vessalli116demonstrated that either addition of plasminogen or plasmin to an ex vivo PV model or high doses of plasmin alone were capable of enhancing or inducing acantholysis, respectively. Furthermore, Morioka et al.117revealed that an anti-urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) antibody completely blocked PV IgG-induced acantholysis, subsequently confirmed by multiple groups using various uPA inhibitors118–122. The discussion regarding the involvement of the Pa system came to a conclusion by a thorough analysis by Mahoney et al.123, which showed uPA or tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) KO alone or combined have no impact on PV IgG-induced blister formation in neonatal mice. It is noteworthy, however, that tPA KO animals had a tendency for milder disease.

These collective results support the notion that biomechanical signaling through desmosomal cadherins, which is a relatively recent field of research, plays a key role in desmosome shrinkage in PV. It implicates Rho GTPases and the re-organization of the actin/actomyosin cytoskeleton while highlighting a crosstalk between E-cadherin- and Dsg3/1-based plasma membrane exposed molecules and/or junctions in balancing cellular forces. These results give guidance for further research on identifying and discriminating between signals by these respective stress-bearing cadherins including the crosstalk to integrins in epithelial cells and PV.

Only a limited number of studies, in total 22, have addressed causative electric potential/ion signaling in PV pathogenesis with main focus on the role of calcium ions and calcium-responsive molecules summarized in Table2and Fig.2. Occurring within seconds after anti-Dsg1 or anti-Dsg3 antibody incubation, as first reported by Seishima et al. in the squamous cell carcinoma keratinocyte line DJM-131, an increase in intracellular calcium flux is the fastest signal recorded so far after antibody incubation. It can be mediated through various mechanisms, such as activating calcium channels at the plasma membrane or releasing calcium from intracellular stores like the endoplasmic reticulum124. Upon stimulation, opening of plasma membrane calcium channels allows extracellular calcium to enter the cytosol, while calcium release from intracellular stores can be triggered by IP3R activation caused by Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) production through Phosphatidylinositol 4-Kinase alpha (PI4Kα) and Phospholipase C (PLC). Seishima et al. showed an increase in IP3 and release of calcium from intracellular stores following anti-Dsg1 or anti-Dsg3 antibody treatment in keratinocyte 2D cultures31.

Treatment modalities: Pretreatment, Intervention added before antibody application. Cotreatment, Intervention added simultaneously with the antibody. Posttreatment, Intervention added after antibody application. Model: Ex vivo, human skin organ culture. In vitro, 2D cultured keratinocyte cell lines or primary cells. PTNM, Passive transfer neonatal mouse model. PTAM, Passive transfer adult mouse model. Antibodies: mPV IgG, mucosal PV IgG. mcPV IgG, mucocutaneous PV IgG. atPV IgG, Atypical PV IgG. PF IgG, pemphigus foliaceus IgG. Preventing Pathology: ( + ) effective in preventing antibody-induced pathology, (-) Ineffective in preventing antibody-induced pathology, (x) worsened antibody-induced pathology.KDAKeratinocyte dissociation assay,NANot Available.

The figure depicts the reported pathways and molecular interactions centering around the increase of intracellular calcium concentration and consequences thereof (boxes at the bottom). Arrows indicate the interactions between specific molecules involved in the signaling cascade. Effector molecules that have been tested across various experimental PV models and antibody types are highlighted in bold to emphasize their roles within the bioelectrical pathways. This scheme outlines bioelectrical signaling events initiated by PV antibody binding to Dsg proteins, illustrating the potential intervention points and molecular interactions. This figure was created in BioRender. Hariton, W. (2025)https://BioRender.com/3f3hvc2.

Rötzer et al. and Walter et al. confirmed that chelation of intra- and extracellular calcium with BAPTA-AM reduces fragmentation in vitro caused by anti-Dsg1, Dsg3/1 and Dsg3 antibodies, while, conversely, only anti-Dsg1 containing PV IgG caused a measurable cytosolic calcium influx46,72. Furthermore, Arredondo et al. demonstrated that inhibiting the calcium-activated cysteine proteases Calpain I and II using MDL-28170, PD-150606, Calpastatin peptide, alone or in combination ameliorates PV IgG-induced acantholysis in both in vitro and in vivo PV models. However, the effectiveness was only seen for one of the two tested PV IgG antibodies in the in vivo model, with no information on the anti-Dsg1/3 profile125. Calcineurins, activated by Calcium influx and calmodulins upstream of nuclear translocation of NFAT transcription factors, were also shown to be involved in PV pathogenesis126,127. Schmitt et al., also investigated the role of Calcium release-activated channels (CRAC), and PI4KA in two separate studies61,78. Their research demonstrated that PI4KA and CRAC inhibitors effectively prevented antibody-induced loss of intercellular adhesion restricted to anti-Dsg1 antibodies or PV IgG containing both anti-Dsg1 and 3 antibodies but not anti-Dsg3 antibodies alone or AK23 or 2G4. Although these results contrast with initial findings31, it is noteworthy that anti-Dsg3 antibody containing PV IgG used in these two studies were not able to fragment normal epidermal keratinocyte sheets, suggesting experimental conditions with high expression of compensatory Dsg1 levels preventing fragmentation11. This suggested that complementary pathogenic signaling pathways can be activated by the anti-Dsg1 antibodies in PV IgG. However, recent studies have challenged this notion, revealing that intracellular calcium influx is specific for the anti-Dsg3/Dsg1-targeted epitope46,78. Notably, anti-Dsg3 antibodies targeting the extracellular domain 1 (EC1) such as AK23, a monoclonal anti-Dsg3 antibody, failed to induce calcium influx in normal human keratinocytes, whereas 2G4, another monoclonal antibody against the membrane proximal part of Dsg3, triggered calcium influx. These results need further investigations as they seemingly are not compatible with findings on IP3 inhibition which is later discussed in detail81. Furthermore, only inhibition of CRAC, but not PLC, IP3R, or PI4Kα, resulted in the suppression of 2G4-induced intracellular calcium influx, suggesting an alternative pathway for opening intracellular calcium channels besides the PLC pathway. Inhibitors of upstream signaling of calcium have also shown varying results with monoclonal anti-Dsg3 antibodies. While PLC inhibition partially abrogated AK23 induced loss of intercellular adhesion, this effect was not observed with 2G461,78. Altogether, these results suggest the testable hypothesis that the Dsg1 expression level of keratinocytes is crucial to study the ability of anti-Dsg3 antibody alone on triggering a calcium influx.

The PLC/IP3/calcium release axis from intracellular stores relies on PLC recruitment to cell adhesion receptors at the plasma membrane such as Dsg3 and Dsg161; hence, hindering PLC can diminish calcium release from intracellular stores as well as through extracellular ion channels. Several studies have explored the involvement of PLC in PV pathogenesis through various models. Esaki et al., Hiermaier et al. Schmitt et al. 2021 and 2023 utilized in vitro models. Except for Schmitt et al. 2023 who used 2G4 (a monoclonal pathogenic antibody against the juxtaposed membrane domain EC5 of Dsg3), all studies showed PLC inhibition to be effective in preventing PV IgG-mediated (with and without anti-Dsg1 antibodies) loss of intercellular adhesion61,78,128,129. This was further supported by the findings of Sánchez-Carpintero et al. and Schmitt et al. in 2021, using passive transfer neonatal mouse and ex vivo PV models, respectively61,99. Through electron microscopy, Egu et al. further illustrated that inhibiting PLC notably reduced PV IgG-induced keratin retraction, though it did not affect desmosome shrinkage, numbers, or splitting130, consistent with p38MAPK-dependent and independent pathways in PV81(Fig.1).

Following the activation of PLC and the subsequent production of IP3, the inositol IP3 receptor (IP3R) is activated, leading to the opening of calcium channels on the tricellular organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum. Schmitt et al. 2021, 2023, Egu et al. and Hiermaier et al. used IP3R inhibitors to validate implication of this receptor in PV pathogenesis61,78,129,130. In line with results of PLC inhibition, all studies showed that IP3R inhibition is effective in preventing antibody induced loss of intercellular adhesion, except for 2G4. Moreover, electron microscopic evaluation revealed that IP3R inhibition significantly decreased PV IgG-induced desmosome splitting and keratin retraction while it had no effect on shrinkage of desmosomes, presumably being modulated by enhanced Dsg3 turn-over, which was unexpected in light of the activities of PLC described above81.

Protein Kinase C (PKC) which is activated downstream of deacyl glycerol (DAG) or Ca2+ release from intracellular stores (Figs.2and3), plays a crucial role in signal transduction, regulating the structure, composition, and function of desmosomes131. Osada et al. were the first to demonstrate that antibody stimulation activates Ca2 + - and diacylglycerol (DAG)-dependent PKCα, as well as DAG-dependent PKCs δ and η, and atypical PKC (ζ), with recruitment to the plasma membrane, occurring as early as 30 s post-stimulation132. This activation aligns with increased Ca2+ influx and phospholipase C (PLC) activation described above. Various studies employing in vitro and patient-derived PV models have indicated that PKC inhibition can prevent PV-related pathologies72,75,99,133–136. However, findings from ex vivo models remain inconclusive; while Spindler et al. reported that PKCα inhibition prevents Dsg3 depletion, Egu et al. recently found that PKC inhibitors are ineffective in preventing blister formation, desmosome shrinkage, or splitting74,135, results requiring further investigations.

In summary, the electrical signaling axis implicated in PV pathogenesis has been primarily associated with intracellular calcium influx and its related signaling effectors. While it was previously believed that calcium influx depends on Dsg1 and not Dsg3, this finding will be revisited by carefully monitoring Dsg1 expression levels. Furthermore, other ion channels will need to be addressed in PV pathogenesis.

Activation or inhibition of biochemical effectors downstream of Dsg3/Dsg1 has been most widely studied in PV and integrates a variety of components belonging to known signaling pathways. These include specific plasma membrane receptors such as growth factor receptors, canonical Wnt or G-protein-coupled receptors as well as receptors of the TNF superfamily. A total of 91 studies addressed the modulation and pathogenicity of these effectors functionally by pharmacological modulators or gene knockout. All 91 studies of the biochemical signaling axis are summarized in Table3and effector signals in Fig.3.

Treatment modalities: Pretreatment, Intervention added before antibody application. Cotreatment, Intervention added simultaneously with the antibody. Posttreatment, Intervention added after antibody application. Model: Ex vivo, human skin organ culture. In vitro, 2D cultured keratinocyte cell lines or primary cells. PTNM, Passive transfer neonatal mouse model. PTAM, Passive transfer adult mouse model. Antibodies: mPV IgG, mucosal PV IgG. mcPV IgG, mucocutaneous PV IgG. atPV IgG, Atypical PV IgG. PF IgG, pemphigus foliaceus IgG. Preventing Pathology: ( + ) effective in preventing antibody-induced pathology, (-) Ineffective in preventing antibody-induced pathology, (x) worsened antibody-induced pathology.KDAKeratinocyte dissociation assay,NANot Available.

The EGFR growth factor receptor family stands out as one of the most extensively researched biochemical signaling pathways in all models of PV, compatible with a crosstalk between these receptors and Dsg3 and Dsg1. Frušić-Zlotkin et al., were the first to demonstrate in HaCat cells that PV IgG induces EGFR phosphorylation within 30 min after PV IgG exposure and inhibiting it can halt PV IgG-induced acantholysis43. With the exception of the study by Heupel et al., various research works involving different antibodies and in vitro and in vivo PV disease models have consistently shown the protective impact of EGFR inhibition in PV pathogenesis16,46,69,85–88,91,92,137. Notably, Walter et al. found that only PV IgGs containing anti-Dsg3 antibodies and not Dsg3/Dsg1 could induce EGFR phosphorylation, and EGFR inhibitors were ineffective in preventing PF IgG-induced fragmentation46. Furthermore, Ivars et al. reported that EGFR inhibition failed to prevent epidermal blistering in a neonatal mouse model with PV IgG containing anti-desmocollin (Dsc) 3 antibodies, while, conversely, Hudemann et al. have shown that anti-Dsc3 IgG induces the activation of EGFR and p38MAPK, but not Src, in HaCaT cells91,138. Significantly, Sayar et al. underscored the importance of maintaining basal EGFR activity when inhibiting PV blistering in mouse epidermis137. They highlighted that the EGFR inhibition needs to be within a specific range to preserve its basal epidermal activity, to prevent blister formation. Furthermore, complete EGFR inhibition through pharmaceutical agents or gene knockout could be harmful to keratinocyte survival and exacerbate blister formation triggered by autoantibodies in skin but not mucosa, aligning with the dermatological adverse events of EGFR inhibitors. The most recent study by Hariton et al. unveiled a dualistic nature of EGFR activity. EGFR inhibition before antibody injection and blistering in adult mice was found to reduce induction of new hair follicle blisters, whereas EGFR inhibitor treatment in presence of blisters aggravated lesions by hindering regeneration and healing16. The latter study discriminated for the first time between a blister-inducing and blister-healing response phase marked by initial activation followed by inhibition of EGFR, and conversely, blister-inducing Wnt inhibition followed by blister-healing Wnt activation. While the two phases may explain the discrepant findings concerning p38MAK and actin cytoskeleton/RhoA inhibition and activation, they need to be taken into consideration for therapeutic applications.

Inhibition of other growth factor receptors, such as VEGFR2 and TrkA, have also been demonstrated to prevent the loss of intercellular adhesion induced by PV IgG, PX43 or AK23 in both in vitro and ex vivo models77,85. Egu et al. further revealed that TrkA operates downstream of EGFR, where PV IgG led to increased expression and phosphorylation of TrkA at Y49085. On the other hand, Hunziker et al. found that simultaneous injection of PV serum with stimulated or sonicated platelets, which are enriched with PDGF, into an ex vivo model, enhanced blister formation139.

Important effectors downstream of EGFR and receptors such as of the TNF superfamily are PI3K/ERK/Akt. They have only been investigated to a limited extent. Burmester et al. revealed that PI3Kα but not PI3Kβ prevents PV pathologies in both in vitro and ex vivo models77. Additional signaling mediators related to receptor tyrosine kinase growth factors are listed in Table3.

Several studies have evaluated the role of inflammatory cytokines in PV pathogenesis, including protective or disease-promoting effects. Neutralizing or knocking out TNF-α, IL-1α, IL-1β and IL6 but not IL2, has been demonstrated to alleviate the loss of intercellular adhesion, suggesting the implication of inflammatory mediators in blister formation122,140–142. Conversely, a protective effect counteracting blistering was attributed to IL10 and IL37143,144. Inhibiting neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) upregulation and NF-κB nuclear translocation, which can be triggered downstream of TNF/FasR signaling, also prevented skin blistering in mice145. In line with these findings, soluble Fas ligand was shown to be causative in various models and interventions in PV pathogenesis, and its action could be successfully blocked with the human monoclonal antibody PC111 in an ex-vivo model146–148. Notwithstanding, the administration of FLIPLand FLIPS,which inhibit NF-κB downstream of FasR, did not ameliorate antibody-induced acantholysis, keratin retraction, and fragmentation149. Other mediators of inflammation were also shown to be involved in PV pathogenesis, notably p38MAPK, discussed in the section on biomechanical signaling88,145. TNF-α signaling via pro-inflammatory cytokines and p38MAPK was further highlighted by a constitutive mutation (“PV risk variant” rs17315309) in the transcription factor Suppression of tumorigenicity 18 (ST18) gene or its overexpression in human keratinocytes in vitro, which trigger a self-amplifying cycle for Dsg3 downregulation in presence of PV IgG142,150,151. Finally, Luan et al. revealed that PV IgG increased the intracellular proinflammatory adapter protein MyD88 along with other PV phenotypic changes such as NF-κB and blistering, which were ameliorated in HaCaT cells and mice by thalidomide, an immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory glutamic acid derivative152. While inflammatory responses by keratinocytes have been demonstrated to be pathogenic in PV, as outlined above, a role of innate or adaptive immune cells in blister formation sensu stricto could be excluded by passive transfer of PV IgG into mice. Several studies utilizing immunocompromised mice exhibited a similar blistering phenotype than immunocompetent mice153–155. However, Toto et al. demonstrated a higher incidence of PV blisters with low dose PV IgG in CD28 KO mice compared to wild-type mice although in vitro evaluation showed similar acantholysis between KO and wild-type cells143. Similarly, co-incubation of keratinocytes with SOCS3 knocked-down CD4 + T cells, exhibiting a shift towards the Th1/Th17 phenotype, also aggravated PV IgG induced fragmentation156.

Involvement of caspases in PV acantholysis has been reported in 10 independent studies86–88,125,149,157–161. Except for Schmidt et al. all studies found caspase 1/2/3 inhibition but not inhibition of caspase 8/9/12 to prevent PV pathology149. The role of caspase activation in PV pathogenesis remains a critical and unresolved issue, particularly regarding its contribution to apoptosis-dependent versus newly recognized, non-apoptotic processes162. Some evidence indicates that caspases are activated leading to apoptosis in PV43,86,125,157,160. However, recent studies suggest that while apoptosis may occur as a fail-safe mechanism, also in PV, the initial pathogenic event leading to acantholysis is the activation of caspases, rather than apoptosis itself158,159. This is supported by the current understanding that both proteolytic and non-proteolytic activities of caspases are involved in cytoskeletal rearrangements, cell cycle regulation, cytoplasmic reduction, cell migration, and fate determination, thereby providing a rational for their roles beyond apoptosis162.

The Wnt pathway was implicated in PV pathogenesis in various models from three different groups. JUP, a crucial mediator of cell-cell adhesion and Wnt signaling, is implicated in both cell adhesion and fate determination and was already addressed in the biomechanical signaling section. Studies have shown that Wnt activation utilizing various GSK3 inhibitors prevents blister formation in neonatal and adult mouse models16,25. Williamson et al. further confirmed the involvement of Myc in the pathogenesis of PV25, a pro-proliferative transcription factor in the Wnt pathway. Additionally, Hariton et al. recently revealed that Wnt activation using BIO not only attenuated hair follicle blister formation but also facilitated blister regeneration and healing in mice. This finding may have significant implications for clinical applications. In line with these findings, Casein kinase-1, an enzyme that serves dual roles in the Wnt pathway, has also been shown to associate with keratin intermediate filaments via FAM83H163. Schögel et al. demonstrated that inhibiting this molecule exacerbates AK23-induced fragmentation in vitro81. Together, these studies highlight that canonical Wnt and possibly also non-canonical Wnt (upstream of PLC/PKC) inhibition play a critical role in regulating cell adhesion as well as in influencing fate conversion and regeneration.

Corticosteroids, which primarily exert their effects through Corticosteroid G-protein-coupled receptors, are the cornerstone of therapeutic treatment of PV patients and have also been explored in preclinical studies. Among six research studies, at keratinocyte level, only half were able to demonstrate the efficacy of corticosteroids on preventing loss of adhesion in the context of PV pathogenesis127,154,164–167. Nguyen et al. found that pretreatment, and not co-treatment, with methylprednisolone reduced blistering in both neonatal Balb/c and athymic nude mice154, suggesting a therapeutic effect reducing initiation of new blisters. Similarly, Mao et al. reported comparable results in an in vitro model, as well as with the topical application of hydrocortisone in a neonatal C57BL/6 J mouse model which likely acts through the prevention of STAT3 activation167.

Adrenergic and acetylcholine receptors are another family of G protein-coupled receptors that have been studied in PV pathogenesis and might, in rare cases, even be directly targeted by antibodies in PV IgG other than anti-Dsg3/Dsg1. Initially, Grando et al. demonstrated that acetylcholine agonists can prevent PV IgG-induced acantholysis, provided that exposure to PV IgG is limited to less than 8 hours168. These experiments were further validated using a mouse model and with additional acetylcholine receptor agonists155. In a recent study, Chernyavsky et al. found that the effects of PV IgG on keratinocytes involve the phosphorylation of both p120- and β-catenin, with PKC mediating the serine phosphorylation of β-catenin and Src mediating the tyrosine phosphorylation of p120-catenin169. Furthermore, downstream signaling of keratinocyte M1 muscarinic receptors interfered with the PV IgG-dependent catenin phosphorylation through the activation of both protein phosphatase 2 A (PP2A) and protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTP). In contrast, the mechanism of action of α7 nicotinic receptors involved both the activation of PTP and the inhibition of Src. Each inhibitor only partially reversed the effect of PV IgG. Apart from cholinergic receptors, Spindler et al. investigated the role of adrenergic receptors and confirmed previous studies, that the activation of β-Adrenergic receptors prevents loss of intercellular adhesion in vitro and blister formation in an vivo model in response to PV antibodies170. Also, β-adrenergic receptor agonists facilitated the recovery of cell-cell adhesion following the removal of autoantibodies170. Increasing cAMP levels using phosphodiesterase inhibitors protected from the loss of intercellular adhesion through blockage of p38MAPK, while, conversely, the inhibition of protein kinase A (PKA) exacerbated the effects of the antibody60,170. The status of phosphodiesterase activity in PV is currently unknown, however the increase in cAMP monitored after PV IgG stimulation was suggested to pertain to the repair/regenerative phase60,170, revealed and amply described by Hariton et al.16.

In 1979, a seminal study by Schiltz et al. demonstrated that Fab fragments of PV IgG, obtained by enzymatic digestion using papain (Fab), were as effective than entire IgG, suggesting that antibody-mediated crosslinking of target receptors is not required for PV pathogenicity. Moreover, IgG depleted fraction of patient serum failed to cause acantholysis171. Later studies yielded inconsistent results regarding the efficacy of Fab or F(ab´)2in acantholysis. While Kawana et al. reported that PV F(ab´)2was ineffective in an in vitro model, Anhalt and Till found that all mice receiving PV F(ab´)2developed cutaneous blisters and erosions, whereas none of the mice receiving PV Fab fragments developed lesions172,173. Conversely, Mascaro Jr et al. revealed that both F(ab´)2and Fab fragments induced acantholysis in mice174. Consistently, de Bruin et al. found that the Fab portion was as effective as PV IgG in causing loss of intercellular adhesion in cultured keratinocytes58. The role of serum-born factors in inducing acantholysis was further evaluated by Cirilo et al. who showed, on interest for intravenous IgG, that PV serum lacking IgG can partially reduce the intercellular adhesion, but this effect was not statistically significant175. Mimouni et al. conducted two studies revealing that the beneficial effects of normal IgG are not solely dependent on the Fc portion but also involve the F(ab´)2fragments176,177.

Fc receptor activation can also induce Src activation, which may be mistakenly interpreted as Dsg signaling. However, studies have demonstrated that Src inhibition using mouse monoclonal antibodies with low affinity for human Fc receptors is effective90,178. Therefore, Src activation cannot be attributed to Fc receptor signaling.

Other factors such as protease inhibitors, complement system, mitochondrial potential, among others are briefly outlined in Table4.

Treatment modalities: Pretreatment, Intervention added before antibody application. Cotreatment, Intervention added simultaneously with the antibody. Model: Ex vivo, human skin organ culture. In vitro, 2D cultured keratinocyte cell lines or primary cells. PTNM, Passive transfer neonatal mouse model. Antibodies: PV IgG or sera, pemphigus vulgaris IgG/sera. PF IgG, pemphigus foliaceus IgG. Preventing Pathology: ( + ) effective in preventing antibody-induced pathology, (-) Ineffective in preventing antibody-induced pathology, (x) worsened antibody-induced pathology.KDAKeratinocyte dissociation assay,NANot Available.

This systematic review allows for the first time to present a comprehensive network of 128 functionally validated effector signals in PV published since inception in 1977 up to mid-2024. These effectors can be categorized according to three general signaling axis typifying adhesion receptor signaling5,6: biomechanical (Fig.1), bioelectrical (Fig.2), and biochemical (Fig.3). While the understanding of biomechanical signaling is only starting to emerge and bioelectrical effectors, in particular ion channels, have drawn little attention so far, the best studied effectors in loss of intercellular adhesion relate to biochemical signal transduction upon loss of Dsg transadhesion.

It is noteworthy that modulation of the great majority of the 128 effector molecules in PV have been revealed through cell biological approaches followed by functional validation through pharmacological activation, deactivation or gene deletion prior to antibody application, thus mainly addressing effectors responsible for blister initiation. Among these, we defined as key effectors in PV (indicated in bold in Figs.1–3), those molecules which have been consistently identified and validated by multiple sources using various models, antibodies and manipulations. In all signaling axis combined (Fig.4), these are, remarkably, the molecules which were found to be associated with extra-desmosomal Dsg3 or Dsg1; JUP, p38MAPK, PLCγ/PKC, EGFR/ErB2 and GSK-3β/JUP (Wnt signaling). The implications of these effectors are consistent with stress-induced cytoskeleton reorganization, junctional release, increased migration and proliferation. Activation of growth factor and tyrosine kinase receptors, including EGFR/ErbB2, govern three major processes: mitotic activation, cytoskeletal rearrangement and migration, encompassing endocytosis of junctional components and release of adhesive strength. The pro-migratory and pro-mitotic phenotype in PV is consistently seen throughout the biomechanical signaling axis and is supported by Wnt inhibition, closing the gateway towards keratinocyte differentiation through nuclear signaling and stabilization of junctions at the plasma membrane25,179. Several other studies have demonstrated the influx of intracellular calcium and activation of tyrosine kinase receptor-dependent signaling pathways further supporting enhanced migration. Moreover, the suggested inhibition of small GTPases, such as RhoA, Rac-1 and Cdc42 in PV35or the early redistribution of activated RhoA away from the plasma membrane36, and the reported actin depolymerization40, would also support migration. However, to define the rebalance of forces through the Rho GTPase family of highly dynamic, complex and compartmentalized molecular switches, more sophisticated technologies like live cell imaging or experimental manipulations such as FRET180, as initiated by Jin et al.181, will be required. Consistent with calcium influx and a migration/mitosis phenotype, calcium release-activated channels (CRAC), and calmodulins were identified as effectors in the bioelectrical axis, which were however mainly identified to be activated in presence of low Dsg1 protein expression31or complementary anti-Dsg1 antibodies. The increase in intracellular calcium concentration8,46,61,72also favors migration in addition to the release of inflammatory cytokines125–127. Additional key effectors defining the biochemical axis are soluble FasL and Caspases (TNF superfamily). Furthermore, the TNF-α superfamily regulates survival and apoptotic genes under stress conditions. Taken together, this signaling network is highly consistent and supports actin rearrangement40, and contractility50as well as increased proliferation16,25,153,182,183and migration while reducing differentiation17,25. Other studies outside the scope of PV have also confirmed the role of Dsg3, and in some cases also Dsg1, in cell migration184–187, proliferation188–190, and the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Consistently, extra-desmosomal Dsg3 has been shown to be associated with actin fibers and ezrin, functioning as an upstream regulator of Rho GTPases and Src22,23,186. Finally, morphological regeneration and restoration of desmosomal junctions were reported to occur via downregulation of EGFR, activation of Wnt signaling, the upregulation of RhoA/Rac-1 and the increase of adherens junction proteins E-cadherin, β-catenin and JUP. The latter presumably increases the tension load to offset desmosomal instability, consistent with α-adducin phosphorylation and p38MAPK inhibition16,72,181.

Collectively, the binding of autoantibodies to desmosomal antigens supports an astonishingly coherent model whereby outside-in signaling mediated by the major PV target receptors Dsg3/Dsg1 leads within seconds to minutes through a rapid influx of calcium to activation of PLC and PKC, p38MAPK, and EGFR as well as Wnt inhibition (Fig.4). These cascades are known to lead to actin remodeling, enhanced Dsg3/JUP endocytosis and desmosomal shrinkage as well as keratin retraction, contributing to the destabilization of desmosomes and weakening of cell-cell adhesion presumably along a process of inside-out signaling such as p38MAPK and PKC activation. Also, Rho GTPases, particularly RhoA, and their inactivation in PV pathogenesis may further facilitate weakening of desmosomal adhesion, while reactive oxygen species (ROS) and apoptotic pathways survey the signaling events associated with acantholysis.

While a coherent picture is provided for blister initiating effectors reported in PV, the longitudinal analyses, and in particular the study of effectors of protective or regenerative processes during and after blister formation will be essential to be considered when designing therapeutic approaches to avoid adverse effects of effector modulation on already existing blisters, as reported by Hariton et al.16. Furthermore, studying only one time point can introduce a bias, as signaling molecules are subject to dynamic changes, which has been shown in case of EGFR, Wnt and RhoA16,137,181,191–193. This is also compatible with the biological understanding that the cell populations in the basal layer of stratified epithelia reflected in keratinocyte 2D cultures are heterogeneous (stem cells, transit amplifying, differentiating progenitor cells)7. Therefore, and once more, measuring a change in signaling molecules at a single time point may lead to conclusions that cannot be validated in clinical translation. Lastly, in order to understand Dsg3 and Dsg1 receptor signaling in PV and particularly in epithelial homeostasis in detail, it is imperative to investigate the extra-desmosomal (without desmoplakin) and desmosomal (with desmoplakin) fraction separately through biochemical fractionation or imaging.

Concerning inhibitor/activator screening studies, it must be mentioned that validation of the molecular target in the biological setting with and without the pharmacological drug is mandatory, as some molecules may not be directly involved or causative in PV pathogenesis but may instead strengthen the cytoskeleton network, desmosomes or other adhesion molecules as a compensatory mechanism, thereby seemingly preventing or attenuating blister formation60,170. Moreover, when probing Dsg3 signaling, the status of Dsg1 expression needs to be monitored, as high Dsg1 levels may compromise signaling results, or compensate for loss of Dsg3 cell-cell contacts. Further discriminating between Dsg3 and Dsg1 receptor signaling will help to better address this gap. As another caveat, some signaling molecules respond within seconds to minutes after antibody binding, inferring that the application of inhibitors or activators occurs too late and may not effectively interrupt the signaling cascade, yielding misleading results194. Another issue identified is that in many studies chemical concentrations were not titrated and only one single dose was used. This might not be effective or come with secondary, PV-unrelated effects, and was for example shown to be particularly important for fundamental biological pathways like EGFR. It was shown in one study that EGFR inhibition is ineffective in preventing the loss of intercellular adhesion, while Sayer et al. demonstrated a biphasic dose-response relationship where only doses within a hermetic zone effectively prevent blister formation92,137. Additionally, none of the studies measured confounding contaminants, such as endotoxins, which can activate inflammatory pathways and potentially confound PV signaling195,196.

In summary, in this systematic literature review, we identified targets that have been tested in various models using different PV antibodies (Fig.4). The therapeutic use of these targets necessitates careful consideration of their feasibility and efficacy on both phases of blistering and regeneration. For example, while EGFR is implicated in PV pathogenesis, Hariton et al. demonstrated that lapatinib administration can hinder the healing process of blisters, and thus is not eligible for therapeutic application16. Similarly, p38MAPK plays a crucial role in numerous physiological processes, which will continue to be identified while making it a challenging drug target62,197; several clinical trials have failed due to unacceptable toxicities198,199. More recently developed p38MAPK inhibitors, which have shown greater tolerability in patients, were found to act primarily as EGFR inhibitors rather than direct p38MAPK inhibitors200. Hence, targeting downstream pathways may offer a more feasible approach with fewer side effects, although efficacy remains a concern, as some inhibitors, such as MK2, have only been shown to prevent spontaneous blistering, not Nikolsky-induced blisters71,201. Thus, a more advanced understanding of the intertwined signaling network downstream of PV IgG binding potentially presents the possibility to design combined targets for efficient treatment.

In conclusion, the signaling network downstream of transadhesion loss by extra-desmosomal Dsg3/Dsg1 receptors and desmosomal structures, unveiled through half a century of signaling studies on PV, increases the complexity of our understanding of epithelial homeostasis and regeneration. Suggested to be strong enough to reprogram epidermal cell states16,25, the cross-talk triggered from desmosomal cadherins to major cellular circuits and evolutionary older structures such as classical cadherins and integrins202revealed here is astonishing and will require further attention. The great challenge ahead will be to follow through from desmosomal cadherin signaling to global transcriptional reprogramming expected to represent a fine balance between a plethora of intersecting signaling cascades.

The present systematic review was performed according to the methodology outlined by the 2020 version of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Four databases—PUBMED, EMBASE, Web of Science, and SCOPUS—were searched for eligible articles using the search terms “pemphigus” AND (“activator” OR “inhibitor” OR “Dsg3 signaling”) from inception until June 12, 2023. The syntax of search terms in each database is mentioned in Supplementary TableS1, Supplementary Information. The reference lists of all relevant articles previously identified through electronic database searches were also checked. After the completion of data extraction, another search was performed to screen for newly published investigations in this interval until April 25, 2024.

Search results were combined, and duplicates were excluded using EndNote (version 20.6, Thomson Reuters, 2020). Two reviewers independently reviewed all citations and selected eligible studies. Eligibility was determined after the inclusion criteria were met as follows: (i) studies that used PV sera, PV IgG, or monoclonal antibodies against Dsg3 or Dsg1/3; (ii) Studies that utilized one or more of the following models: human skin explants, 3D keratinocyte cultures, 2D cultured primary or cell line keratinocytes, passive antibody transfer models in neonatal or adult mice; (iii) studies that evaluated a signaling molecule through chemical or genetic manipulation (intervention) to inhibit or aggravate the PV phenotype; (iv) studies that measured at least one of the following pathological outcomes: desmosomal shrinkage, keratin retraction, cell-cell and cell-matrix dissociation, Dsg3 internalization, acantholysis, or blister formation in suprabasal layers or hair follicles.

Exclusion criteria included: (i) non-English published studies; (ii) non-original researches (e.g., editorials, reviews, book chapters, commentaries); (iii) studies in humans or in non-human animals other than mice (iv) studies conducted on active transfer PV mouse models; (v) outcome measures other than PV pathological phenotypes mentioned in inclusion criteria; (vi) studies that used non-Dsg antibodies or IgG from atypical PV cases; (vii) unavailability of the full text of articles.

The authors extracted data using a pilot-tested form. The study characteristics extracted from the full-text articles eligible for qualitative analysis included the following categories: (i) bibliographic details (title, authors, publication year, journal); (ii) model characteristics (type of preclinical model); (iii) intervention characteristics (type of experimental manipulation, dose, incubation duration, antibodies used); (iv) details of the examined signaling molecule (signaling molecule, signaling pathway); and (v) outcome measures (type of outcome, primary and secondary outcomes, effectiveness).

All studies were included in the review; therefore, a formal quality assessment was not considered necessary.

This research was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (Sinergia CRSII5_202301/1). Authors would like to express their gratitude towards the Sinergia pemphigus consortium members Ralf J. Ludwig, Hauke Busch, Jennifer E. Hundt, and the expert committee Carien M. Niessen, and Ralf Paus for fruitful discussions and constructive criticisms with regard to pemphigus signaling.