National estimates of drug discontinuation for deprescribing targets in older adults are limited, partly due to challenges distinguishing planned deprescribing from poor adherence. Focusing on individuals with multidose dispensing (MDD), characterized by high adherence by design, may yield realistic discontinuation rates.

To estimate the rates of discontinuation for chronically used drugs targeted for deprescribing among older adults, and to describe reinitiation among users of MDD and standard dispensing (non‐MDD).

In this nationwide cohort study, Swedish adults aged ≥ 75 were identified from national registers. At baseline (1 January 2021), chronic users of seven drug classes were defined. We estimated the 12‐month cumulative incidence of discontinuation (defined as no new dispensing during the treatment episode of the prior dispensing plus a 180‐day grace period) and the proportion of patients restarting therapy within 180 days after discontinuation.

We identified 162 518 chronic users: benzodiazepines (n= 69 511), PPIs (n= 43 973), antidepressants (n= 41 577), statins (n= 36 085), cholinesterase inhibitors (n= 6408), bisphosphonates (n= 5801) and antipsychotics (n= 4380). Discontinuation rates were low (8.3–51.5 per 1000 person‐years), and non‐MDD users had higher discontinuation and reinitiation rates across all drugs.

Discontinuation among Swedish older adults is infrequent. Irregular dispensing is likely misclassified as deprescribing, and MDD users may better reflect true discontinuation in routinely collected data.

We examined how common supervised drug discontinuation was among older adults in Sweden. Using national data, we followed over 160 000 people aged 75 and older who were long‐term users of seven drug classes commonly targeted for deprescribing. We stratified the population into those receiving their medications through multidose dispensing (MDD), which supports regular use, and those with standard prescriptions. We found that drug discontinuation was generally uncommon, especially for those using MDD. Our findings suggest that MDD users may offer a more accurate view of planned medication discontinuation when using routinely collected healthcare data.

Deprescribing is an important aspect of care among older adults, providing benefits such as reduced risk of adverse drug events and minimizing polypharmacy [1,2]. Several drugs including proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), statins and benzodiazepines have been suggested as relevant targets for deprescribing among older adults [3].

Despite the benefits of deprescribing among older adults [1,2], few studies have estimated discontinuation rates of chronically used drugs using routinely collected nationwide data. To date, drugs such as statins, bisphosphonates and benzodiazepines are among the most studied drug classes for which discontinuation estimates have been reported using routinely collected data [4,5,6,7,8,9,10]. Discontinuation estimates provided by these previous studies vary substantially, in part due to differences in defining drug exposure and discontinuation [5,6,7]. Distinguishing deprescribing from non‐adherence and irregular refill patterns is a substantial challenge when estimating discontinuation in routinely collected data [11]. This limitation is due to a lack of data detailing the healthcare provider's intent of stopping a patient's medication [12]. This issue is underscored by previous studies showing that 30% to 60% of individuals identified as discontinuers later restart the same drug [5,6,7]. This limitation of routinely collected data has been highlighted for several drug classes by a previous study using clinical documentation to validate true discontinuation among patients identified as discontinuers using routinely collected data [13].

Low adherence and irregular refill patterns are common issues in older adults [14]. To support adherence in frail individuals with complex regimens, many healthcare systems including Sweden use multidose dispensing (MDD). Under this scheme, medications are delivered in pre‐packed pouches labeled by administration time and dispensed at regular intervals (every 14 days in Sweden). MDD use is common among the Swedish older population, accounting for about 24% of dispensings for persons aged 80 years and older [15]. Due to their regular refill patterns, MDD users have better primary adherence and likely better secondary adherence as compared to the general population of older adults [16]. As a result, a gap between MDD dispensings may more reliably indicate clinically supervised drug discontinuation, rather than non‐adherence. Therefore, MDD users may represent a population where true discontinuation can be more accurately observed in routinely collected register data, when using discontinuation definitions such as a gap in medication availability.

This study aims to estimate discontinuation rates for chronically used drugs identified as deprescribing targets among Swedish older adults to provide insight on current drug discontinuation practices in Sweden and serve as a benchmark in future studies. Furthermore, we aim to describe discontinuation rates and reinitiation for older adults with MDD and those with regular dispensing (non‐MDD) to better understand the validity and applicability of existing definitions for drug discontinuation.

This is a nationwide cohort study based on pseudonymized data from the Total Population Register [17] linked to other Swedish registers based on a patient identifier, unique to all individuals living in Sweden with data available in registers. The linked registers included the National Patient Register [18], the Prescribed Drug Register [19], the Cause of Death Register [20], the Longitudinal Integration Database for Health Insurance and Labour Market Studies (LISA) [21] and the social service register [22]. The different data sources are further described in TableS1.

The study population consists of all individuals aged 75 years and older who resided in Sweden on the 1st of January 2021. At baseline, prevalent user cohorts for seven preselected drugs commonly highlighted as targets for deprescribing among older adults were established using data from the prescribed drug register: benzodiazepines, PPIs, statins, antipsychotics, antidepressants, cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEls) and bisphosphonates. Drug classes were selected based on published guidelines and criteria for potentially inappropriate medications in older adults such as the Beers Criteria and STOPP/START [23,24], as well as prior deprescribing studies and consensus among the co‐authors. The relevant ATC codes for each drug cohort are presented in TableS2. For each drug cohort, prevalent use was defined as having an oral drug dispensing (baseline dispensing) with a treatment episode that overlapped with the cohort entry date (1 January 2021; FigureS1). Data from the prescribed drug register was used to define treatment episodes (i.e., expected duration of the medication supply) for all drug dispensing. Treatment episodes for each drug dispensing were estimated based on the date of dispensing, the total amount dispensed and prescribed daily dose. This methodology is described in detail elsewhere [25].

Chronic use was retrospectively assessed, defined as having a medication possession ratio (MPR) of ≥ 80% in each of the four 6‐month periods (24 months) preceding the baseline treatment episode [26]. The drug cohorts were not mutually exclusive; thereby, an individual could be a prevalent chronic user of multiple drugs at baseline. We excluded individuals who migrated in the 24 months before the baseline date, died before the index date or had a baseline treatment episode that was unexpectedly long (greater than 365 days) given that most drugs should only be dispensed for a 90‐day supply in Sweden. The 365 days cut‐off was used to define long treatment episodes based on regulation that in certain cases (such as traveling), it is allowed to dispense more than the usual 90‐day supply. The flow chart describing the different analytical drug cohorts is presented in FigureS3.

For each analytical drug cohort, the index date (i.e., start of follow‐up) was defined as the day after the end of the baseline treatment episode (FigureS1). Drug discontinuation was defined as the absence of a new dispensing during the treatment episode of the previous dispensing plus a grace period of 180 days. In the Swedish healthcare system, patients typically receive a 90‐day supply per dispensing. The 180‐day grace period corresponds to two consecutive missed refills and provides a more conservative definition of discontinuation, reducing the risk of misclassifying irregular refill patterns as true discontinuation [7]. Individuals in each analytical drug cohort were followed from the index date until drug discontinuation or censoring due to death, emigration or end of follow‐up (12 months from index date).

At baseline, individuals in each drug cohort were stratified as either MDD users or non‐MDD users. We define MDD use as having only MDD dispensing or a mix of both MDD and non‐MDD dispensing (due to transitioning from non‐MDD to MDD dispensing over time and because as‐needed treatments are not provided through MDD) in the 24 months prior to the baseline dispensing. In Sweden, MDD is primarily intended for individuals with complex medication regimens, cognitive impairments or for those residing in settings where structured medication administration is preferred, such as nursing homes [27].

Patient characteristics were assessed at baseline for MDD and non‐MDD users. Patient characteristics at baseline include age (75–84, 85–94, ≥ 95 years), sex, education level (primary, secondary and tertiary), number of chronic conditions (0, 1–3, 4–6 and 7+), number of unplanned outpatient visits and number of inpatient admissions in the 6 months prior to baseline (0, 1, 2 and 3+ visits). Further descriptions of the definitions are detailed in TableS3.

The 1‐year incidence rate (per 1000 person‐years) of drug discontinuation was calculated for each drug cohort, and for MDD users and non‐MDD users separately. In a subgroup analysis, the 1‐year incidence rate of discontinuation was stratified by age and sex. For each drug cohort, we calculated the proportion of discontinuers who restarted the drug treatment within 180 days after discontinuation. Two prespecified sensitivity analyses were performed. First, shorter grace periods were used (90 and 120 days) when defining drug discontinuation, as this has been shown to impact discontinuation estimates [7]. In a second sensitivity analysis, the length of a dispensing treatment episode was based only on the defined daily dose (DDD) instead of the prescribed daily dose, to allow for a better comparison with previous studies without information on actual dosing.

To investigate whether differences in discontinuation rates between MDD and non‐MDD users could be explained by baseline characteristics, we conducted a post hoc analysis using propensity score weighting methods. Both inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) and overlap weighting (OVW) were applied to adjust for baseline imbalances between groups. For each analytical drug cohort, inverse probability treatment weighting (truncated at 95th percentile) was used to create a pseudo‐population in which the distribution of baseline characteristics was balanced across MDD and non‐MDD users [28]. In a second post hoc analysis, OVW was used to create a pseudo‐population that emphasized individuals with similar propensity scores across groups, resulting in balanced baseline characteristics between MDD and non‐MDD users [29]. Covariate balance was assessed using standardized mean differences (SMDs) [30], and the 1‐year incidence of drug discontinuation was then estimated within each weighted cohort. All analyses were performed in SAS 9.4, and data visualization was performed in R. The study was conducted in accordance with the Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology policy for experimental and clinical studies [31].

At baseline, 603 164 individuals aged 75 years and older were prevalent users of one or more of the seven drug classes of interest. Statins (n= 338 693) were the most frequently used drug class at baseline, followed by PPIs (n= 201 126), benzodiazepines (n= 166 714), antidepressants (n= 138 137), bisphosphonates (n= 24 926), antipsychotics (n= 21 972) and ChEls (n= 20 874). Chronic use in the 24 months prior to baseline ranged between 44% for benzodiazepines and 11% for statins. The most chronically used drugs in the 24 months prior to baseline were benzodiazepines (44%), ChEls (32%), antidepressants (31%) and bisphosphonates (23%) (FigureS3).

Females were more prevalent in all drug cohorts of chronic users, ranging from 52% for statin users to 81% for bisphosphonate users (Table1). The mean age at baseline was 81 to 86 years across drug cohorts. MDD users accounted for 33% of chronic benzodiazepine users and up to 83% for chronic ChEls users. As compared to non‐MDD users, MDD users were older, more often female and generally had more chronic diseases and inpatient visits (TableS5). In the post hoc analysis, good balance (SMD ≤ 0.1) was achieved in the IPTW‐weighted cohorts for all baseline characteristics except age (and sex for some drug cohorts). Good balance was achieved for all baseline characteristics in the overlap weighted drug cohorts (TableS5).

Showing patient characteristics at baseline for all drug cohorts.

Abbreviations: ChEls, cholinesterase inhibitors; MDD, multidose dispensing.

The highest incidence rate of drug discontinuation per 1000 person‐years was observed for bisphosphonates (IR 50.7; CI 50.5 to 50.9), PPI (IR 23.6; CI 23.5 to 23.6), benzodiazepines (IR 16.6; CI 16.6 to 16.7) and antipsychotics (IR16.2; CI 16.1 to 16.3) (Table2). Across all drug cohorts, incidence rates were consistently higher among non‐MDD users compared to MDD users (Table2). Incidence rates of drug discontinuation for non‐MDD users ranged from 72.8 (CI 72.5 to 73.0) for bisphosphonates to 18.6 (CI 18.6 to 18.7) for antidepressants. In contrast, discontinuation rates for MDD users ranged from 14.2 (CI 14.0 to 14.4) for bisphosphonates to 2.6 (CI 2.6 to 2.6) for PPIs. The post hoc analysis using propensity score weighting to balance baseline characteristic distribution between MDD and non‐MDD users showed that the incidence rates of drug discontinuation for MDD and non‐MDD users remained largely consistent with the crude estimates across all drug cohorts (TableS6). Drug discontinuation was generally lower for females compared to males, with the largest differences in discontinuation observed for antipsychotics (females: IR 12.5, CI 12.3 to 12.6; males: IR 21.3, CI 21.1 to 21.5) and PPIs (females: IR 20.9, CI 20.8 to 20.96; males: IR 25.5, CI 25.4 to 25.5) (TableS7). We found that drug discontinuation decreased with age (TableS8). This was the case for all drug cohorts, except ChEls.

Showing incidence of drug discontinuation per 1000 person‐years for all drug cohorts.

Abbreviations: ChEls, cholinesterase inhibitors; MDD, multidose dispensing; PPI; proton pump inhibitors.

Restarting a drug in the 180 days after discontinuation was most common among statin users (67.2%), followed by antidepressants (61.4%), PPIs (53.6%) and benzodiazepines (43.2%) (Figure1). For all drug cohorts, a higher proportion of restarters was observed among non‐MDD users as compared to MDD users. The largest differences were observed for antipsychotics (39.6% for non‐MDD and 5.9% for MDD) and statins (73.5% for non‐MDD and 22.2% for MDD).

Showing the proportion of discontinuers who restarted within 180 days after discontinuation.

In the sensitivity analysis with less restrictive definitions of drug discontinuation, we found that the incidence of drug discontinuation increased with shorter grace periods. This difference in incidence rate was most pronounced for statins, where we observed an incidence rate of 15.4 (CI 15.4 to 15.5) when using a grace period of 180 days (primary analysis) as compared to an incidence rate of 77.1 (CI 77.0 to 77.2) when using a grace period of 90 days (TableS9). The results from the sensitivity analysis using the DDD to estimate the coverage of dispensing yielded attenuated incidence estimates for all drug cohorts (TableS10).

In this nationwide register‐based cohort study, we observed that the rates of drug discontinuation for seven classes of drugs suggested for deprescribing were generally low among Swedish older adults. Discontinuation rates varied between the drug cohorts, ranging from 8.3 per 1000 person‐years for antidepressant users to 51.5 for bisphosphonate users. Across all drug cohorts, MDD users had lower discontinuation rates as compared to non‐MDD users despite being older and having more chronic conditions and inpatient visits. Furthermore, the proportion of discontinuers who restarted therapy was higher among non‐MDD users as compared to MDD users for all drug cohorts. The differences in discontinuation rates observed between MDD and non‐MDD users across drug cohorts persisted when using propensity score weighting to adjust for observed baseline differences. Overall, our findings indicate that deprescribing in routine clinical practice is uncommon for Swedish older adults. Furthermore, our findings indicate that irregular dispensing patterns among non‐MDD users may be mistakenly classified as deprescribing, and the extent of this misclassification appears to vary by drug class.

Our findings of low discontinuation rates, particularly for statins, align with prior studies, although direct comparisons are limited by methodological differences, including varying definitions of chronic use and discontinuation. The prevalence of statin use (30.1%) in our study is in line with previous Danish data (33%) with a similar definition of discontinuation [7]. We however observed a lower 1‐year discontinuation rate for statins (1.4% vs. 2.4%) and a substantially higher proportion of restarters (70% vs. 41%) as compared to the Danish study. These differences may reflect our focus on a more adherent population at baseline and not using DDD for defining the duration of a treatment episode. Interestingly, the proportion of statin restarters (33%) we observed when using DDD for defining treatment episode duration was more in line with the Danish study. This may reflect the tendency of DDD‐based definitions to overestimate or underestimate drug coverage depending on the drug [32]. Such an overestimation of drug coverage may explain a larger population of chronic users identified when using the DDD‐based definition. We observed a lower proportion of discontinuation (1.6%) for benzodiazepines as compared to previous studies (6% to 15%) [9,10]. These studies used a less restrictive chronic use definition, likely leading to study populations which at baseline were less adherent to benzodiazepine treatment as compared to our population of benzodiazepine users. This could have translated to more non‐adherent users classified as discontinuers. We are unable to compare our results on the discontinuation rates of PPIs, antipsychotics, antidepressants, ChEIs and bisphosphonates with other studies due to a lack of literature on this topic. The large proportion of restarters observed for drugs such as statins and PPIs in this study suggests a likely misclassification of discontinuation. This interpretation aligns with previous research that used clinical documentation to validate ‘true discontinuation’ for patients identified as discontinuers based on routinely collected data. That study found that individuals with subsequent refills after a 90‐day gap in dispensing were less likely to represent true discontinuation (29%) [13]. Notably, the proportion of true discontinuation among restarters varied by drug class, ranging from 13% for statins to 44% for PPIs, suggesting that the extent of misclassification in routinely collected data is drug‐specific.

The differences in incidence rates and proportion of restarters observed between drug cohorts in our study can be attributed to a combination of factors including differences in adverse effect profiles, intended duration of therapy, perceived necessity of the drug and evolving clinical guidelines. For example, the high rate of discontinuation observed for bisphosphonate users as compared to other drugs may be driven by drug holidays, commonly recommended for long‐term users with the aim of reducing the risk of serious side effects [33,34]. Alternatively, the large discontinuation rate observed for bisphosphonate users may be due to an increasing number of patients receiving long‐term injectable treatments such as intravenous zoledronic acid at primary care centres [35]. As this information is unavailable in the Swedish prescribed drug register, we were unable to ascertain if patients identified as having discontinued were indeed discontinuers or had switched from oral medications to long‐term injections during the follow‐up period.

In our study, MDD use ranged between 33% for benzodiazepine use and 83% for cholinesterase use. Previous data in the Swedish setting found that 16% to 24% of older adults had MDD [27,36]. Because we focused on older adults with more consistent dispensing patterns at baseline, MDD users were more prevalent in this study as compared to previous data from Sweden. The rationale for focusing on this group was that a gap in dispensing is more likely due to planned discontinuation than irregular filling patterns. The higher prevalence of MDD users, particularly for cholinesterase inhibitors, is expected as these patients usually have difficulties handling their drugs (a characteristic for which MDD use is recommended) and predominantly reside in nursing homes, where MDD use is common [37].

Despite the lack of data on drug discontinuation for MDD users in previous literature, the lower discontinuation estimates observed for this population in our study is surprising. Patient characteristics such as old age, polypharmacy and frailty, for which deprescribing is often recommended [38], are more common among MDD users [39]. Unexpectedly, these characteristics did not result in higher drug discontinuation rates among MDD users compared to non‐MDD users. We believe that the lower discontinuation rates observed for MDD users signify that MDD users are a suitable population for investigating planned and supervised deprescribing when using routinely collected data. Their regular refilling patterns reduce the chance that adherence affects the incidence rates and the non‐existence of prescribed but not dispensed medications secures that discontinuation is managed by a healthcare professional. The low discontinuation rates could also be linked to the fact that MDD patients are less likely to experience medication changes [40]. This rigidity in medication management may contribute to the lack of deprescribing in routine care for this important group.

The low rates of discontinuation observed for the different drug cohorts identified as possible targets for deprescribing highlight the limited practice of discontinuation in clinical settings. The low rates of discontinuation observed for MDD users indicate a need for interventions specifically targeting deprescribing in this population. Our findings suggest that a conservative definition of drug discontinuation in a population of chronic users can still lead to varying degrees of misclassification, depending on the drug of interest. This misclassification has potential implications for estimates derived from safety studies that use drug discontinuation as an exposure, as these results could directly inform health policies.

Our study had several limitations. Common to previous studies based on routinely collected data, it was not possible to differentiate planned and supervised discontinuation from poor adherence or treatment interruptions. However, we believe our methodological consideration, including our definitions of chronic use and drug discontinuation, as well as the inclusion of MDD users who are less likely to exhibit irregular dispensing patterns, has helped mitigate such misclassification. Although propensity score weighting was used to adjust for measured baseline differences between MDD and non‐MDD users, some differences may remain. The analysis included a limited set of covariates, and other covariates not captured in the data could influence the observed patterns of discontinuation.

Another limitation was including only patients with oral dispensing in the 24 months prior to baseline. This was due to the difficulties of accurately estimating dispensing coverage when including other drug formulations such as injections. This may not have led to significant differences for most drug cohorts as bisphosphonates are the only selected drugs for which injections are common. For bisphosphonates, it was not possible to identify patients who received long‐term injections at primary care centres [35], which could have led to the misclassification of discontinuation. Deprescribing is a new concept in Sweden. Hence, we opted for having the baseline in 2021. This resulted in a relatively short follow‐up period (12 months) as well as a short period (180 days) for identifying restarters. A restrictive definition of chronic drug use was implemented to better capture planned drug discontinuation in routinely collected data. This, however, means that our definition of chronic users does not accurately reflect chronic users in the population. The same definition of discontinuation was used for all drug cohorts. We, however, acknowledge that a 180‐day grace period for defining drug discontinuation may not be suitable for some drug classes. Similarly, a 180‐day grace period may not be the most suitable for MDD users, as they have a different dispensing pattern (every 14 days). Moreover, aspects of deprescribing such as dose reduction and drug switching should be better addressed in future studies.

In this nationwide register‐based study, the discontinuation of chronically used drugs targeted for deprescribing was infrequent among Swedish older adults. Our findings for MDD users, whose consistent dispensing patterns reduce the likelihood of misclassification, demonstrate that true discontinuation rates are likely lower than observed, as drug discontinuation estimates from routinely collected data may overestimate rates due to challenges in distinguishing deprescribing from poor adherence. This study highlights that drugs suggested for deprescribing are rarely discontinued in old chronic users. Moreover, measuring planned and supervised discontinuation in routinely collected data requires careful consideration of the definitions and methodologies applied.