Remote, smartphone‐based cognitive assessments such as the Mobile Toolbox (MTB) may increase the accessibility of Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical trials. We examined the feasibility of the MTB among cognitively unimpaired (CU) older adults and investigated its associations with standardized in‐clinic cognitive testing and amyloid and tau positron emission tomography imaging.

A total of 100 CU older adults self‐administered the MTB remotely on their personal devices. Linear regression models correcting for demographics investigated associations of MTB fluid and crystallized cognition composites with in‐clinic Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite‐5 (PACC‐5) scores, global amyloid‐beta burden and tau deposition in the medial‐temporal lobe and neocortex.

Most participants completed the MTB without requiring assistance (81%) or reminders (61%). MTB fluid cognition scores were positively associated with PACC‐5 scores and negatively with tau deposition in the medial‐temporal lobe and neocortex.

These findings suggest that the MTB may provide a feasible approach to capture cognitive processes relevant in preclinical AD.

The Mobile Toolbox (MTB) is a remote smartphone‐based cognitive assessment.

We deployed the MTB in CU older adults with Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers.

We show how the MTB may facilitate cognitive assessment in preclinical AD research.

The Mobile Toolbox (MTB,www.mobiletoolbox.org) is a library of cognitive tests that can be self‐administered on individuals’ own smartphones and in the comfort of their home.11The initial core tests within the MTB were developed to measure comparable cognitive functions that are often utilized for in‐person research and were based on the well‐validated National Institutes of Health (NIH) Toolbox Cognition Battery (NIHTB‐CB).12,13The current version of the MTB includes six cognitive tests measuring “fluid cognitive functions,” including episodic memory, working memory, processing speed, and executive function (EF), and two tests of “crystallized cognitive functions” reflecting premorbid intellectual functioning. Previous work has shown that the MTB may be a promising tool for reliably assessing cognition outside the research lab and clinic.14,15,16,17,18However, what remains unclear is whether the MTB can provide useful cognitive data in the context of AD (secondary) prevention trials.

The utility of the MTB in AD (secondary) prevention trials will require that these tests, or any subset thereof, are feasible to administer remotely in older adults and able to detect cognitive changes in the preclinical disease stage, i.e., in cognitively unimpaired (CU) adults who have abnormal AD biomarkers.19It has been widely acknowledged that measures of episodic memory can detect early cognitive changes in AD biomarker‐positive CU older adults,20,21,22but recent studies have also shown that sensitive measures of processing speed and EF may assist in the detection of amyloid‐ and tau‐related cognitive change.22,23,24,25One in‐clinic, multidomain, paper‐and‐pencil cognitive measure found to be sensitive to early AD‐related cognitive decline is the Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite‐5 (PACC‐5). The PACC‐5 is an established cognitive outcome measure in AD secondary prevention trials.26As such, comparing the MTB to the in‐clinic PACC‐5 constitutes an initial step to examine its value in AD research and AD prevention trials. Here, we are especially interested in the MTB fluid cognition tests that measure cognitive constructs similar to the PACC‐5.

Systematic review: The authors reviewed the literature on PubMed for studies on remote, smartphone‐based cognitive assessments in the context of AD, as well as studies on the Mobile Toolbox (MTB) for use in aging and AD research. Relevant citations are provided.

Interpretation: Our study shows that remote self‐administration of the MTB on an individual's personal mobile device provides a feasible approach to assessing cognitive functions that are relevant in preclinical AD. However, some usability challenges were observed among older participants, suggesting some need for design improvements to further optimize feasibility.

Future directions: Longitudinal data collection is ongoing to evaluate the MTB's ability to detect AD‐related cognitive decline over time. Future research should focus on validating the MTB in more diverse populations including individuals with lower digital literacy. Ultimately, the integration of remote cognitive assessments like the MTB may enhance scalable, cost‐effective monitoring of individuals at risk of AD.

The goal of this study was to investigate the feasibility and utility of the MTB in CU older adults with AD biomarkers. We deployed the MTB in a cohort of well‐characterized CU older adults with in‐clinic cognitive testing as well as amyloid and tau positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. MTB data are being collected longitudinally, and this article reports on the baseline data of this study. First, we assessed feasibility aspects regarding the remote self‐administration of the MTB. Next, we compared the MTB to the in‐clinic administered PACC‐5, global amyloid burden, and regional tau deposition. Given the overlapping cognitive constructs,22‐‐25we hypothesized that the MTB fluid cognition composite would show a moderate to strong association with the PACC‐5, whereas the association between MTB crystallized composite and PACC‐5 scores would be weaker. We also hypothesized that only MTB fluid cognition scores would be associated with global amyloid‐beta (Aβ) burden and tau deposition in early AD‐relevant regions, including the medial‐temporal lobe (MTL) and temporal neocortex. Finally, we explored whether the administration time of the MTB could be reduced by identifying the minimal combination of MTB fluid cognition tests that explain unique variance in PACC‐5 scores.

Participants were community‐dwelling CU older adults (age 50 to 90 years) recruited from four affiliated Mass General Brigham ongoing observational cohort studies: the Harvard Aging Brain Study (HABS, P01AG036694; R.A.S., K.A.J.),27Instrumental Activities of Daily Living study (IADL, R01AG053184, and R01AG067021; G.A.M.), Subjective Cognitive Decline study (SCD, R01AG058825; R.E.A.) and Serial Merck Study (SMK). Each of these ongoing cohort studies includes annual in‐clinic study visits with standardized cognitive testing. To be eligible for the MTB substudy, participants were deemed CU at the time of their most recent in‐clinic visit. Of note, this was based solely on clinical evaluation and cognitive assessments. For the HABS, SCD, and IADL studies, participants were considered CU if they had a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale global score of 0, or if they had a global CDR of 0.5 but were still deemed to be CU as determined by clinician consensus based on standardized cognitive and functional test results and medical history. Since the CDR is not administered in the SMK study, participants were considered CU if they had a PACC‐5 score above a cut‐off of −1.5 standard deviations (SDs) at the time of their most recent in‐clinic visit. Other inclusion criteria for the MTB study were age >45, a Mini‐Mental Status Examination (MMSE) > 25, and Logical Memory Delayed Recall scores above education‐adjusted cutoffs (≥9 for 16+ years of education, ≥5 for 8 to 15 years of education). Exclusion criteria were a diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment or dementia, a recent history of alcohol or drug abuse, severe head trauma, or a current unstable medical condition or primary psychiatric diagnosis.

The current study reports on the MTB baseline data that were collected between December 2022 and July 2024. The Massachusetts General Brigham Institutional Review Board approved the study, and written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to study procedures.

The MTB battery includes eight cognitive tests (Table1). All tests are based on NIHTB‐CB tests and were optimized for unsupervised, self‐administration on a personal smartphone using either an iOS or Android operating system.12The full battery takes about 30 min to complete and covers multiple cognitive domains including episodic and associative memory, EF (inhibitory control and cognitive flexibility), working memory, processing speed, and language functions (Table1).14,15,16,17,18,28A detailed description of each MTB test and scoring is provided in theSupporting Information.

Procedures. Participants self‐administered the MTB on their own iOS or Android device. After signing informed consent, they received an email with a link and QR code leading them to the Apple Store or Google Play to download and install the MTB app. Participants were also provided with contact details of the study team in case they needed assistance with installing the app or troubleshooting during the assessment. Upon installment of the app, participants were asked to allow push notifications. If they allowed them, they would receive a notification reminding them to complete the MTB every 3 days until they completed the assessment. A dedicated study team monitored the status of each participant and sent additional reminders by email or phone every week until they completed the assessment. When opening the assessment, participants were instructed to complete all the tasks by themselves in one sitting. If participants exited the app before completing the entire battery, they were allowed to resume later; partial completions were flagged and followed up by the study team. The order of assessments was the same for all participants, starting with the fluid cognition tests: arranging pictures, faces and names encoding phase, arrow matching, shape–color sorting, sequences, number–symbol match, and face and name retrieval phase. Lastly, they finished with the crystallized cognition tests: word meaning and spelling.

In‐clinic cognitive testing was done using the PACC‐5, a widely used cognitive outcome measure in research and clinical trials of preclinical AD.26,29The PACC‐5 comprises well‐validated paper–pencil tests including the MMSE,30the Wechsler Memory Scale‐Revised Logical Memory Delayed Recall,31the Digit‐Symbol Substitution Test (DSST),32the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test (FCSRT) Free + Total Recall,33and the Category Fluency Test.34The PACC‐5 score is computed as an averagedz‐score of all individual tests.

As part of the larger cohort study that participants were enrolled in, 84 participants had amyloid PET with [11C]Pittsburgh compound‐B (PiB) available within −1.85 ± 1.89 years of their first MTB assessment. Additionally, 88 individuals had tau PET available with either [18F]flortaucipir (FTP) (n= 43) within −1.46 ± 1.97 years of their first MTB assessment) or [18F]MK‐6240 (MK) (n= 45) within −0.43 ± 0.86 years of their first MTB assessment. Amyloid and tau deposition were quantified in accordance with established protocols for acquisition and analysis.35,36,37A detailed description of the acquisition and processing procedures is provided in theSupportingInformation.

Analyses were done using R (version 4.0.3). Statistical significance was set atp< 0.05. Histograms of score distributions for each individual MTB test are provided, and independentt‐tests were used to investigate whether there were any differences in MTB test scores for iOS versus Android users. To assess feasibility, we calculated the proportion of participants who needed technical assistance before or during their MTB assessment and the proportion of participants that needed additional reminders from the study team (i.e., beyond the built‐in app notifications) to complete their tests within 4 weeks. Independentt‐tests and chi‐squared tests were used to assess whether there were any demographic or clinical differences between participants who needed technical assistance versus those who did not, and between participants who needed additional reminders versus those who did not.

Scores for each MTB test were standardized using the mean and SD calculated across the entire sample. Next,z‐scores from the MTB fluid cognition tests (arranging pictures; faces and names; arrow matching; shape–color sorting; number–symbol match) were averaged into a MTB fluid cognition composite score, and spelling and vocabularyz‐scores were averaged into a MTB crystallized cognition composite score. A completion criterion of 50% of the individual MTB tests was set in order to calculate each MTB composite score. A series of linear regression models were run to examine the association of each MTB composite scores with PACC‐5 scores, global Aβ burden (distribution volume ratio [DVR] values based onfrontal, lateral, and retrosplenial regions) and MTL and neocortical tau uptake (z‐scored SUVR values). All linear regression models were corrected for age, sex, and years of education, and models with MTL and neocortical tau were additionally corrected for tracer (FTP or MK). The time between the MTB assessment and the in‐clinic PACC‐5 visit and the time between the MTB assessment and the PET scan were treated as covariates in the models predicting PACC‐5 and biomarker outcomes, respectively. However, as these variables were not statistically significant in any of the models, they were excluded from the final models. Scatterplots showing raw data are presented, as are the standardized regression coefficients obtained from linear regression models after adjusting for covariates. These standardized regression coefficients can be interpreted as an effect size (0.10 = small, 0.30 = medium, and 0.50 = large).

To examine whether the number of MTB fluid cognition tests could be reduced without a decreasing signal with PACC‐5, we performed a hierarchical regression analysis with PACC‐5 as outcome and the individual MTB fluid cognition tests as predictors, adjusting for age, sex, and years of education. We started with the three MTB tests that mimic tests included in the PACC‐5 (arranging pictures, faces and names and number–symbol match) and separately added in the remaining MTB fluid cognition tests (sequences, arrow matching, shape–color sorting). We assessed whether the addition of tests significantly improved the association with PACC‐5 using model selection heuristics, namely, the Akaike information criterion (AIC), Bayesian information criterion (BIC), and likelihood‐ratio test (LRT). The coefficient of determination (R2) was used to assess the overall model fit. Associations between different iterations of MTB fluid cognition composites and global Aβ burden and tau deposition were also explored using linear regression models, correcting for the same covariates as the primary analysis, and are included asSupportingInformation.

A total of 100 participants self‐administered the MTB at home on their own personal device, of whom 66% used an iOS device and 34% used an Android device. Table2presents the demographic, cognitive, and biomarker characteristics of the total sample. Briefly, participants were on average 70.5 (SD = 7.8) years old, had a mean of 16.8 (SD = 2.5) years of education, 63% were female, and 16% were from a historically underrepresented group (Table2). Per our inclusion criteria, participants’ cognitive test scores from the in‐clinic visit closest to their MTB assessment fell within the normal range (MMSE score: M = 28.8, SD = 1.3; PACC‐5 score: M = 0.12, SD = 0.67). Among the 84 participants with PiB PET available, 27% were classified as Aβ‐positive (Table2). Histograms with score distributions for each MTB test are provided in FigureS1. There were no significant differences in scores between Android and iOS users for any of the MTB tests (allp> 0.05).

Abbreviations: Aβ, amyloid beta; DVR, distribution volume ratio; FTP, [18F]flortaucipir; MMSE, Mini‐Mental State Examination; MTB, Mobile Toolbox; MTL, medial‐temporal lobe; NEO, neocortical; PACC‐5, Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite‐5; PET, positron emission tomography; PiB, [11C]Pittsburgh compound‐B; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio.

The majority of participants (81%) did not require additional assistance from the study team before or during their MTB assessment. However, 19 participants (19%) reached out to our study team for assistance with troubleshooting over the phone, as they experienced difficulties (e.g., with downloading the MTB app or logging in). Those who sought assistance were significantly older (age M = 77.6, SD = 7.3) than those who did not seek assistance (age M = 68.9, SD = 8.3) (t= −4.6135,p< 0.001), but we did not find any significant association between seeking assistance and other demographic variables (e.g., sex, education, race, ethnicity), clinical variables (e.g., MMSE, PACC‐5 scores), global Aβ status, or device type (allp> 0.05). After installing the app, most participants (61%) completed their assessments within 4 weeks without any additional reminders from the study team, whereas 39% needed one or more reminders. We found no demographic differences (age, sex, years of education, race, ethnicity), clinical differences (MMSE, PACC‐5 scores), or differences in global Aβ status or device type between those who needed a reminder call versus those who did not (allp> 0.05).

Missing data on MTB tests ranged from 1% (arranging pictures) to 13% (spelling) (TableS1). MTB fluid cognition scores were associated with age (r =−0.47, 95% CI [−0.60; −0.29],p <0.001) and years of education (r =0.36, 95% CI [0.18, 0.52],p <0.001), whereas MTB crystallized cognition scores were associated with years of education (r= .47, 95% CI [0.29, 0.62],p< 0.001) but not with age (r= −0.01, 95% CI [−0. 21, 0.20],p= 0.965). There were no sex differences on either MTB composite (fluid cognition:t= 1.31,p= 0.237; crystallized cognition:t= −0.632,p= 0.529). Importantly, MTB fluid and crystallized composite scores did not differ for those who had data from the entire battery available compared to those who had missing data on any of the individual tests (allp> 0.10). In addition, there were no significant differences in MTB fluid and crystallized composite scores between those who completed the assessments without reminders and those who needed reminders (allp> 0.10). However, MTB fluid cognition composite scores tended to be higher in those who completed the tests independently (M = 0.42) compared to those who did seek assistance (M = 0.07,p= 0.04).

MTB fluid cognition scores were positively associated with PACC‐5 scores, with a medium to large effect size (standard β = 0.49, 95% CI [0.23, 0.74],p< 0.001). MTB crystallized cognition scores were also positively associated with PACC‐5 scores, albeit with a small to medium effect size (standard β = 0.28, 95% CI [0.10, 0.46],p= 0.003) (Figure1).

Scatterplots showing associations of MTB fluid cognition composite (left) and MTB crystallized cognition composite (right) with PACC‐5 scores. Individual data points show raw data; standardized regression coefficients are corrected for covariates (age, sex, and years of education). MTB, Mobile Toolbox; PACC‐5, Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite‐5.

Figure2and Table3show the association between the MTB composites and AD biomarkers, including standardized regression coefficients from linear regression after adjusting for covariates. For reference purposes, standardized regression coefficients from linear regression models between AD biomarkers and the PACC‐5 are included in Table3as well. We did not find a statistically significant association between MTB fluid cognition scores and global Aβ burden (standard β = −0.28, 95% CI [−0.76, 0.21],p= 0.257). However, lower MTB fluid cognition scores were significantly associated with greater tau deposition in the MTL (standard β = −0.60, 95% CI [−1.05, −0.14],p= 0.012) and neocortex (standard β = −0.65, 95% CI [−1.14, −0.17],p= 0.009). As expected, there were no associations between MTB crystallized cognition scores and amyloid or tau deposition (Table3).

Scatterplots showing association of MTB fluid cognitionz‐scores with global Aβ burden (left), MTL tau (middle), and neocortical tau (right). Individual data points show raw data; standardized regression coefficients are corrected for covariates (age, sex, and years of education). Fill areas around lines present 95% confidence interval. MTB, Mobile Toolbox; MTL, medial‐temporal lobe.

Standardized regression coefficients obtained from linear regression models correcting for age, sex, and years of education.

Note: Linear regression models for MTL and neocortical tau were additionally corrected for tau tracer.

Abbreviations: DVR, distribution volume ratio; MTB, Mobile Toolbox; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio.

Table4shows the output from the hierarchical regression models for different iterations of the MTB fluid cognition composites explaining PACC‐5 scores. Model 1 (arranging pictures, faces and names and number–symbol match) improved model fit significantly compared to a model with demographic variables only (AIC = 173.54, BIC = 193.35, LRT: chi squared = 12.19,p= 0.007). Further, adding sequences to the predictors (Model 2) again significantly improved the model fit to PACC‐5 scores over Model 1 (AIC = 169.17, BIC = 191.47, LRT: chi squared = 6.37,p= 0.012), withR2values increasing from 0.29 to 0.34. However, neither the addition of arrow matching nor shape–color sorting (Models 3, 4, and 5) led to a statistically significant model improvement. Taken together, these results suggest that a MTB composite of arranging pictures, faces and names, number–symbol match and sequences is similarly associated with PACC‐5 scores as the full MTB battery. This reduces test administration time by 6 min compared to administering all fluid cognition tests and 12 min compared to the entire MTB battery.

Output from hierarchical linear regression models with PACC‐5 as outcome, adjusting for age, sex, and years of education.

Note: Null model is model with demographics only (age, sex, years of education).

Abbreviations: AR, arrow matching; AM, associative memory; AP, arranging pictures; EF, executive function; EM, episodic memory; FN, faces and names; MTB, Mobile Toolbox; NSM, number–symbol match; PACC‐5, Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite; PS, processing speed; SCS, shape–color sorting; SQ, sequences; WM, working memory.

Similarly to the original MTB fluid cognition composite, a composite score of only arranging pictures, faces and names, number–symbol match, and sequences was negatively associated with tau deposition in the MTL (standard β = −0.41, 95% CI [−0.76, −0.07],p= 0.02) and neocortex (standard β = −0.37, 95% CI [−0.74, −0.01],p= 0.048) (TableS2).

We showed that remote self‐administration of the MTB on an individual's own mobile device outside of a clinic provides a feasible approach to measuring fluid and crystallized cognitive functions in CU older adults. We found that particularly the MTB fluid cognition tests captured cognitive processes that are associated with in‐clinic cognitive assessments currently used in preclinical AD research and clinical trials (i.e., the PACC‐5) and with early to intermediate tau burden.38We also found that this MTB fluid cognition composite could potentially be reduced to only four tests while maintaining the association with PACC‐5 and tau, suggesting that the administration time of the MTB could be reduced to less than 20 min while assessing similar cognitive constructs. Overall, our findings support the notion that the MTB provides a promising approach to remotely measuring cognitive functions that are relevant in early, preclinical stages of AD.

After receiving standardized instructions on how to set up the MTB app, the majority of our participants did not seek further assistance from the study team to complete their assessments. However, it should be noted that one out of five participants did need troubleshooting assistance and that those individuals tended to be older than those who did not seek assistance. Thus, despite not conducting the tests in clinic, a designated clinical staff member was still utilized by those participants. This also suggests that the user‐friendliness of the MTB could be further improved, especially for older adults for whom operating a smartphone might be a less automated skill. This is supported by our finding that MTB composite scores tended to be slightly lower in those who sought assistance before or during the MTB assessment. However, we do want to point out that MMSE and PACC‐5 scores did not differ between participants who needed assistance and those who completed the MTB without assistance. Importantly, the proportion of individuals seeking assistance did not differ across the Aβ‐negative and Aβ‐positive groups, suggesting that the MTB would be equally feasible in those who are likely to enroll in AD clinical trials and prevention programs. Overall, our results also highlight that, even though the MTB itself is a fully remote assessment, it is advisable to involve a dedicated team that is available to provide assistance and keep track of whether participants are completing their remote assessments.

Another opportunity to further improve the feasibility of the MTB for use in studies of AD would be to reduce the number of tests and shorten their administration time and burden. The original MTB battery was not specifically designed for use in AD and therefore includes tests that may be less relevant for the detection of AD‐related cognitive changes.39As such, administering the full MTB battery (∼30 min of testing) may lead to unnecessary lengthy testing, which in turn could result in fatigue or ennui effects that impact the reliability and validity of the test scores. We found that the MTB fluid cognition composite could be reduced to only four tests (∼18 min of testing) that explain the same amount of variance in PACC‐5 scores. Whereas these findings should be confirmed in a prospective validation study, our initial results suggest that using the arranging pictures, faces and names, number–symbol match, and sequences tests may be sufficient if the goal is to assess similar cognitive constructs as measured by the PACC‐5. This may not be entirely surprising since those four MTB show the most overlap with the tests included in the PACC‐5 (i.e., logical memory, FCSRT, and DSST, respectively).30The only unexpected finding was that including sequences, a measure of working memory, further significantly improved the association with PACC‐5. However, it should be noted that some elements in the PACC‐5, such as the DSST and individual MMSE items,31to a certain degree rely on attentional and working memory processes, such that the sequences tests may measure the cognitive processes that are captured by those PACC‐5 elements.

We did not find an association between the MTB fluid cognition composite and global Aβ burden. This is in line with a previous study that found no associations between the in‐clinic administered NIHTB cognitive tests and amyloid PET among CU older adults.23This implies that the MTB may not be fully optimized for detecting very early amyloid‐related cognitive changes but rather captures cognitive processes that are more vulnerable to decline once tau starts to spread into the MTL and temporal neocortex.25,38This also aligns with the work by Snitz et al., showing that particularly NIHTB fluid cognition tests were associated with tau deposition in higher Braak regions.23Overall, our findings that MTB fluid cognition tests are associated with MTL and neocortical tau deposition but not global Aβ burden are in line with several other cross‐sectional studies demonstrating that tau correlates more strongly with cognition than amyloid.40,41,42Longitudinal MTB data collection in our study cohort is currently ongoing, which will allow us to examine whether elevated Aβ at baseline is associated with decline over time on the MTB.

Several limitations should be considered. First, our study sample predominantly consists of highly educated, non‐Hispanic White participants, so it is unknown how generalizable our findings are to more diverse populations. Thus, further validation of the MTB in more diverse populations is required with a focus on acceptability and feasibility in individuals with lower digital literacy. Additionally, remote self‐administered testing offers limited control over testing conditions, which may affect test validity.9The possibility of participants receiving assistance or using external memory aids cannot be excluded, though no evident ceiling effects or abnormally high scores were observed, suggesting no inflated performance through cheating. However, future updates of the MTB could incorporate built‐in integrity checks or other monitoring mechanisms to detect external assistance or cheating during testing. A limitation regarding our tau PET findings is that two different radioligands were used to measure tau uptake. Ongoing harmonization efforts focus on diagnostic power,43,44but no consensus exists on converting different tau PET radioligands to a common scale for early tau burden detection. Wez‐scored SUVR values for each radioligand and corrected for tracer in our analysis, though a formal harmonization method will be applied when available. Additionally, MTB and PACC‐5 were not administered on the same day, so day‐to‐day cognitive variability may have weakened their association.45Thus, this study should be viewed as proof of concept rather than a formal head‐to‐head comparison between MTB and PACC‐5.

To conclude, our findings indicate that leveraging the cognitive information captured by the various MTB fluid cognition tests may aid in the detection of subtle cognitive deficits in preclinical AD. However, we do note that the MTB crystallized tests may remain important depending on study goals and the target population, for example, in the case of needing to estimate premorbid function. Longitudinal data collection is ongoing, with the goal being to determine the optimal MTB composite for detecting AD‐related cognitive change over time. Other future opportunities include examining the associations between the MTB tests and other (co‐)pathologies such as vascular changes. Ultimately, by providing more efficient, scalable, and accessible assessments of cognition, remote assessments like the MTB may facilitate the monitoring of individuals at risk of cognitive decline in AD research, clinical trials, and real‐world settings.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. G.A.M. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharma USA Inc. and has received research salary support for serving as site principal investigator for clinical trials funded by Eisai Inc. and Eli Lilly and Company.

The authors would like to thank all study participants of the HABS, IADL study, SCD study, and Serial Merck Study and everyone involved in the data collection. R.J.J. is supported by the Alzheimer's Association (AARF‐22‐967786). The Mobile Toolbox Substudy was funded (5U2CAG060426‐03) by the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The Harvard Aging Brain Study is funded by the NIH/National Institute on Aging (NIA) (P01AG036694; Principal Investigators Sperling, Johnson) with additional support from several philanthropic organizations. The Instrumental Activities of Daily Living study (R01AG053184 and R01AG067021; Principal Investigator Marshall) and Subjective Cognitive Decline study (R01AG058825; Principal Investigator Amariglio) are funded by the NIH/NIA.