Traumatic brain injury (TBI) often causes permanent neurological dysfunction. Although no medication has been validated yet to prevent secondary injury of brain tissue, recent animal studies have reported that perampanel, a glutamine receptor antagonist, could improve the neurological functions of animals with TBI by mitigating the abnormal calcium influx and cell death around the site of primary injury. The present study aims to elucidate the efficacy of perampanel administration in improving the neurological function of patients with TBI.

The perampanel for alleviation of secondary injury in TBI trial is a multicentre, phase-II, open-label randomised controlled trial targeting patients with mild-to-moderate TBI. This trial will include adult TBI patients with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 9–14 from five tertiary centres. Patients with epilepsy as a comorbidity, delayed presentation of symptoms (>24 hours after injury) or Injury Severity Score of ≥25 will be excluded. The study participants will be randomly assigned to either the perampanel group (2 mg/day) or the control group (fosphenytoin administered at a dose of 15–18 mg/kg/day, followed by 5–7.5 mg/kg/day of fosphenytoin). In both groups, the medication will be initiated within 12 hours of the TBI diagnosis and continued for 7 days. The antiepileptic drugs can be increased, changed or added as necessary if early post-traumatic seizures are observed. The primary outcome is favourable neurological outcome, defined as a Glasgow Outcome Scale Extended score of ≥5 at 90 days after the TBI diagnosis, which will then be compared between the groups through an intention-to-treat analysis.

The present study has been approved by the Certified Review Board of Keio at the principal institution (approval number: N20240004). Written informed consent will be obtained from all participants or their legal representatives. The results will be disseminated via publications and presentations.

Japan Registry of Clinical Trials (jRCTs031250067).

This trial evaluates the neuroprotective effects of perampanel for patients with traumatic brain injury by a randomised controlled design.

Fosphenytoin, which has similar antiepileptic effects to perampanel, is used as a comparator and therefore, additional neuroprotective effects of perampanel can be evaluated.

Intervention is conducted in the first week after injury, which, according to clinical guidelines, is the recommended period for the antiepileptic medication.

Open-label design is a limitation for the evaluation of neurological functions.

Numerous basic and clinical studies have shown that the clinical consequences following TBI are determined according to the degree of primary and secondary injuries.8 9Traumatic external impact disrupts the brain tissue as the primary injury that changes the microenvironment around the injured site. The secondary injury then sequentially damages the brain cells spared from the primary injury; therefore, severe permanent brain dysfunction can occur even when the primary injury only mildly damages the brain tissue.10Although preventing or alleviating the secondary injury is considered a pivotal strategy to avoid the occurrence of unfavourable neurological outcomes among TBI patients,11there is still no drug treatment that considers the pathophysiology of the secondary injury.

Basic research on the secondary injury of TBI has been extensively conducted, and the pathophysiological mechanisms have been gradually revealed.12Cellular damage caused by local reactive oxygen species, overstimulation of glutamate receptors and massive influx of calcium ions has been identified as the phenomena surrounding the injured tissues, referred to as the primary injury.13 14Particularly, excitatory glutamate stimulation around the site of primary injury causes a rapid increase in calcium concentrations, ultimately leading to cell oedema and death, which are considered targets for the treatment of secondary injury. Given that the overstimulation of the alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isooxazole-propionic acid (AMPA) receptors, which are among the glutamate receptors, has also been observed in many TBI models,15a pharmacological agent blocking this abnormal stimulation may be a therapeutic option for alleviating the secondary injury in TBI.

Perampanel, an AMPA receptor antagonist, has been used clinically as an antiepileptic drug. Preclinical studies have reported that the administration of perampanel improves the neurological function of TBI models,14 16 17as it decreases the reactive oxygen species and reduces apoptosis and autophagy of brain cells located around the site of primary injury. Based on these studies, the beneficial effects of perampanel in preventing secondary injury among patients with TBI can be expected, and patients treated with perampanel will have better neurological outcomes as compared with those receiving another antiepileptic drug without glutamine antagonist effects. Therefore, we aim to elucidate the effectiveness of perampanel in improving the neurological function of patients with TBI. We hypothesised that perampanel is associated with a higher rate of favourable neurological outcomes at 90 days after injury in patients with mild-to-moderate TBI as compared with fosphenytoin, an antiepileptic drug without glutamine antagonist effects.

The perampanel for alleviation of secondary injury in TBI trial is a multicentre, phase-II, open-label randomised controlled trial (RCT) conducted at five tertiary care centres, including academic and community hospitals in urban areas around Tokyo, Japan.

A flowchart of the patient enrolment process is shown infigure 1. The inclusion criteria for selecting the study participants will be as follows: (1) patients aged ≥18 years; (2) those diagnosed with TBI, including contusion, acute subdural haematoma, acute epidural haematoma, traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage and diffuse axonal injury, diagnosed by CT or MRI; (3) those with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 9–14 on hospital arrival or at the time of TBI diagnosis; (4) those who consented to participate in the study by themselves or their legal representatives and (5) those who can tolerate oral medications (including enteral administration). The patients will be included regardless of the mechanism of injury.

The exclusion criteria will be as follows: (1) patients with epilepsy as a comorbidity; (2) patients who arrived at the hospital for >24 hours after injury; (3) patients with an Injury Severity Score of ≥25; (4) pregnant patients; (5) patients with contraindication for perampanel administration; (5) patients with contraindication for fosphenytoin administration and (6) patients unsuitable for the study as determined by a physician (eg, difficult to adhere to the study protocol, to take medications as directed or to attend appointments).

The investigators will explain the study verbally and in writing and will provide the consent form to potential trial participants or their legally authorised representatives (onlinesupplemental materials 12). After consent obtainment, participants will be randomly assigned to either the perampanel (intervention) group or the fosphenytoin (control) group. In the perampanel group, 2 mg/day of perampanel will be administered orally or enterally once daily for 7 days, with the initial dose being administered within 12 hours of TBI diagnosis. In the control group, 15–18 mg/kg of fosphenytoin will be administered intravenously within 12 hours of TBI diagnosis, and from the next calendar day, 5–7.5 mg/kg of fosphenytoin will be administered intravenously once daily for 6 days (including the initial dose, a total of 7 days of administration).

In both groups, standard care will be provided by a treating physician. Regarding other anti-epileptic drugs, the treating physician may increase, change or add antiepileptic drugs as necessary if early post-traumatic seizures are observed after the TBI diagnosis. Therefore, in the perampanel group, perampanel can be increased or replaced with other antiepileptic drugs, except for fosphenytoin. However, in the control group, the fosphenytoin dose cannot be increased due to the drug’s safety profile and can only be decreased, stopped or replaced with other antiepileptic drugs, except for perampanel. All other antiepileptic drugs will be administered with an approved dose for on-label use.

The primary outcome is a favourable neurological outcome at 90 days post-TBI diagnosis, defined as a Glasgow Outcome Scale Extended (GOSE) score of ≥518at 90 days after the TBI diagnosis. The secondary outcomes include as follows: (1) GOSE score at 90 days after TBI diagnosis; (2) Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score at 90 days after the TBI diagnosis;19(3) occurrence of traumatic epilepsy or post-traumatic seizures within 90 days of TBI diagnosis; (4) occurrence of adverse events within 90 days of TBI diagnosis; (5) GOSE score at 30 days after TBI diagnosis; (6) occurrence of traumatic epilepsy or post-traumatic seizures within 30 days of TBI diagnosis; (7) hospital-, intensive care unit- (ICU) and ventilator-free days within 30 days of TBI diagnosis; (8) occurrence of traumatic epilepsy or post-traumatic seizures within 7 days of TBI diagnosis and (9) occurrence of adverse events within 7 days of TBI diagnosis.

Random assignments will be made using an electronic data capture (EDC) system,21with the facility being the stratification factor. The random sequence will be block randomised, where the block size will be created by a statistician and will not be disclosed to the patients, treating physicians or research personnel. The random sequence will be implemented in the EDC system by the administrator, and the allocation will be determined at the time of patient enrolment in the EDC. The patients and treating physicians will not be blinded to the group allocation, but the statistician will be.

The schedule of enrolment, interventions and assessments is presented infigure 2. All data will be recorded using the EDC system. Trial monitoring experts, who are independent of trial conduct, will ensure that the data reported by the investigators are being collected accurately to validate the integrity and reliability of the data. The participants will be followed up for 90 days after initiating the intervention. If follow-up is difficult at the study institution for a participant, the investigators will contact him/her via telephone to obtain relevant information.

We hypothesised that 7 days of perampanel administration is associated with a higher rate of favourable neurological outcomes, defined as a GOSE score of ≥5, at 90 days after the TBI diagnosis, compared with 7 days of fosphenytoin administration.

The percentage of moderate TBI patients with favourable neurological outcomes (GOSE score ≥5) at 2 weeks postinjury has been reported to be approximately 40%.2 22As most patients with mild TBI have a GOSE score of ≥5 and 60% of patients who will be included in this trial are considered to have mild TBI, the proportion of patients with favourable neurological outcomes (GOSE score ≥5) at 1 month for the total population in this trial will likely be approximately 75%. Considering these previous data, the nature of this trial as a phase-II study, and the balance between feasibility of trial (trial duration and financial costs), we assumed an absolute difference of 15% in the intervention group,14 161:1 allocation, a two-sided alpha level of 0.15 and a power of 0.70 to test the difference in the primary outcome proportion between the two groups.23 24The sample size calculation concluded that a total of 98 patients (49 in each group) are required based on a two-sample test for difference in proportions. Assuming a dropout rate of approximately 2%, the target number of cases is estimated to be 100 (50 each for the intervention and control groups). In the five study institutions, 2–3 patients per month per institution will be included; therefore, a study inclusion period of 1–2 years is planned.

We will report the patient flow according to the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials flowchart.25The final analysis will be performed after collecting the 90-day outcomes of the participants. Eligibility for the analysis will be decided based on the availability of 90-day data by the primary investigator and statisticians who are not involved in the conduct of the trial. The intention-to-treat cohort will include all eligible patients. The proportion of patients with a GOSE score of ≥5 will be calculated for the intervention and control groups and compared between the groups using Pearson’s χ2test. Fisher’s exact test will be used when the χ2test may yield inaccurate results, especially in cases of small sample size or when any expected cell count is five or less. Results will be reported as counts and proportions, with absolute differences in proportions, their corresponding 95% CIs and p-values.

A secondary analysis will be conducted to interpret the primary analysis. The following secondary endpoints will be compared using t-tests between the two groups: mean GOSE score at 30 and 90 days after TBI diagnosis and MMSE score at 90 days after TBI diagnosis. Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test or other non-parametric tests will be used as appropriate after analysing the data distribution. The proportion of patients with traumatic epilepsy or post-traumatic seizures within 30 and 90 days of TBI diagnosis will be compared using Pearson’s χ2or Fisher’s exact test. The hospital-, ICU- and ventilator-free days within 30 days of TBI diagnosis will be examined using survival analysis, in which the time from TBI diagnosis to the occurrence of an event will be compared using the log-rank test and a Kaplan–Meier curve will be calculated. The adverse events occurring within 90 days of TBI diagnosis will be presented as a list.

An interim analysis will not be conducted, given that this trial is a phase-II study. Moreover, there are no plans to conduct additional analysis. Although the researchers at the participating centres may conduct ancillary studies using the data obtained from this trial, the specific analytical methods have not been determined yet. If the proportion of missing data exceeds 10% for any variable at any time point, a sensitivity analysis will be performed using multiple imputations of the missing values.

The steering committee comprises four clinical researchers who will supervise the implementation of the trial and check its progress. The steering committee designed the study. Contract research organisations developed the clinical trial data management system and will conduct the monitoring and audit of the trial, independently from investigators and funding sources. The Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) comprises three clinical researchers from different institutions who are independent from the sponsor and have no competing interests. The DSMC monitors the trial to ensure its reliability in terms of the protection of human rights, safety and welfare of the study participants. The DSMC will hold a meeting at least every year to assess the clinical trial data management system and evaluate the safety of continuing the trial.

All investigators at the participating institutions will be mandated to collect, assess, record and manage solicited and spontaneously reported adverse events. If the principal investigator is notified of a severe adverse event related to the trial intervention, a prompt report will be presented to the DSMC and the ethics review board of the principal institution. Additionally, the principal investigator will take appropriate action and promptly share information on the severe adverse events with other investigators involved in the trial. The DSMC and ethics review board of the principal institution will review and examine the report, assess the relationship between the study intervention and severe adverse events and send written recommendations made in response to it to the principal investigator. The DSMC will also recommend the trial’s continuation, modification or termination.

Former patients with diseases rather than TBI were involved in the design of this research. During the feasibility stage, the choice of outcome measures and recruitment methods was determined by discussions with patients who were participating as members of the Certified Review Board.

The present trial will be conducted according to the principles stipulated in the Declaration of Helsinki and the Clinical Trials Act enacted by the Japanese National Diet. The study protocol was approved by the Certified Review Board of Keio at the principal institution in March 2025 (approval number: N20240004); the approval process was initiated in February 2025. Written informed consent to participate will be obtained from all participants or their legally acceptable representatives. The insurance company will provide compensation to the trial participants who might experience health issues related to the flaws in the trial protocol during the first year after their trial participation.

The need for protocol changes will be initially discussed by the steering committee, followed by a meeting that will include representatives from all of the participating institutions. When a decision is reached to change the protocol, the revised protocol will be discussed by the Certified Review Board at the principal institution. After obtaining approval from the Certified Review Board, the revised protocol will be promptly disseminated to the relevant parties via email or other means. Any modifications will also be reflected in the trial registry.

The data registered in the EDC do not contain personal information. After the completion of all planned analyses, the findings of the present trial will be presented at relevant scientific meetings and disseminated through publications in peer-reviewed journals. Following the completion of all ancillary analyses by the trial group, the data sets analysed during the current study and statistical codes will be available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

This multicentre, phase-II, open-label RCT will investigate the efficacy of perampanel, an AMPA receptor antagonist, in preventing secondary injury among patients with TBI and examine whether patients treated with perampanel will have better neurological outcomes as compared with those receiving fosphenytoin, an antiepileptic drug without glutamine antagonist effects. This study will measure the effect size and safety of perampanel on neurological function after injury, which is required to establish a novel drug therapy of TBI.

The present study has several limitations in the context of its design. First, the patients and treating physicians will not be blinded to the study intervention. Although the GOSE score is a non-modifiable outcome determined by an observer with limited inter-rater variability,32some biases can emerge, such as the patients’ motivation for rehabilitation. Second, the effect size of the improvement of neurological function by treatment with perampanel has not been elucidated; therefore, the sample size may be too small to test the hypothesis. The low statistical power, high alpha error and exploratory nature of this study would not conclude the efficacy of perampanel. However, the present phase-II clinical trial will allow us to estimate an accurate effect size for the future phase-III trial. Third, the present study will include patients with both mild and moderate TBI. Although the benefits of perampanel can differ depending on the TBI severity, the confounding effects between them will not be eliminated. Finally, the perampanel regimen in this trial will be the administration of the drug at a dose of 2 mg/day orally or enterally for 7 days. Therefore, the beneficial effects of the other administration routes, dosages and durations cannot be validated in this study.

The trial protocol V.1.3 was approved on 25 March 2025 (approval number: N20240004), with the approval process having been initiated in February 2025. The latest protocol is V.1.4, which will be approved in May–June 2025, after minor revisions regarding the changes in the representatives at some participating hospitals and clarifications on the protocol statements. The first participant will be recruited after 26 May 2025, at the primary institution. The trial is ongoing, and approximately 80 patients will be enrolled by the end of 2025. The estimated completion date is 31 October 2026.