Over two billion people menstruate worldwide. Many lack the resources and knowledge to manage their menstruation, which can lead to reproductive health issues and stigma.

This longitudinal study set out to describe menstrual health and hygiene (MHH) knowledge levels among adult women across global regions and estimate changes in knowledge from exposure to health information through the mobile application (app) Flo Health. Furthermore, the study quantified changes for psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes and explored whether these were mediated by improvements in MHH knowledge. At installation of the Flo app, 6165 participants across 52 countries were recruited for a baseline assessment. Follow-up data collection was conducted after at least 3 months of app access. Two study designs were used, following 513 respondents in a pre–post design and recruiting an additional 1346 respondents to match to baseline participants lost to follow-up in a repeated cross-sectional design.

MHH knowledge was low at baseline, with on average only one-third of knowledge quiz questions answered correctly. Compared with the baseline, MHH knowledge was 18.7% higher in the matched sample, while it increased by 8.1% in the pre–post sample after 3 or more months of access to Flo. Other changes included higher menstrual awareness (matched and pre–post: 9.0%), sexually transmitted infection awareness (matched: 1.7%; pre–post: +3.1%), quality of life (matched: +1.8%; pre–post: +3.5%) and lower menstrual stigma (matched: −8.1%) and menstrual impact on daily life (pre–post: −6.7%). In the matched sample between 23 and 66% of associations between app access and select outcomes were mediated by MHH knowledge.

The poor MHH knowledge found in this study highlights the opportunities for improvement, which in turn could lead to better psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes. Mobile apps may represent an important tool for better MHH knowledge and associated benefits at scale.

Menstrual health and hygiene (MHH) knowledge, a key aspect of MHH management, is often inadequate, with more barriers to improving MHH knowledge in low-income and middle-income countries.

This study describes MHH knowledge gaps in low-income and middle-income countries, providing data of select knowledge indicators for global monitoring of MHH progress, while demonstrating the potential impact of providing MHH information through a mobile application. A key contribution of this research is that it was conducted among adult women of reproductive age, thus providing important data to an evidence base that has historically focused on adolescent girls. Furthermore, findings from a mediation analysis suggest that improving MHH knowledge may be an important pathway to positively impacting women’s health and well-being through psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes.

The findings from this study illustrate the need for practical interventions to improve MHH knowledge across global settings and provide evidence on how mobile applications may represent an important tool to improving MHH knowledge and the associated health and well-being benefits at scale.

Studies in Indonesia and Ethiopia have shown that poor MHH management among adolescents is associated with inadequate MHH knowledge.14 15Similar links have been reported in Lao People’s Democratic Republic and Tanzania, where girls with lower cycle knowledge were more likely to improvise absorbents and to miss school during their periods.16 17A study in India found that adult women’s MHH needs go beyond materials and facilities and include social support and an enabling sociocultural environment, with the authors suggesting that knowledge about the menstrual process beyond typical patterns could support improved MHH management experiences.18Workplace research from Uganda and Bangladesh adds that misinformation and lack of support can reduce productivity and trigger absences among adult women.19 20Additionally, evidence from Kenya and Gambia have documented widespread menstrual and fertility misinformation among adults, with most respondents not knowing when a woman could become pregnant.21 22Together these findings show that insufficient menstrual knowledge and entrenched stigma are not confined to any single region or age group.

This longitudinal study collected data on select indicators across five of seven global MHH monitoring domains32: knowledge, menstrual health impacts, supportive environment, discomfort/disorders and menstrual materials (figure 1). Five of the global monitoring domains (water, sanitation and hygiene facilities, materials, knowledge, support for discomforts and disorders, and a supportive social environment) attempt to capture requirements needed for achieving MHH progress towards the sustainable development goals (SDGs), for good health and well-being (SDG 3), quality education (SDG 4) and gender equality (SDG 5).33Menstrual health impacts and policy are additional domains for monitoring purposes.

Describe MHH knowledge among adult women across global regions in LMICs.

Estimate the associations between exposure to menstrual and fertility health information through the Flo Health app on MHH knowledge and select psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes.

Explore whether the associations between Flo app use and psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes might be related to changes in MHH knowledge.

In addition to tracking, Flo provides a comprehensive library of evidence-based educational content, covering a wide range of topics including menstruation and fertility, pregnancy and postpartum care, sexual health, mental health and self-care. This content is cocreated by a team of doctors and health scientists, drawing on peer-reviewed sources and guidelines from internationally recognised health organisations. All educational material undergoes a rigorous peer-review process before being published within the app.

Engagement with this educational content is facilitated through various interactive features, such as personalised health tips, reminders and chatbots that offer daily health advice. These features aim to enhance users’ knowledge of their menstrual health and guide them in making informed decisions. The app also allows users to anonymously participate in community polls, offering a platform to engage with others on topics related to sexual health and menstrual experiences, thus reducing the stigma often associated with these issues. Additionally, the app integrates with a range of wearable devices that capture sleep, heart rate and physical activity data. This may indirectly enhance users’ knowledge and self-care by encouraging proactive health monitoring.

This study was conducted among new subscribers to the premium version of the Flo Health app in LMICs. Flo Health UK Limited granted free premium access to Android users in 66 countries to broaden access to women’s health information.35New and existing users were granted access to the premium version automatically. Participants were recruited for the study through a notification in the app. By clicking on the notification, participants were directed to a questionnaire hosted on the SurveyMonkey service. Study participation was optional and was not required for free access to the premium version of the app. Participants were asked to provide electronic informed consent and those who consented were included in the study. Eligible study participants included English-speaking, French-speaking and Indonesian-speaking users of the premium version of the Flo app 18–45 years of age (adult women of reproductive age) residing in one of the 66 included countries. The study team was limited by capacity to translate the surveys from English into two additional languages; thus, we chose Indonesian and French as they are the two most represented languages after English of Flo app use in LMICs.

We targeted 6000 respondents at app installation to estimate baseline MHH knowledge as well as psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes. We then employed two study designs to estimate the potential impact of exposure to the Flo app (online supplemental figure 1). The first was a pre–post longitudinal study design and the second a repeated cross-sectional design. The pre–post design compared the same users at app installation and after exposure to the Flo app, whereas the repeated cross-sectional design compared different users. As such, the pre–post design was able to estimate changes in outcomes among the same users, whereas the repeated cross-sectional design estimated differences between users at app installation and users who had experienced exposure to the app. Neither design included a control group, thus was not able to establish causality between app exposure and included outcomes.

Specifically, the pre–post design targeted the same users at 3 and 6 months after they completed the baseline survey at app installation. We assumed a follow-up attrition rate of 50%, however loss to follow-up was higher than expected, with only 8% of baseline respondents initiating the follow-up survey after 3 or 6 months. For this reason, we launched the repeated cross-sectional study design in parallel. For this, we surveyed users who had not participated in the baseline survey but had used the premium version of the Flo app for at least 3 months and up to 12 months. These users were then matched to baseline respondents lost to follow-up in the pre–post design using coarsened exact matching.36The matching criteria included age (18–<25; 25–<35; 35+ years), highest education level attained (higher; secondary; primary/none), country of residence, whether participants used the web/mobile apps as their main source of reproductive health knowledge and whether participants had children.

The baseline questionnaire contained three sections. The first section covered sociodemographic characteristics, including education, employment and parity, as well as type and sufficiency of menstrual materials used, reproductive health and conditions and sources of reproductive health knowledge. The second section had a knowledge quiz to assess the MHH knowledge of participants. The third section included questions on psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes. The follow-up questionnaire for the pre–post sample included the same questions in sections 2 and 3 to measure any changes in MHH knowledge, and psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes, but did not include section 1, since we did not expect changes in sociodemographic characteristics in a 3-month and 6-month time period. The follow-up questionnaire additionally included a question on which features of the app users found most helpful. All questions required an answer with no ability for participants to skip questions. However, participants were able to end their participation in the questionnaire at any time.

Respondents completed the baseline questionnaire between October 2023 and May 2024. The timing of survey completion depended on when participants installed the premium version of the Flo app, since the baseline questionnaire was available to all newly subscribed users for 1 month after installation. Participants who did not complete the full baseline survey at app installation were excluded from the analysis.

For the pre–post design, the follow-up questionnaire was released to baseline respondents two times, for the 3-month and 6-month follow-up, in monthly batches between January and November 2024. For example, October 2023 baseline respondents received the survey in January 2024 (3-month follow-up) and in April 2024 (6-month follow-up), November 2023 baseline respondents in February 2024 and May 2024. This continued monthly until the last set of respondents from May 2024 received the follow-up survey in August and November 2024. Pre–post participants who did not complete the knowledge quiz at a minimum were excluded from the pre–post sample.

For the repeated cross-sectional design, the full questionnaire was administered to respondents who had not previously participated in the baseline survey but had been using the premium version of the Flo app for at least 3 months and up to 12 months. Participants had to complete all three sections to be included in the matched sample. A unique pseudonymised identifier was used to link survey responses to Flo app data for the respondents. Specifically, country of residence and age at the time of survey completion were extracted.

Outcomes considered in this study were MHH knowledge, menstrual health awareness, communication confidence, quality of life, sexually transmitted infection (STI) awareness, bodily appreciation, menstrual impact, menstrual stigma and days absent from work/school. Outcomes were developed based on validated scales detailed inonline supplemental table 1,37,44except for the MHH knowledge and communication confidence, which were developed internally given that we could not identify appropriate validated scales for these outcomes. MHH knowledge was assessed based on a quiz that was developed by Flo’s scientific and medical teams, in collaboration with external scientific advisors who reviewed the content for accuracy and relevance (online supplemental information 1). The quiz included 10 multiple-choice questions. For example, it included questions on typical menstrual bleeding length, when unprotected sex would most likely result in pregnancy, and on best practices for maintenance of menstrual hygiene. All outcomes were continuous with higher scores suggesting a better outcome, except for days absent from work/school.

We described population characteristics at baseline, including age, highest education level attained, work, number of children, sources of reproductive health knowledge, menstrual hygiene materials used, access to menstrual hygiene materials and geographic region based on the United Nations geoscheme.45To consider any differences between the pre–post and the matched samples when interpreting study results, we compared participants in the follow-up sample to those lost to follow-up (and thus eligible for the matched sample), by performing Wilcoxon rank sum tests for continuous variables and χ2tests for categorical variables. There were no missing data in the sample included for analysis, since participants who did not complete the questionnaire were excluded from the study.

We described MHH knowledge scores at baseline among all study participants stratified by age, education, language and region. We estimated statistical differences in MHH knowledge levels using Wilcoxon rank sum tests for strata with two levels and Kruskal-Wallis rank sum tests for strata with more than two levels.

To estimate the associations between exposure to the Flo app and MHH knowledge, psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes, we analysed data from users with three or more months’ app access. In the pre–post sample, we estimated within-user changes using linear mixed effect models with a random intercept for individual ID to account for varying knowledge at baseline. Due to potential bias introduced from the high loss to follow-up in the pre–post sample, we repeated the analysis in the matched sample. Here, we estimated differences between new users and a different sample of matched users with three or more months of access using a weighted linear model, with weights generated from coarsened exact matching to account for imbalances between matched strata. We used estimated marginal means to estimate mean scores at baseline and at follow-up. In a sensitivity analysis, we repeated the analyses comparing new users to users with 3–6, and 6 or more months of app access. Given that this is an observational study, the inferential analysis was not able to establish causality.

All research procedures were completed in accordance with the relevant ethical standards and guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki. When choosing to participate in the study, participants consented to the use of their survey data and their Flo app data in aggregated and deidentified form for research purposes using an electronic consent form. Participants were not compensated for participating in the study.

Participants were not involved in the design of this study.

Among the 23 395 new users recruited after app installation, 6165 (26%) were included in the baseline sample (table 1). We excluded 17 230 (74%) participants who either did not provide consent or did not complete the questionnaire (online supplemental figure 2). Among participants included in the baseline sample, 513 (8%) initiated the follow-up survey. The remaining 5652 (92%) baseline participants who were lost to follow-up were eligible for inclusion in the matched sample.

Statistical test compares participants eligible for matching to those who initiated follow-up.

The mean age of all study participants at baseline, combining baseline participants in the matched and pre–post samples, was 25.8 years, 49% completed the survey in English followed by 27% in Indonesian and 23% in French (table 1). Many participants had experienced some higher education (67%) and worked either full time or part time (59%), whereas only 21% had children. Most participants reported using websites/mobile apps as their primary source of reproductive health knowledge (62%). Participants originated across global regions, southeastern Asia (31%), southern Asia (27%) and western Africa (23%), having the most representation. Participants from 52 countries responded to the baseline questionnaire (online supplemental table 2). Most participants used disposable sanitary pads during their last period (92%), with 84% of participants reporting having enough of menstrual material to change them as often as they wanted (online supplemental table 3).

Characteristics were comparable between respondents eligible for matching and those that initiated follow-up (table 1), with the exception of age, language and region. Respondents that initiated follow-up were slightly older (26.8 compared with 25.7 years among respondents eligible for matching), had a lower proportion of Indonesian speakers (18% compared with 28% in the sample eligible for matching) and had more representation from African regions compared with regions in Asia. Education levels, employment, having children and main sources of reproductive health knowledge were comparable between pre–post and matched samples.

The mean MHH knowledge score at baseline from the overall sample, combining baseline participants in the matched and pre–post samples, was 3.4 (SD=1.7), meaning that on average, 3.4 out of 10 knowledge quiz questions were answered correctly before participants experienced exposure to the Flo app. Baseline knowledge scores were different by age, education, being a parent, language and region (table 2). Participants aged 35+ had higher knowledge scores (3.8) compared with younger participants (3.3 for <25 and 3.5 for 25–<35-year olds), as did participants with higher education (3.6), participants that have children (3.5), English-speaking participants (3.8) and participants from western (3.9) and eastern Africa (3.8). Breaking down knowledge quiz results by question, most participants (83%) knew the length of a normal menstrual period, whereas only 38% knew how long a normal fertile window typically lasts and 38% either did not know or incorrectly specified when unprotected sex would most likely result in pregnancy (online supplemental figure 3).

Statistical test compares health knowledge scores within each group.

An additional 1346 participants consented and completed the follow-up survey at least 3 months and less than 12 months after app installation and were available for matching to baseline participants lost to follow-up (online supplemental figure 2). For the pre–post design, 276 participants completed the follow-up survey. Users who completed the follow-up survey reported a range of features that they found helpful, including the tracking functionality, interacting with chatbots and exposure to in-app educational content (online supplemental table 4).

The final matched sample included 6369 participants, whereas the pre–post sample available for analysis was 552 (two knowledge quiz scores available for each of the 276 participants in the pre–post sample). On average, participants in the pre–post sample responded to the follow-up questionnaire 4.5 months after baseline. In the matched sample, the difference in app access between baseline and matched participants was 7.4 months on average.

Compared with baseline, participants in the matched sample that had access to the Flo app for 3 months or more had a 18.7% higher MHH knowledge quiz score (figure 2). In the pre–post sample, MHH knowledge increased by 8.1%. Menstrual health awareness (+9.0%), communication confidence (+4.2%), STI awareness (+1.7%) and quality of life (1.8%) were all higher in the matched sample among 3+ month users compared with baseline users. In the pre–post sample, menstrual health awareness (+9.0%), communication confidence (+5.3%), quality of life (+3.5%), bodily appreciation (+3.9%) and STI awareness (+3.1%) had increased significantly after 3+ months of app use.

Menstrual stigma (−8.1%) was lower among 3+ months users compared with matched baseline users, while we did not see statistically significant reductions in menstrual impact or absenteeism in this sample (figure 2). In the pre–post sample, menstrual impact (−6.7%) was reduced after 3+ months of app use. After stratifying the analysis to compare the associations between 3 to 6 months and 6 or more months of app use, we found that access to Flo had similar association effects compared with baseline in both groups in both the matched and pre–post samples (online supplemental figures 4 and 5).

The mediation analysis included all statistically significant associations between Flo app exposure and psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes (table 3). The total associations represent the crude association of app use and the respective outcome (also outlined infigure 2). The average indirect association represents an estimate of the total association attributed to improvements in MHH knowledge. The percentage mediated is a ratio of the average indirect association and the total association, thus representing the proportion of the total association that is mediated by MHH knowledge.

MHH, menstrual health and hygiene; STI, sexually transmitted infections.

In the matched sample, substantial proportions of the total association were mediated by differences in MHH knowledge (table 3). For menstrual awareness and stigma, 23% and 43%, respectively, of the total association from app use were estimated to be attributed to differences in MHH knowledge from app use. Statistically significant mediation was also estimated among outcomes with smaller total associations in the matched sample, namely for communication confidence (32%), STI awareness (66%) and quality of life (54%). In the pre–post sample, the mediation analysis suggested improvements in menstrual (8%) and STI awareness (14%) were mediated by changes in MHH knowledge.

This study aimed to describe MHH knowledge in LMICs, while also evaluating the potential impact of exposure to health information via the Flo Health app on knowledge, psychosocial factors, menstrual health and quality of life outcomes. Notably, this research was conducted among adult women of reproductive age, thus filling a gap in a knowledge base that has historically focused on adolescent girls.8 10 11We found that even among adults, overall MHH knowledge was low at baseline and improved after at least 3 months of access to the Flo Health app. The study also found that use of Flo had positive associations with psychological, menstrual and quality of life outcomes, and that this may have been mediated by improvements in MHH knowledge for select outcomes.

These findings align with broader evidence that improving health literacy can drive behaviour change and improve health and well-being.48 49The study estimated substantial mediation in the matched sample across outcomes ranging from 23% to 66% of associations mediated by MHH knowledge. Low health knowledge is associated with worse health outcomes48and has been previously shown to act as a mediator for the relationship between education and self-reported health.50We found that participants who were younger than 25 years, had no higher education or were from Southeast Asia had the lowest MHH knowledge. Since health knowledge is associated with socioeconomic disparities in health,51improving MHH health knowledge may be an effective approach to improving women’s health and well-being even among disadvantaged populations.

A previously published study on evidence-based online menstrual cycle educational resources showed improvements in participants’ perceptions of their health knowledge after exposure to these resources.56However, the data presented here sought to go a step further by using a knowledge quiz to provide empirical evidence on MHH knowledge changes, finding that after 3 months of app use, MHH knowledge was 18.7% higher among the 3-month users in the matched sample, while it increased by 8.1% in the pre–post sample. Given the difficulty in dismantling menstrual stigmas,3measuring changes in menstrual health awareness and stigma were included as key outcomes in this study. We found that menstrual health awareness improved (matched and pre–post: +9.0%), while menstrual stigma (matched: −8.1%) was significantly lower after 3 months of app use. Most of these associations appear to be attributed to the early stages of app exposure, with no regression from continued use, as indicated by a stratified analysis that compared associations from baseline to 3–6 months of app use, and from baseline to 6 or more months of app use.

For comparability between outcomes, the associations are summarised as percentage changes before and after app exposure. To interpret the magnitude of the associations, it is helpful to consider baseline levels (figure 2) and the content areas assessed (online supplemental information 1–8;online supplemental table 1). For example, in the matched sample, MHH knowledge was 3.6 out of 10 at baseline. The +18.7% difference after app exposure corresponds to an improvement to 4.3, an average difference of +0.7 quiz questions answered correctly on average. While this may seem modest in absolute terms, the knowledge quiz addresses critical concepts in menstruation, conception and sexual health. One approach to interpreting this difference is that, on average, approximately two in every three women improved their understanding of at least 1 of 10 key knowledge areas, an outcome with potentially meaningful implications for health.

The study additionally generated important data on some of the 21 global MHH monitoring indicators.32While the indicators were developed with a focus on adolescent girls, with some pertaining to their experience in schools,12there is a need for indicators beyond this age group, but research and data on older populations are limited. This study provides data on some of the indicators that could contribute to non-adolescent monitoring. For example, for indicator 1 (proportion reporting having enough menstrual materials during their last menstrual period) in the menstrual materials domain, 16% reported not having access to enough menstrual materials. For indicator 10 (proportion with correct knowledge of the fertile period during the ovulatory cycle) in the knowledge domain, the knowledge quiz demonstrated that 62% of study participants either did not know or incorrectly specified how long a normal fertile window typically lasts, and 38% either did not know or incorrectly specify when unprotected sex would most likely result in pregnancy.

It is also important to note that we found differences in magnitude of associations for different measured outcomes between the matched and pre–post samples. There are multiple reasons why we may have seen these differences. Baseline levels for outcomes were different. For example, the baseline average quiz score in the pre–post sample was higher at 4.0, presenting differences in possible impact from app exposure. The profile of respondents in the pre–post sample also had underlying differences to the matched sample. While most sociodemographic characteristics were well balanced, we did see differences for age, language and region of residence. Furthermore, the length of follow-up was different between matched (7.4 months) and pre–post (4.5 months) samples, resulting in more exposure, on average, to the app in the matched sample.

There are opportunities for improvement in MHH knowledge, including in populations of highly educated adults.

Mobile apps may represent an important digital tool to reach populations at scale and support exposure to MHH information.

Improvements in MHH knowledge could in turn lead to better psychosocial, menstrual and quality of life outcomes.