Corni Fructus, a plant with both medicinal and edible properties, is renowned for its aromatic flavor and hepatoprotective and renoprotective effects, offering significant nutritional value and broad application potential. Wine-processed Corni Fructus (WCF) is a primary processed form of Corni Fructus, widely utilized in food supplements. Traditional Chinese medicine suggests that wine-processing enhances its hepatoprotective and renoprotective properties, yet the underlying mechanisms remain unclear.

In this study, a novel comprehensive strategy guided by variation in the chemical components and differences in biological activities was developed to explore the wine-processing mechanisms.

Firstly, the chemical constituents in vitro and in vivo were identified by liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Furthermore, chemometric analysis was applied to investigate the chemical characteristics in the samples with different processing methods. The possible molecular mechanism differences were unraveled by network pharmacology.

A total of 53 and 61 components were identified in vitro of crude Corni Fructus (CCF) and WCF, respectively. In addition, 39 and 43 components were detected in rats’ serum after CCF and WCF administered by gavage. Ten common targets were identified as key targets for the therapeutic effects of CCF and WCF on Chronic kidney diseases (CKD). The network analysis showed that 23 components in WCF may be the active substances that make it more effective than CCF for treating CKD.

This study provides a theoretical basis for the pharmacological substances of WCF and CCF and gives insights into comparing their pharmacological differences. It further investigates the mechanisms underlying different processing techniques of Corni Fructus, supporting further exploration of its potential in CKD management.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12906-025-05046-y.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12906-025-05046-y.

Corni Fructus (shanzhuyu in Chinese) is the pulp of the ripe fruit of ofCornus officinalisSieb.et Zucc. As first recorded in Shennong Bencao Jing (Shennong’s Classic of Materia Medica) in Han Dynasty, Corni Fructus has been used as both food and medicinal purposes with nutritional and functional benefits [1]. Corni Fructus Pharmacological studies have demonstrated that Corni Fructus have a wide range of bioactivities, such as anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, analgesic, anti-apoptotic, antioxidant, and immunomodulatory effects, as well as potential cancer prevention [2–4]. Corni Fructus provides a broad range of compounds including iridoid glycosides, alkaloids, flavonoids, polysaccharides, organic acids, and terpenoids [5–7]. Among these, iridoids have various beneficial effects of renal protection, antidiabetic activity, cardioprotection, antioxidation, neuroprotection, antitumor activity, anti-inflammation, and analgesic effects [8].

Chinese materia medica processing is a traditional pharmacy technique that has evolved over thousands of years under the principles of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Processing aims to increase effectiveness, decrease toxicity, and meet clinical medication needs [9,10]. Corni Fructus has been processed for a long time and processed in various recipients such as wine, vinegar and salt [11]. The most common processing method is wine-processing. Although both Crude Corni Fructus (CCF) and WCF were commonly used for kidney disease treatment, there are differences and trends in their usage. In the traditional Chinese medicine theory system, CCF has strong ability to retain yin with astringent and stop sweating, but WCF has stronger nourishing effect often used as is used as a tonic. In clinical practice, CCF was commonly employed for impotence with spermatorrhea, while WCF was used for nourishing the liver and kidneys, nourishing yin deficiency, and supplementing Yang [12–16]. As is known, a diversified chemical composition is the material basis for the efficacy of TCMs. Therefore, confirming the compositional changes of the drug and comparing the differences in efficacy before and after being processed could provide a basis for revealing the processing mechanism of TCM. The chemical composition changes in Corni Fructus before and after wined-processed remains unknown.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is the gradual decline in kidney function and structure [17]. As the proportion of elderly individuals, obese individuals, and diabetic patients increases, CKD has become a significant healthcare burden [18]. As the disease progresses to end-stage renal disease, the structure and function of the kidneys become irreversibly compromised. Patients ultimately have to undergo costly dialysis treatment or kidney transplantation, significantly impacting their quality of life [19]. Currently, glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive drugs are primarily used to slow down the progression of CKD. However, they come with serious adverse effects and are not suitable for all patients. Therefore, TCM is gaining increasing attention as an alternative treatment for chronic kidney disease due to its advantages such as low cost and low recurrence rate [20]. Our preliminary research has also indicated that wine-processed Corni Fructus was more effective for treating CKD rats compared to crude Corni Fructus [21,22], but the precise mechanisms involved still remain unclear.

Currently, research on the processing mechanisms of food and medicinal herbal decoctions still primarily focuses on investigating the chemical composition characteristics through targeted or untargeted metabolomics [23–25]. Despite these advances, most studies still focus solely on the in vitro changes of chemical constituents without investigating the relationships between chemical and pharmacological changes. However, the absorption of drugs by the body is a complex process that is influenced by various factors, including the molecular structure of the drug, its lipid-water partition coefficient, and the physiological state of the body [26]. Therefore, it is not comprehensive to explain the changes and trends of medicinal efficacy solely from the changes in the in vitro chemical constituents. Therefore, the underlying mechanisms of the processing would be unveiled if the chemical transformations induced by processing in vitro or in vivo were summarized. Modern pharmacological research suggests that drugs typically need to enter the systemic circulation to exert their therapeutic effects. The importance of conducting combined research on the changes in both in vivo and in vitro constituents and their correlation with biological activities is particularly emphasized in TCM research [27,28]. Serum pharmacochemistry mainly focuses on the pharmacological constituents of drugs after they enter the bloodstream [29]. It could enable the rapid detection of potential active ingredients in serum following oral treatment with various TCM [30]. Through the integrated study of changes in vivo and in vitro constituents and biological activities, we can have a more comprehensive and accurate understanding of the processing mechanisms of TCM.

Network pharmacology is an innovative approach in the field of TCM research for investigating the mechanisms of drug actions [31]. It employs high-throughput omics data processing, computational virtual calculations, and retrieval of network databases to study the interactions between drugs, constituents, targets, and diseases, with the aim of revealing the comprehensive relationships between multiple components, targets, and pathways of TCM [32]. It applies the principles of systems biology and pharmacology and provides a new perspective for studying the complex mechanisms of TCM [33]. Its research methodology has the characteristics of systemicness and comprehensiveness, and can be fully integrated with the TCM research system, showing unique advantages in the study of TCM [34–36]. However, due to the diverse chemical constituents and varying concentrations of each component in TCM, the traditional network pharmacology approach, which establishes a target library with all known chemical constituents of TCM to predict molecular mechanisms of herbal therapies, often suffers from significant prediction biases [37,38]. Therefore, the combination of serum pharmacology and network pharmacology can greatly reduce the interference of poorly-absorbed and low-concentration chemical constituents in TCM, leading to more accurate predictions of the pharmacological effects.

In this study, we developed plant chemistry, plant metabolomics, network pharmacologyand serum pharmacology to investigate wine-processed Corni Fructus how to enhance the nourishing effect on the liver and kidneys. The differential constituents changes of WCF and CCF in vitro and in vivo was examined in order to explore the pharmacological substance basis of WCF in enhancing its effects on liver and kidney nourishing. Additionally, adenine-induced rat models of chronic kidney diseases were utilized to evaluate the pharmacological effects of WCF and CCF. Finally, qRT-PCR was used to validate the predicted mechanisms by network pharmacology. This study provides a theoretical foundation for exploring the pharmacological substance basis of WCF and CCF and offers a theoretical basis for the interpretation of TCM processing mechanisms.

Authenticated samples of CCF were obtained from the Hebei Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital (Shijiazhuang, China). Botanical authentication was performed by Professor Yun Huang from the School of Pharmacy at Hebei Medical University, confirming the material as the dried ripe fruit pulp of Cornus officinalis Sieb. et Zucc. (Family: Cornaceae). Voucher specimens (accession number: Hebmu-2021060) have been deposited in the herbarium of Hebei Medical University’s School of Pharmacy for future reference.

Morroniside and loganin were purchased from China Institute for Food and Drug Control (Beijing, China). cornuside, 7-Ethoxymonoside, 7-Methoxymonoside, Sarracenin and 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural were obtained from Shanghai Dingrui Chemical Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). RNAkey Total RNA Extraction Reagent and was obtained from Sevenbio (Beijing, China).

The preparation of wine-processed Corni Fructus (WCF) followed our established protocol [39] with six independent batches of Crude Corni Fructus (CCF, CCF-2023-001 to CCF-2023-006). Briefly, CCF was processed with yellow wine (20% w/w), steamed for 8 h, and dried at 60 °C.

The samples were ground into a powder and sieved through a 20-mesh screen. The powder (20 g) of CFC or WFC was extracted with 240 mL of 60% methanol (W/V: 1/12) at 60 °C for 2 h under reflux in a constant temperature water bath. The extract was filtered, and the residue was extracted again using the same method. All the filtrates from the CFC or WFC samples were combined, and then concentrated using a rotary evaporator until no methanol odor was detected. The resulting concentrate was separately freeze-dried to obtain the dry powder of CFC or WFC.

The freeze-dried powder was reconstituted with 75% methanol at a ratio of 1:8 (W/V). After passing through a 0.22 μm microporous membrane filter, the solution was injected into LC-MS for plant chemical analysis. The remaining freeze-dried powder was reconstituted with purified water before conducting gavage administration.

Male Sprague-Dawley rats (150–160 g) aged 6 weeks were purchased from Beijing Huafu Kang Biotechnology Co (SCXK (Beijing) 2019-0008).

Animals were maintained in groups of three per cage under controlled environmental conditions (temperature: 22 ± 1 °C; relative humidity: 50 ± 10%) with a 12-hour light/dark cycle. Standard rodent chow and water were provided ad libitum throughout the study. All rats underwent at least one week of acclimatization prior to experimental procedures.

Twenty-four rats were randomly divided into the control group (CG), the CCF group (CCF), and WCF groups (WCF) of 6 rats each. The animals were fasted for 12 h and allowed free access to water before the experiment. The CCF and WCF groups were administered with CCF and WCF extracts (4.32 g/kg/day, 4 times the clinical equivalent dose) by gavage administration. The control group was given an equivalent amount of purified water. Blood samples were collected from the inner canthi of the rats at 0 h, 0.083 h, 0.17 h, 0.25 h, 0.5 h, 1 h, 1.5 h, 2 h, 4 h, 6 h, 8 h, 12 h, and 24 h, and placed in Coagulation-promoting tubes. The blood samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm/min, 4 °C for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected. The serum samples from the same rat at different time points were combined and stored at -80 °C.

Twenty-four male SD rats were divided into a control group (CG,n= 6) and a model group (MG,n= 18) for pharmacological validation. The MG received 2.5% adenine (dissolved in 0.9% saline) at a dosage of 200 mg/kg/day via oral gavage for four weeks, while the CG received the same volume of 0.9% saline. Four rats from the MG and four from the CG were randomly selected and anesthetized. The kidneys were immediately removed, washed with cold saline, and stored at -70 °C. Blood and renal samples were collected for biochemical (Scr, BUN, UA) and histological observations were examined to validate the model. The observed changes were consistent with established literature benchmarks, confirming the successful induction of the model [40,41]. After model construction, the model group was further divided into MG, WCF, and CCF groups (n= 6 each). Starting from the fifth week, the CCF and WCF groups were orally administered CCF or WCF extracts (1.08 g/kg/day; equivalent to the clinical dose of crude drugs) for four weeks. The CG and MG received an equal amount of distilled water.

Twenty-four hours after the final administration of WCF and CCF, all experimental animals were anesthetized via intraperitoneal injection of 20% uratan solution, followed by humane euthanasia through cervical dislocation. The rat kidneys were then harvested and stored at -80 °C. Kidney tissues are employed for histopathological examination and PCR experiments. Serum samples will be tested for BUN, UA, and Scr using an automated biochemistry instrument (Hitachi High-Tech Science Systems Inc., Tokyo, Japan), and the results will be interpreted according to clinical standards.

Serum samples were prepared using our optimized protein precipitation method [42]. Briefly, 50 µL serum was mixed with 120 µL methanol, centrifuged, and the supernatant was evaporated and reconstituted for UPLC-MS/MS analysis.

Chromatographic separation was achieved using an LC-30 A UHPLC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) coupled with Analyst®TF 1.7 control software (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Separation was performed on a Phenomenex Luna C18column (150 mm × 2.0 mm i.d., 3 μm particle size) maintained at 40 °C. The mobile phase consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (B) methanol, delivered at a constant flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The following gradient program was employed: 5–70% B (1–8 min), 70–95% B (8–18 min), 95 − 90% B (18–20 min), 90–95% B (20–25 min), and 95 − 5% B (25–26 min), followed by a 5-minute re-equilibration period. Samples (5 µL) were injected via an autosampler maintained at 4 °C to ensure sample stability.

Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 + mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, USA) equipped with both information-dependent acquisition (IDA) and dynamic background subtraction (DBS) functions. The instrument was operated in dual-polarity mode using an electrospray ionization (ESI) source maintained at 550 °C. Key mass spectrometric parameters were optimized as follows: ion spray voltage floating (ISVF) at ± 4500 V, declustering potential (DP) at ± 80 V, collision energy (CE) at ± 10 eV, and collision energy spread (CES) at 15 eV. The nebulizer gases (GS1 and GS2) were set at 55 psi each, with curtain gas maintained at 30 psi. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired over the m/z range of 50-1500 Da. To ensure measurement accuracy throughout the analytical run, the system was calibrated every 2 h using the integrated calibration delivery system (CDS) with APCI-TOF calibration solution (AB Sciex, USA).

For quality control, pooled QC samples were prepared by mixing equal 50 µL aliquots from each individual sample. The analytical sequence included: (1) six initial QC samples, (2) one QC sample inserted after every six experimental samples, and (3) two final QC samples. This QC scheme ensured continuous monitoring of analytical stability and reproducibility during the entire run.

Initially, a database of 109 iridoid glycosides fromCornus officinaliswas established by searching the China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) and PubMed databases. Relevant literature was reviewed to summarize the fragmentation patterns of iridoid glycosides. The PeakView (version 1.2; AB Sciex, USA) software was then utilized to identify key diagnostic fragment ions, relative abundances, and major fragment ions. The self-built database was inputted into PeakView, with compound elemental composition error set at 5 ppm and secondary fragment ion error set at 10 ppm. The identification of iridoid glycosides compounds in the samples was performed using Master View and IDA functions.

Raw data was imported into Progenesis QI (version 2.4; Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) software for a series of data preprocessing steps, including deconvolution and peak alignment. The processed dataset was subsequently analyzed using SIMCA software (version 14.1, Umetrics, Umeå, Sweden) for comprehensive multivariate statistical analysis. This included both unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) and supervised orthogonal projection to latent structure discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA). The OPLS-DA model was specifically employed to enhance inter-group discrimination, with variable importance in projection (VIP) scores calculated to evaluate the relative contribution of individual variables to group separation. For additional statistical validation, the data were further analyzed using MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca/), where independent t-tests and fold change (FC) analyses were conducted to identify statistically significant variations between experimental groups. Cyclic sesquiterpenoid compounds that simultaneously met the criteria of VIP > 1,P< 0.05, and FC > 1.2 or FC < 0.8 were considered significantly different between CCF and WCF. The heatmap of differentially expressed components was generated using the “Heatmap” logic package in the R programming language.

The chemical structures of differentially expressed sesquiterpenoids obtained from serum drug chemistry research were inputted into Swiss Target Prediction. The species selected was “Homo sapiens” to obtain the target proteins associated with these compounds. The obtained results were merged in Excel, removing duplicates, to identify potential target proteins of the absorbed components in the bloodstream.

To gather disease targets related to chronic kidney disease (CKD), the OMIM (confirmed/provisional entries only), TTD (score ≥ 0.7), GeneCards (relevance score ≥ 5), and DrugBank (known action targets) were searched using “chronic kidney disease” as the keyword. The results obtained were merged in Excel, removing duplicates, to ultimately obtain the targets associated with CKD.

A drug-component-disease network for the absorbed components and their associated targets of WCF (compound A) and CCF (compound B) was constructed using Cytoscape. This network was analyzed to interpret the pharmacological mechanisms of WCF and CCF comprehensively. Subsequently, a Venn diagram was employed to identify the overlapping targets between WCF or CCF and CKD (chronic kidney disease). These overlapping targets were then uploaded to the STRING database to obtain protein-protein interaction (PPI) data. It is important to note that the species selected for analysis was limited to “Homo sapiens,” and a confidence score threshold of > 0.7 was applied. The DAVID database was utilized to conduct enrichment analysis on the key targets obtained from the PPI network analysis between WCF or CCF and CKD. This enrichment analysis included both Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis. A screening threshold ofP< 0.05 was used.

RNA extraction and quantitative PCR analysis were performed as follows: Kidney tissue RNA was isolated using RNAkey Total RNA Extraction Reagent (Sevenbio, Beijing, China) and quantified using an ND-1000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Shanghai). First-strand cDNA was synthesized from 1 µg total RNA using SuperScript IV reverse transcriptase (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Quantitative real-time PCR was conducted on a CFX96 system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) using the BeyoFast probe one-step RT-PCR kit (Beyotime, D7277M) with SYBR Green detection (Toyobo). GAPDH served as the endogenous control for normalization of target gene expression. All primer sequences used in this study are provided in Table1.

Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software (version 22.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Statistically significant differences were determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Brown-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA tests when variances are unequal. If the data does not follow a normal distribution, use the Kruskal-Wallis test. Ap-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

In this study, it can be observed from the total ion chromatograms (FigureS1andS2) of WCF and CCF that the peak heights differ at the same retention time, indicating variations in the composition of iridoid glycosides constituents in the samples. Compound identification was conducted based on relative molecular mass, primary mass spectrometry quasi-molecular ion [M-H]−, and secondary mass spectrometry characteristic fragment ions, combined with retention time and parts per million (ppm) values, as well as the decomposition pathway of iridoid glycosides constituents. This study characterized a total of 65 iridoid glycosides compounds in WCF and CCF, with compound structures depicted in Fig.1. Fragment ion information of these compounds is presented in TableS1.

The basic nucleus of bicyclic ether terpenoid compounds is bicyclic ether alcohol, which has a cyclic ether and an alcohol hydroxyl group [43–45]. Based on the structure of the bicyclic ether triterpenoid nucleus, it can be classified into cyclopentene type, cyclopentane type, epoxide type, and ring-opening ether terpenoid. The main fragmentation pathways of bicyclic ether terpenoid compounds in mass spectrometry involve the removal of functional groups from the parent ring, such as H2O, CO2, CH2, CH3OH, CH3COOH, and glucose. When the substituent at the C-4 position is a carboxyl methyl or carboxyl group, the loss of one molecule of methyl-3-oxopropyl acetate and 3-oxopropionic acid occurs, with molecular masses of 102 Da and 88 Da, respectively. In addition, the fragmentation pathways of F1-, F2-, F3-, and sugar cleavage shown in Fig.2are also present in MS/MS. Fragment ions at m/z 183, 165, 119, 113, 101, 89, 71, 59, and others are characteristic ions resulting from the cleavage of dihydropyran ring and sugar. Furthermore, the parent ring of bicyclic ether triterpenoids contains a hemiacetal structure, which can easily form isomers with two aldehyde structures. The fragmentation pattern is illustrated in Fig.2.

Based on the identification of chemical constituents, we performed metabolomics analysis on the extracts of CCF and WCF. The chemical profile of each group was obtained in both positive and negative ion modes. Principal component analysis (PCA) was conducted to display the separation trend among groups in score plot. Orthogonal partial least-squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) was established to demonstrate the differences in chemical constituents between CCF and WCF from the metabolomics perspective. The results of 200 permutation tests indicate that Q2 intersects the negative half of the Y-axis, confirming the absence of overfitting in the OPLS-DA model. This finding demonstrates the model’s accuracy and reliability (Fig.3).

Chemical constituents that met the criteria of VIP > 1,P< 0.05, and FC > 1.2 or FC < 1.2 were recognized as differentiating components between CCF and WCF. After removing duplicated compounds obtained from positive and negative ion modes, 26 differential components were identified between WCF and CCF. Hierarchical clustering analysis was performed on these differential metabolites, and their contents were expressed as a heatmap of differential biomarkers (Fig.4A).

The study showed that CCF and WCF had different levels of certain components. Cornuside IV, 8-epigallic acid, cornifins A, hastatoside, and others were more abundant in CCF, while cornuside N, sweroside, cornuside III, cornusfural C, cornusphenoside B, cornifins C, and officinaloside A were found in higher levels in WCF.

Matrix subtraction in peakview with the CG group as a reference confirmed the absorption of prototype components from WCF and CCF into the bloodstream, supported by MS/MS fragmentation data. A total of 43 prototype chemical constituents were absorbed from WCF and 39 from CCF. The heatmap (Fig.4B) showed variations in absorption levels of prototype chemical constituents. A total of 32 components in WCF treated group had higher blood levels compared to CCF, while 12 had lower levels. The chemical composition information is provided in Table2. These results may explain why WCF is more effective than CCF in treating kidney diseases.

In the plant metabolomics study, four components including 2’-O-(p-coumaroyl) kingiside, 7 S-ethoxymonoside, 10-hydroxy cornelian and sweroside in WCF had higher levels than CCF in serum and in vitro samples. Nineteen components such as cornuside G, cornuside A and cornusglucoside H had higher levels in serum samples but lower levels in in vitro samples compared to CCF. Six components including 7R-ethoxymonoside, 7R-monoside, 7-dehydrologanin, 8R-hydroxy-10-hydrosweroside, 8-epigallic acid and swertiamarin showed lower levels in serum samples compared to CCF, but higher levels in in vitro samples. These suggested that the compounds with higher levels in serum samples may be the active substances responsible for the renal benefits of WCF over CCF.

The absorbed components of WCF and CCF were analyzed by network pharmacology to explore their underlying the anti-chronic kidney disease molecular mechanisms. A total of 502 molecular targets were extracted from Swiss Target Prediction database based on 38 components absorbed in blood of WCF and CCF. Target names were converted to official gene symbols in UniProt, resulting in a library of 502 target genes.

Meanwhile, a total of 1799 CKD targets were obtained from the OMIM, TTD, Gene Map, and DrugBank databases after selection and elimination of redundancies. The therapeutic targets of the 38 blood-absorbed components showed significant associations with disease-related targets (Fig.5A). Therefore, these target genes were considered predictive targets for WCF and CCF in the treatment of CKD. Chemical composition information was presented in Table3.

To explore the key targets of CCF and WCF in the treatment of chronic kidney disease, an analysis of the 185 intersecting targets was conducted using the STRING database to construct a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. After removing independent targets, the network contained 185 nodes and 6548 edges, with node color, size, and degree positively correlated (Fig.5B). Analysis showed that core drug treatment targets for the disease were chosen based on their high degree values. The top 10 targets, all with values over 190, were AKT1, TNF, VEGFA, EGFR, SRC, CASP3, IL1B, STAT3, FOS, and IL2. Based on the top 20 ranking core targets, we performed KEGG pathway enrichment analysis on these genes (Fig.5C). The results revealed that the therapeutic effects of CCF and WCF on CKD in rats were associated with signaling pathways such as Pathways in cancer, Proteoglycans in cancer, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, and MAPK signaling pathway. To explore the relationships between core targets, pathways, and components, a drug-ingredient-target-pathway network was constructed using Cytoscape (Fig.5D) to speculate on the therapeutic substances in CCF and WCF. It was found that 10 components could regulate TNF, while 34 components could regulate IL2. AKT1, VEGFA, STAT3, FOS, and IL1B were regulated by only one component each. A total of 31 components were found to regulate EGFR, 23 components could regulate SRC, and 28 components could regulate CASP3. These specific findings will be presented in Table4. The chemical components in Table4may be the therapeutic substances for treating chronic kidney disease by CCF and WCF, according to the drug-ingredient-target-pathway network.

The MAPK signaling pathway, the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, and the AGE-RAGE signaling pathway were regarded as classical routes in cellular signal transduction [46]. Extensive research has revealed that these signaling pathways play pivotal roles in the pathophysiology of CKD. The PI3K-Akt signaling pathway orchestrated podocyte apoptosis and exerted regulatory effects on cell proliferation, growth, and metabolism [47]. PI3K could interact with its downstream molecule Akt to induce inflammatory responses, thereby expediting renal fibrosis. The onset and progression of numerous glomerular diseases were intricately linked to the heightened expression of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway [48]. Consequently, the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway was frequently identified as a pivotal target for therapeutic interventions in both clinical and experimental research on. Activation of the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway has been demonstrated to suppress oxidative stress and inflammatory responses, ameliorating tubulointerstitial damage and glomerulosclerosis, as well as mitigating renal ischemia-reperfusion injury. This helped slow down the progression of CKD [49]. The MAPK signaling pathway extensively participates in processes such as inflammation, cell growth, and oxidative stress, influencing extracellular matrix formation and playing a crucial role in the processes leading to renal fibrosis and proteinuria generation [49,50]. Inhibiting the activity of the MAPK signaling pathway has been shown to upregulate podocin and nephrin proteins on the slit diaphragm of podocytes, thereby reducing podocyte injury [46]. While the Pathways in Cancer primarily relate to cancer, recent research suggested their potential involvement in key processes such as inflammation, fibrosis, and cell apoptosis in the pathophysiology of CKD [51]. This indicated that certain cancer-related signaling pathways may play a more significant role in CKD than previously thought, offering novel therapeutic targets. Literature review revealed an inseparable association between Pathways in Cancer, Proteoglycans in Cancer, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway, and chronic kidney diseases. These pathways were all implicated in renal tubular damage [48,51–53], kidney fibrosis [54–56], inflammation [57], and cell apoptosis [58,59].

The therapeutic effects of WCF and CCF on adenine-induced CKD in rats were evaluated. Initially, WCF showed strong therapeutic effects in rats with adenine-induced CKD, improving renal function parameters such as Scr and BUN levels, urine volume, and uric acid excretion rate (Table5). Additionally, pathological examination of rat kidney tissue revealed that WCF reduced glomerulosclerosis, interstitial fibrosis, and inflammation, protecting the kidneys from damage (Fig.6). However, CCF had limited therapeutic effects on renal function compared to WCF, with only minor improvements observed after treatment. Furthermore, the examination of renal tissue showed that CCF had a weaker effect on glomerulosclerosis and interstitial fibrosis, and did not effectively alleviate renal damage. These differences align with traditional Chinese medicine theory. Our research showed that WCF was more effective than CCF in treating adenine-induced CKD rats. This suggested that WCF had potential for clinical use, but further research was needed to confirm these results and understand how WCF worked.

The top 10 targets identified through network pharmacology analysis were validated by qRT-PCR (Fig.7).

Firstly, adenine reduced EGFR, SRC, and CASP3 expressions, but increases AKT1, TNF, VEGFA, IL1B, STAT3, FOS, and IL2 expression compared to control rats. These results support previous research and validate our initial predictions. Moreover, they suggested that the dysregulation of these targets is important in CKD progression. Additionally, Treatment with WCF and CCF can reverse aberrant target expression in CKD, indicating their potential as therapeutic targets for the disease.

By comparing the regulatory effects of WCF and CCF on targets, we found that WCF more effectively regulates 8 targets, while CCF is stronger on VEGFA and IL1B. This suggests that the 8 targets regulated by WCF may be responsible for its superiority over CCF.

This study proposed a comprehensive strategy based on plant chemistry, plant metabolomics, serum pharmacokinetics, and network pharmacology to reveal the substance basis and mechanisms of action of CCF and WCF in the treatment of CKD. Noticeable differences appeared in chemical composition and content between CCF and WCF the absorption and circulation of chemical components by oral administration of WCF and CCF. Furthermore, network pharmacology analysis demonstrated that WCF exhibited superior health-promoting effects compared to CCF in CKD treatment, attributable to their distinct bioactive compositions and target networks. Overall, this study provides theoretical evidence for the substance basis of WCF and CCF in the treatment of CKD, as well as new insights into the pharmacological differences between them. It lays the foundation for further research on the mechanisms of Corni Fructus treatment under different processing techniques.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Thanks to the Department of Pharmaceutical Analysis, School of Pharmacy, Hebei Medical University for the instrument support. Thanks to the Key Laboratory of Clinical Research on Respiratory and Digestive Diseases, Baoding Institute of Pediatrics for the instrument support.