Drug-resistant bacterial infections impose a major threat
to human
health, as current antibiotic treatments are becoming increasingly
ineffective. Priority has been given to the development of alternative
medications to curb the development of resistance or agents that can
work on the resistance strains. Among various promising approaches,
1,2,3-triazole-based molecular hybrids have emerged as excellent candidates
owing to their ease of synthesis, high structural diversity, functional
tunability, and biocompatibility. The rapid advancement of biological
understanding of 1,2,3-triazole has been greatly aided by the discovery
of the Click reaction. Drugs with a single molecular target often
fail to kill the bacteria effectively, and even if they do, the bacteria
eventually become resistant by virtue of mutations or other mechanisms.
In this context, the 1,2,3-triazole group has been explored to design
novel molecular hybrids to combat antimicrobial resistance in an effective
manner. Different types of 1,2,3-triazole-based hybrids have been
developed that have shown inhibitory effects on critical bacterial
enzymes, the ability to produce intracellular reactive oxygen species,
and the ability to disrupt the cell membrane. Herein, we discuss the
strategic design principles of triazole-based hybrids, their antibacterial
potential, especially focusing on the drug resistance issue, and future
perspectives to critically assess their potential for multitargeting
antibacterial agents. The presented information can lead to the development
of novel multifaceted antibacterial agents in the future by means
of their unique chemical features to address the growing challenge
of drug resistance.

The rapid emergence of
antimicrobial resistance (AMR) over the
past few decades has raised questions regarding the efficacy of existing
medications. It is estimated that bacterial AMR resulted in 4.95 million
deaths across the globe in 2019. The number
is expected to rise to 10 million within the next 25 years if no effective
measures are implemented. In the coming years, the death rate due
to AMR could match that of the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic, which
has also been associated with a large number of secondary bacterial
infections. There has been a massive use
of antibiotics to treat these bacterial infections or as a precaution
during the pandemic period, which may have exacerbated the AMR crisis.
Unfortunately, current drug development cannot match the pace of AMR
in the very near future. At present, only
1% of the antimicrobial drugs in development are entering clinical
trials, with relatively few targeting resistant bacteria. Considering
the fact that most of the antibiotics approved in the last 40 years
are derived from the already existing chemical structures drives us
to explore novel strategies by chemical modifications and derivatization.

Bacteria develop various mechanisms of
resistance to antibiotics,
of which some are intrinsic, where they use existing genes to survive.
The other type is called “acquired”, where they gain
new genetic material that provides new capacities to evade the action
of antibiotics. In 2017, the World Health
Organization (WHO) identified antibiotic resistant pathogens as a
significant global health threat, categorizing them into three priority
groups: medium, high, and critical. Among these, ESKAPE pathogens
fall into the “critical group”, consisting ofEnterococcus faecium(E. faecium),Staphylococcus aureus(S. aureus),Klebsiella pneumoniae(K. pneumoniae),Acinetobacter baumannii(A. baumannii),Pseudomonas aeruginosa(P. aeruginosa),
andEnterobacterspecies.,These
microbes are widely recognized for their ability to evade traditional
antibiotics using various advanced mechanisms such as inactivation of antibiotics by either irreversible modification
or degradation by enzymes (β-lactamases, chloramphenicol acetyltransferases, and aminoglycoside modifying enzymes), the use of efflux pumps to expel drugs from the bacterial
cell, alterations in cell membrane permeability to prevent antibiotic
uptake, and structural modifications of antibiotic target sites, making
it difficult for drugs to bind effectively. For example,Staphylococcus aureus(S.
aureus), a Gram-positive bacterium, employs the mecA gene to impart methicillin resistance through the
alteration of penicillin-binding proteins, whereasK. pneumoniae, a Gram-negative bacterium, acquires carbapenem resistance via carbapenemases
and extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs).P. aeruginosacan resist β-lactams
via β-lactamase and metallo β-lactamase. In this manner, bacteria developed resistance to several
antibiotics such as aminoglycosides (gentamicin,
streptomycin, kanamycin), β-lactams (penicillins, cephalosporins, cephamycins, carbapenems, monobactams),
glycopeptides (vancomycin), macrolides (azithromycin, erythromycin), quinolones and
fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin). Additionally,
to prevent the entry of foreign molecules in to the cell an extensive
outer lipid layer and a polysaccharide capsule coat were produced
by certain bacteria such as Gram-positive mycobacteria. Recently, porin structure modification has also
been observed as an important contributor to resistance development.
For example, modification of the nonselective porin OmpK36 through
a selected insertion of Gly115-Asp116 into loop 3 of the porin has
caused significant constriction and increased tolerance to the antibiotic
carbapenems inKlebsiella pneumoniae. Similarly, multiple mutations in OmpC affect
the permeability of antibiotics such as cefotaxime, gentamicin or
imipenem in multidrug resistantE. coli. These resistance mechanisms hamper the treatment
of diseases, such as pneumonia and bloodstream infections, highlighting
the need for novel therapeutic approaches.

Heterocyclic scaffolds
are omnipresent as the common cores in a
wide range of active pharmaceuticals and thus naturally have caught
the significant attention of medicinal chemists over the decades.
Among various heterocyclic scaffolds, nitrogen-containing ones hold
particular importance due to their widespread occurrence in nature.
These structures serve as integral subunits in various natural products,
including vitamins, hormones, antibiotics, etc. Analysis of the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) databases has shown that approximately
60% of unique small-molecule drugs contain nitrogen-based heterocycles,
underscoring their structural importance in drug design and discovery. Of these, triazoles featuring a five-membered
ring of two carbon atoms and three nitrogen atoms have been recognized
as an important scaffold due to their unique physicochemical properties.,The name triazole was first coined by J. A. Bladin in 1885. Since then, its chemistry and biology have undergone
tremendous advancement, facilitated by efficient synthesis methods
and applications. Triazoles act as versatile alternatives to a range
of aromatic rings and functional groups. These properties render it
an attractive heterocycle for drug design, offering a less lipophilic
alternative to phenyl rings and serving as a substitute for other
heterocycles such as homologous azines. Triazole demonstrates unique
physicochemical properties, characterized by its weak basicity, diverse
dipole moments, and dual capabilities as both a hydrogen bond donor
and acceptor, which are critical in mediating drug-target interactions.
The intrinsic polarity of triazole contributes to a reduced logP value,
indicating potential enhancements in water solubility. The presence of nitrogen atoms with lone pairs
that are capable of metal coordination also makes triazole a valuable
scaffold for designing inhibitors. The ease of electrophilic substitutions
on the triazole ring leads to the development of novel scaffolds with
improved therapeutic effects.

1,2,3-Triazoles are five membered
heterocyclic compounds with a
6π electron ring system composed of two carbon and three nitrogen
atoms. Several methods for the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles have been
reported in the literature. However, Click chemistry made it considerably
easier to synthesize 1,2,3-triazoles allowing researchers to create
hybrids of choice with the desired functionalities. Sharpless established
the notion of Click chemistry in 2001 to alleviate the problems and
obstacles associated with conventional synthetic techniques. The concept of Click chemistry focuses on efficiency
and selectivity in terms of both regio and stereoselectivity. The Click technique paves the way to the discovery
of lead compounds and allows for fast exploration of chemical space.
It improves optimization through an efficient structure–activity
relationship (SAR) by providing various scaffolds. 1,2,3-Triazoles can bind with biomolecular targets like
enzymes, receptors, and proteins through various noncovalent interactions
such as hydrogen bonding, van der Waals interactions, etc. Due to its similar dipole moments, size, and
hydrogen-bond acceptor properties, the 1,2,3-triazole structure has
gained attention in drug discovery as a bioisostere for amides.,These physiochemical properties of the 1,2,3-triazole ring attracted
researchers for the development of novel scaffolds with various therapeutic
applications such as antibacterial,,anticancer and fungicidal activity. Several 1,2,3-triazole-containing drugs including seviteronel,
cefatrizine, tazobactam, rufinamide, daridorexant, mubritinib, and
suvorexant (Figure) have already been approved by the FDA for clinical use in anticancer,
antibacterial, and antiepileptic therapies. These approvals highlight
the growing clinical significance of 1,2,3-triazoles in modern medicine.

Chemical structures of some of the FDA approved 1,2,3-triazole-containing
marketed drugs.

Molecular hybrids generated by a combination of
two or more active
pharmacophores have emerged as a promising alternative to traditional
therapeutics, offering increased molecular diversity through the combination
of multiple subunits. The concept of designing molecular hybrids for
therapeutic purpose was first introduced by Fink et al. in 1996 where
they tried to design a single molecular framework to inhibit both
acetylcholine esterase and monoamine oxidase for treating Alzheimer’s
disease. Since then, there has been a
sharp upsurge in research output from both academia and industries
on various molecular hybrids to target complex multifaceted diseases
such as cancer, diabetes, Alzheimer’s, microbial infections,,etc. Among various
molecular hybrids designed so far, 1,2,3-triazole-based ones have
attracted significant attention due to their facile synthesis which
involves readily available or custom-synthesized alkyne and azide
components. Additionally, these compounds
demonstrate high biocompatibility and show considerable potential
in combating antibiotic-resistant bacteria. The antibacterial activity of 1,2,3-triazoles hybrids highly depends
on their molecular composition. The presence of lone pairs on the
nitrogen atom of 1,2,3-triazoles confers a coordination effect that is most likely observed with certain metalloproteins
as well as free metal ions present in bacteria, resulting in the inhibition
of metalloenzyme activities and thus reduces their biological functions,
depriving the availability of essential nutrients and inhibiting
their growth. The 1,2,3-triazole-based
hybrids have been reported to inhibit several critical bacterial enzymes
such as DNA gyrase, dihydrofolate reductase, sterol 14-α-demethylase causing bacterial cell death. It is observed that 1,2,3-triazole-based
hybrid molecules can target both Gram-positive and Gram-negative strains
by generating reactive oxygen species (ROS), thus affecting the metabolic
activity and disrupting membrane integrity. It also interacts with
the DNA polymerase enzyme responsible for the replication of chromosomal
DNA, affecting the survival of bacterial cells by disrupting their
cell division. Moreover, the molecular
hybridization of 1,2,3-triazole with existing antibiotics resulted
in more potent antibacterial drugs that can operate as a framework
to improve antibacterial properties more effectively than combination
treatment. The incorporation of a 1,2,3-triazole ring improves the
overall stability of the molecule and also makes it less susceptible
to bacterial resistance due to the multimodal action. Furthermore,
triazole hybrids have been shown to inhibit biofilm formation and
make the bacteria more susceptible to antibiotics. Thus, 1,2,3-triazole can be an excellent candidate for
developing antibacterial agents with multiple targets. In this Perspective,
we aim to analyze the structural and functional aspects of recently
reported 1,2,3-triazole hybrid molecules and their primary modes of
action. Additionally, we examine the role of 1,2,3-triazole as a pharmacophoric
unit in enhancing antibacterial activity and explore how 1,2,3-triazole
structures may contribute to combating the development of antimicrobial
resistance. Finally, we discuss the limitations and challenges associated
with 1,2,3-triazole-containing hybrid compounds with the goal of providing
a clear understanding of their potential and current constraints.
The multifaceted processes by which these chemicals exert their effects,
together with their structural diversity, open up new possibilities
for the generation of successful treatments.

1,2,3-Triazoles serve as versatile linkers
that connect two bioactive
moieties as well as function as a robust pharmacophore capable of
binding to various biological targets. This feature has been frequently used in medicinal chemistry in
the development of hit compounds, particularly for bidentate inhibitors.
In hybrid drug design, the triazole ring is often used to form homodimers
or heterodimers, which are made up of two identical or distinct pharmacophores,
respectively. In heterodimers, it connects
two pharmacophoric units that may simultaneously target multiple sites
or pathways. In the case of bidentate inhibitors, the triazole linker
is crucial to enable the molecule to interact with two distinct binding
sites on a target protein.,This dual engagement
often results in a stronger binding affinity and improved selectivity,
making these inhibitors more effective in modulating the activity
of their target proteins.

In a five-membered ring structure,
triazoles can exist in two isomeric
forms, 1,2,3- and 1,2,4-triazoles, based on the arrangement of nitrogen
atoms in the ring, and there are two tautomeric forms for each of
them (Figurea). 
For 1,2,3-triazoles, it can be 1H-1,2,3-triazole and 2H-1,2,3-triazole
whereas the 4H-1,2,3-triazole is generally less stable due to its
nonaromatic character. For 1,2,4-triazoles, the tautomeric forms can
be 1H-1,2,4-triazole and 4H-1,2,4-triazole. The structural aspects
of 1,2,3-triazoles enable them to mimic various functional groups,
particularly amide bonds, making 1,2,3-triazoles widely used as bioisosteres
in drug design to create novel active compounds. Amide bonds are susceptible
to hydrolysis in the presence of endogenous peptidases/proteases,
and thus have a poor pharmacokinetic profile.,Therefore, in drug designing, amides have often been replaced by
triazoles, which offer better metabolic stability. Despite variation
in the dipole moment and substituent spacing, their structural characteristics
enable efficient mimicry and overlap with amide-binding groups. Amides
and triazoles are similar in several key aspects including substituent
distances (3.8–3.9 Å for amides and 5.0–5.1 Å
for 1,2,3-triazoles), dipole moments (approximately 4 D for amides
and 5 D for 1,2,3-triazoles), and hydrogen bond donor/acceptor capacities
(Figureb). Substituted 1,2,3-triazoles can be of two types,
1,4-disubstituted and 1,5-disubstituted. 1,4-Disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles
are excellentZ-trans-amide isosteres: The C-4 atom
serves as an electrophilic site; the C–H bond functions as
a hydrogen bond donor, and the lone pair of electrons onN-2andN-3acts as a hydrogen bond acceptor. On the
other hand, 1,5-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles effectively mimicE-cis-amides through the optimal spatial overlap of their
substituents. However, there are some polarity differences due to
the difference between the carbonyl group of amides and electronegative
nitrogen atoms of the triazole ring. Trans amides are naturally occurring,
whereas cis-amides are sterically unfavorable due to substituent repulsion.
This steric barrier is responsible for the higher utilization of 1,4-disubstituted
triazoles over their 1,5-disubstituted counterparts, despite the emergence
of ruthenium-based catalysts to synthesize the 1,5-regioisomer. This isosteric replacement is not only limited
to amides but also to other groups such as phenyl, trans olefins as well as for carboxylic acids and esters upon
proper substitutions.

(a) Isomeric forms of the triazole nucleus and their tautomerization,
(b) 1,2,3-triazoles as nonclassical bioisosteres for amides, and (c)
synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole before and after the advent of Click chemistry.

Since the advent of the Click chemistry concept in 2001 by
Sharpless,
Kolb and Finn, it stands out as the most efficient, simple and eco-friendly
method for the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles. This approach is based on the copper­(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne
cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction that offers a highly selective and
straightforward route for the synthesis of 1,4 disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole
compared to earlier efforts (Figurec). By combining an azide and an alkyne under mild
conditions with a copper­(I) catalyst, Click chemistry facilitates
the formation of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles with high yield
and purity that has been widely explored for making various library
of molecules for drug discovery. Subsequently, Fokin and co-workers
developed a ruthenium catalyzed azide alkyne Click reaction (RuAAC)
using Cp*RuCl­(PPh3)2complex for the selective
synthesis of 1,5 disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles. In CuAAC, two copper­(I) atoms facilitate the formation
of 1,4-substituted 1,2,3-triazoles, where the terminal nitrogen of
the azide attacking the substituted carbon of the sigma-bonded alkyne. In RuAAC, a single metal complex is involved,
where the first carbon nitrogen bond is formed when the terminal nitrogen
attacks the more electronegative and sterically demanding carbon of
the pi-coordinated alkyne, selectively producing the 1,5-substituted
isomer. Apart from metal catalyzed Click
reaction, a metal free strategy has also been reported in 2016 for
the synthesis of 1,5-disubstituted triazole where primary amines,
enolizable ketones, and 4-nitrophenyl azide are heated together in
the presence of acetic acid as a catalyst. Organocatalytic 3 + 2 cycloaddition
has also been reported for the synthesis of 1,5 disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles
using organic catalysts such as 1,8-diazabicyclo [5.4.0] undec-7-ene
(DBU). Other methods used for the synthesis
of 1,2,3-triazoles include ionic liquids as catalysts, microwave and ultrasound-assisted
synthesis, etc.

Bacteria continue to develop resistance
to antibiotics available
on the market, which is a serious public
health problem and this demands new antibiotics that would be effective
against resistant strains, yet avoid the development of resistance.
Designing new alternative medicines requires an innovative and modular
approach to address the issue of resistance development. Currently,
most existing antibiotics follow a one-drug, one-target model, making
them highly susceptible to target modifications, such as mutations.
A multitargeting technique would be advantageous, because if one encounters
resistance, the other will still work. In this context, we observe
that 1,2,3-triazole is a simple and efficient molecule that can be
used to combine several distinct mechanisms of action in a single
molecule. 1,2,3-triazole hybrids are effective against a broad spectrum
of microorganisms, including drug-resistant pathogens. They function
through various modes of action (Table), which are covered in detail in this perspective.
These mechanisms include the inhibition of important bacterial enzymes,
the production of intracellular ROS, and the rupture of the phospholipid
bilayer of the bacterial cell. The strategic combination of multiple
modes of action in a single triazole-based compound could result in
effective antibacterial agents. In the following section, we present
an in-depth overview of various triazole-based hybrids that have demonstrated
notable antibacterial activity with a particular focus on their effectiveness
against resistant strains and the primary mode of action through which
they exert their action.

One of the primary mechanisms of action
attributed to 1,2,3-triazole hybrids is the inhibition of the critical
enzymes required for bacterial survival. Here, we discuss some of
those enzymes that are targeted by 1,2,3-triazole containing hybrids
and validated by experimental analysis or computational studies. Enzymes
or proteins are essential for both the survival and proliferation
of bacteria and the generation of antibiotic resistance. Targeting
these enzymes can disrupt essential metabolic processes, leading to
inhibition of bacterial growth. The enzyme DNA gyrase is one such
target that plays a key role in bacterial cells by introducing negative
supercoils to DNA, which is essential for DNA replication, transcription,
etc. It is an important and clinically
validated target of many antibiotics due to its critical function.
A library of novel dehydroacetic acid (DHA) chalcone-1,2,3-triazole
hybrids were designed and synthesized by Lal and co-workers in 2018,
as potent antibacterial agents against a variety of pathogenic bacteria
such asStaphylococcus epidermidis (S. epidermidis), Bacillus
subtilis (B. subtilis), Escherichia coli (E. coli) and P. aeruginosa.Chalcone represents an important class
of natural product, flavonoids, that has large number of replaceable
hydrogens that attracted synthetic chemists to introduce structural
diversity. Structurally, chalcones are α,β-unsaturated
aromatic ketones and display a wide range of pharmaceutical and biological
activities including anticancer, antidiabetic, anti-inflammatory,
and antibacterial. The DHA-chalcone alkyne and substituted benzyl
azide derivatives were Clicked to obtain a library of compounds. They
demonstrated antibacterial activity comparable to standard antibiotic
ciprofloxacin, which exhibited a minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC) of 0.0015 μg/mL. In the synthesized library, compound1(Figure) was found to be the most effective againstE. coliandB. subtiliswith an MIC value of 0.0016 μg/mL.
Molecular docking analysis further indicated that compound1effectively binds to the active sites of DNA gyrase through hydrogen
bonding, hydrophobic interaction, and electrostatic interactions.
The SAR studies revealed that the attachment of substituted benzyl
groups through the triazole ring increased antibacterial efficacy,
highlighting the importance of the 1,2,3-triazole unit. Recently,
a novel series of 1,2,3-triazole hybrids was designed and synthesized
by Mokariya et al. using an indole scaffold which exhibited excellent
antibacterial activity against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacterial strains. They synthesized different derivatives by changing
the substituents such as Cl, F, NO2, Me, COOH, etc. on
the benzene ring attached to the 1,2,3-triazole group. The most potent
compound in their library, compound2(Figure) with a meta-chloro substitution
on benzene ring attached to the triazole exhibited an MIC of 25 μg/mL
againstE. coli. Compound2was also
found to interact with the active site of DNA gyrase in the molecular
docking study. Similarly, Suryapeta et
al. synthesized 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole derivatives with
an indole-triazole-peptide conjugate. In their library, compound3(Figure) exhibited the most potent activity against four different bacterial
strains tested, including drug-resistantS. aureus(MIC = 200 μg/mL) andK. pneumonia(MIC =
100 μg/mL). They observed that the activity changes according
to the nature and position of the R group on the benzene ring linked
to the 1,2,3-triazole core. When docked with DNA gyrase, compound3exhibited strong interactions with the target protein. In another study by Yadav and co-workers, the
design and synthesis of indole-chalcone linked 1,2,3-triazole hybrids
was demonstrated that exhibited strong antibacterial properties against
Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria, and fungal strains.
From the SAR analysis, they identified the most potent compound, compound4(Figure), with an MIC of 6.2 μg/mL againstB. subtilisandE. coli. The bromine substitution on the benzene
ring imparted better activity as compared to the chlorine substituent.In-silicostudies revealed that the reported compounds interact
with the bacterial DNA gyrase enzyme through hydrophobic interactions,
leading to antibacterial activity. Furthermore,in-silicostudies with sterol 14α-demethylase (CYP51), a cytochrome
P450 enzyme, which is an important enzyme in sterol biosynthesis and
a primary drug target for antifungal azoles, showed that the triazole-containing
compound exhibited π–π stacked interactions and
other hydrophobic interactions, resulting in overall inhibition of
the enzyme’s functioning and potential antimicrobial effects.

Chemical structures of potent 1,2,3-triazole hybrids that
have
been reported to inhibit critical bacterial enzymes with their respective
MICs against the tested bacterial strains.

In another report, Patel et al. synthesized a library
of ciprofloxacin-conjugated
1,2,3-triazoles, where the C-3 carboxylic group of ciprofloxacin was
linked to various substituted 1,2,3-triazole rings and other variations
were further introduced in the piperazine moiety. The antibacterial efficacy of the synthesized compounds
was evaluated against various bacterial strains. Most of the reported
compounds demonstrated strong antibacterial activity, particularly
against strains such asE. coli,S. aureus, and clinical isolates ofA. baumannii. MIC data
indicated that the nature, type, and position of the substituents
on the benzene ring significantly influenced the antibacterial efficacy.
The SAR studies showed that compounds with acetyl and benzoyl groups
on the piperazine moiety exhibited enhanced activity, especially againstS. aureus,E. coli, andA. baumannii. However, compound5(Figure) with an unsubstituted piperazine moiety
showed excellent antibacterial activity againstS. aureuswith MIC of 0.195 μg/mL, which is 32 times more effective
than the standard drug ciprofloxacin, having MIC of 6.25 μg/mL.In-silicostudies such as molecular docking and molecular
dynamics simulations revealed a strong interaction of the active compounds
with the DNA gyrase enzyme. Further, the same has been experimentally
validated via anin vitroDNA gyrase inhibition assay.
This assay suggested that compound6(MIC 0.391 μg/mL
againstS. aureus) (Figure) having a bromine substituent on the benzene
ring exhibited the highest inhibition of the DNA gyrase enzyme, and
the inhibition was better than the unmodified ciprofloxacin used as
a positive control.

Further, a series of 2-quinolone-1,2,3-triazole-α-amino
phosphonates
was synthesized by Gadali et al. leveraging the structural similarity
of α-amino phosphonates to α-amino acids, peptides, and
natural phosphates. The study detailed
the synthesis of novel compounds through a molecular hybridization
approach, combining α-aminophosphonate, 1,2,3-triazole, and
4-methyl-2-quinolone moieties in a single scaffold. Four bacterial
strains,E. coli,P. aeruginosa,Enterococcus faecalis(E. faecalis), andS. aureuswere used to evaluate the antibacterial activity
of the synthesized compounds. The chloro-substituted hybrid, compound7(Figure) showed an MIC of 0.018 μg/mL which is 8.7-fold and 10-fold
better than the standard antibiotics, ampicillin and rifampicin, respectively
againstE. faecalis. Derivatives that had 2-bromo
and 4-iodo phenyl substitutions on the benzene ring showed MIC values
of 0.036 μg/mL againstE. faecalis.Molecular
docking analysis of compound7with bacterial DNA gyrase
demonstrated strong interactions such as hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic
contacts, which contributed to the inhibition of DNA gyrase activity.

Methicillin resistantStaphylococcus aureus(MRSA)
is one of the most dangerous superbugs that cause deleterious effects
such as sepsis and endocarditis in humans. Recently, Tang et al. synthesized triazolyl pterostilbene derivatives
and tested against MRSA. A Click reaction
was performed with propargylated sterostilbenes and selected azides
in the presence of sodium ascorbate and copper sulfate to yield a
library of hybrids. Among them, significantly low MIC values (1.2–2.4
μg/mL) were exhibited by Compound8(Figure) as compared to pterostilbene
(41–161 μg/mL) indicating a great enhancement in anti-MRSA
activity. The SAR studies showed that the presence of a carboxylic
acid functionality and its spacing from triazole played a key role
in the antibacterial activity of the compounds. The compound showed
antibacterial properties by inhibiting the replication of bacterial
DNA. The mechanism of action was analyzed via experimental as well
as molecular docking analysis; the DNA replication test showed the
ability of the compounds to inhibit DNA polymerase, and the reduction
of PCR products in a dose-dependent manner confirmed the target of
the compounds as DNA polymerase. Thein-silicostudies
also indicated that the triazole group and the oxygen that connect
to the pterostilbene scaffold formed hydrogen bonds with Lys 450 and
Arg 435, respectively. These findings support the experimental validation
and suggest a potential interaction between the triazole group and
DNA polymerase enzyme, which plays a crucial role in chromosomal
DNA replication.

Aarjane et al. have designed and synthesized
novel 1,2,3-triazoles
from acridone, another nitrogen containing heterocycle with a wide
pharmacological application from antimicrobial to anticancer.,The synthesis was started with the alkyne functionalization of acridone
using propargyl bromide on the acridone skeleton which were presynthesized
using an Ullman condensation reaction 2-bromobenzoic acid and aniline
derivatives. The final compound was synthesized by using a Click reaction
with aromatic azide derivatives. The antibacterial activity of the
synthesized 1,2,3-triazole compounds were evaluated againstS. aureusandPseudomonas putida (P. putida),K. pneumoniae, andE. coli. It
was found that,S. aureuswas most sensitive to the
synthesized compounds. The SAR studies showed that compounds which
feature anO-methylphenyl group on the acridone-1,2,3-triazole
skeleton, demonstrated the highest antibacterial activity againstS. aureuswhereas carboxylic acid functionalization decreased
the activity. Compound9(Figure) exhibited the most potent activity with
an MIC of 10 μg/mL againstS. aureus(Table). The mechanism of
action of these compounds was revealed to be through inhibition of
the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) enzyme, which plays an important
role in thymidylate biosynthesis and cell proliferation. Molecular
docking studies revealed effective binding ofO-methylated
derivatives into the active site of DHFR.

In 2022, Malah et
al. synthesized a library of ten isatin-1,2,3-triazole
hybrids through a Cu­(I)-catalyzed cycloaddition of N-propargylated
isatin with various azide derivatives. The N-propargylated isatins were prepared by reacting 1H-indole-2,3-dione
with propargyl bromide in an alkaline DMF solution. The antimicrobial
activity of the final compounds was evaluated against different pathogenic
microorganisms, includingE. coli, S. aureus, C. albicans, andA. niger, and it was observed that the activity
was highly dependent on the substituents on theN-phenyl group. The compounds showed antibacterial effects through
different mechanisms such as reduction of ATP production in bacterial
cells, inhibition of DHFR, which is an essential cytoplasmic protease
with NADPH as a cofactor involved in the reduction of dihydrofolate
to tetrahydrofolate thereby playing a crucial role in DNA synthesis,
DNA translation, RNA transcription, protein replication, and controlling
cell proliferation. Compound10(Figure) exhibited the most potent activity in the
library with zone of inhibition (ZOI) (disk diameter in mm) inE. coli, S. aureus, C. albicans, A. nigeras 19 ± 0.08,
16 ± 0.28, 14 ± 0.09, and 12 ± 0.11 respectively. Polar
substituents enhanced the activity, whereas nonpolar groups reduced
the efficacy. The inhibition of DHFR was found to be the key mechanism
of action, using molecular docking studies. Similarly, in 2020, Wallace
et al. demonstrated the antimetabolite action of 1,2,3-triazole-thioacetamide
hybrids. Their lead compound11exhibited a very low MIC of 1.6 μg/mL againstE. coli, and the mechanism was found to be inhibition of the cysteine synthase
A (CysK). CysK present in bacteria plays an important role in several
fundamental pathways such as cysteine biosynthesis, sulfur assimilation,
and homocysteine biosynthesis. Inhibition of these critical pathways
disrupts sulfur metabolism and redox homeostasis in bacteria, resulting
in elevated levels of intracellular oxidative stress and affect their
resistance development against antibiotics.

Reddyrajula et al. synthesized 36 novel phenothiazine incorporated
1,2,3-triazole hybrids and evaluated their activity againstM. tuberculosis. Compared to the tuberculosis standard drug,
pyrazinamide, more than half of the synthesized compounds exhibited
superior antibacterial activity. Interestingly, these compounds were
inactive against other bacteria such asS. aureus, P. aeruginosa,andE. coli,indicating their specificity towardM. tuberculosis.Compound12(Figure) exhibited the lowest MIC
of 1.6 μg/mL againstM. tuberculosis. To get
an insight into its mechanism of action, they demonstrated molecular
docking studies with two target enzymes, namely, enoyl reductase (Inh
A) and CYP121. A strong enzyme-ligand binding affinity was observed
as a result of hydrogen bonding and pi-pi stacking interactions.

In 2019, Lipeeva et al. reported the antibacterial
efficacy of
1,2,3-triazole-coumarin hybrids made from plant-derived coumarin.
These hybrids exhibited greater potency againstS. aureuscompared to standard antibiotics, ceftriaxonum and streptomycin. In particular, hybrid13(Figure) (MIC: 0.65 and
3.75 μg/mL) showed substantial activity againstS. aureusC-18 andS. aureus“Viotko” strains,
indicating its potency in treatingS. aureusinfections.
The SAR analysis showed that carboxylic acid at the para-position
of the phenyl ring was essential for excellent activity against S.aureus. Molecular docking studies further indicated a strong
interaction of compound13with UDP-N-acetylenolpyruvylglucosamine
reductase (MurB) protein, suggesting a potential enzyme inhibition
leading to the observed antibacterial activity. MurB is an essential
enzyme present in bacteria that plays a major role in the synthesis
of cell wall precursor (uridine diphosphate N-acetyl muramic acid
(UNAM)). Thus, targeting this enzyme results in disruption of cell
wall biosynthesis leading to inhibition of bacterial growth. Adding
a furocoumarin moiety in the hybrids significantly improved their
efficacy againstE. coliandB. subtilis, as observed in the coumarin-1,2,3-triazole-furocoumarin hybrid14(Figure). Compound14exhibited
MICs of 0.15 μg/mL and 0.02 μg/mL, respectively, againstE. coliandB. subtiliswhich are significantly
improved as compared to the standard antibiotic streptomycin with
MICs of 1 μg/mL and 2 μg/mL againstE. coliandB. subtilis, respectively. Further studies
revealed that the linker between the 1,2,3-triazole and coumarin moieties,
as well as its position on the coumarin ring, had a significant impact
on the activity.

β-Lactam
antibiotics are a large class of antibiotics that
includes penicillins, cephalosporins, nocardicins, carbapenems and
monobactams. The azetidine-2-one ring
system is the key to biological activities in β-lactam antibiotics.
The primary mode of action of β-lactams to kill bacteria is
inhibition of transpeptidases, which form peptidoglycan by cross-linking
the peptides. The hybridization of 1,2,3-triazole
with the β-lactam motif has gained significant interest among
medicinal chemists, as it may have the potential to overcome drug
resistance.,For example, in 2020, Kaur et
al. reported triazole β-lactam conjugates using Click chemistry.
Compound15(Figure) containing 3-nitro or 3-chloro substituted benzene
reported in their library exhibited an MIC of 1.25 μg/mL againstB. subtilisandP. aeruginosa. In addition to focusing on the different essential
proteins and enzymes required for bacterial survival, antibacterial
drugs have been created that target the ribosome itself, which is
the precise cellular organelle that makes proteins. Since protein
biosynthesis is a fundamental process in all living organisms, the
ribosome has become a key target for a wide variety of antibiotics. To address the challenges associated with these
antibacterial agents, such as low bioavailability, resistance development
and toxicity, researchers have explored the hybridization of antibiotics
with 1,2,3-triazoles. Pleuromutilin,
first isolated in 1951 fromPleurotus mutilus,functions
by inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis through interaction with
the 23S rRNA of the 50S ribosomal subunit. Several pleuromutilin hybrids have been developed for enhanced antibacterial
action, showing a weak tendency to induce cross-resistance. However,
these hybrids often suffer from poor bioavailability and CYP450 inhibition. To address these limitations, 1,2,3-triazole-pleuromutilin
hybrids have been developed. In 2021, Zhang et al. reported the antibacterial
activity of synthesized pleuromutilin analogs containing substituted
1,2,3-triazole moieties against MRSA. Their most potent hybrid, compound16featuring a tertiary
amine group, demonstrated a 8-fold improvement in the MIC (0.25 μg/mL)
against MRSA whereas pleuromutilin alone exhibited an MIC of 2 μg/mL.
Similarly, macrolide antibiotics such as clarithromycin, erythromycin,
and azithromycin are a key group of drugs used to treat bacterial
infections. Several studies have demonstrated
that these antibiotics can bind to some specific nucleotide residues,
such as A2058 and A2059 on the domain V of 23s rRNA present on the
50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome inhibiting the elongation of
peptide chains and thereby selectively blocking bacterial protein
synthesis. In 2021, Qin et al. reported
1,2,3-triazole azithromycin hybrids showing potent activity against
various drug-resistant strains such as MRSA and penicillin-resistantS. aureus(PRSA). Interestingly,
compound17(Figure), upon the introduction of a pentyl group to the 1,2,3-triazole
ring exhibited the most potent antibacterial activity against MRSA
with an MIC of 16 μg/mL whereas the standard drug azithromycin
showed MIC > 256 μg/mL. Molecular docking analyses revealed
that hybrid17has the potential to interact with the
A752 base of the 23S rRNA within the bacterial ribosome, likely through
a combination of hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions and contribute
to exceptional antibacterial activity. Oxazolidinone class of antibiotics
are known to attach 50S ribosomal subunit and inhibit the formation
of the 70S initiation complex by blocking the assembly of the N-formyl-methionyl-tRNA,
ribosome, and mRNA ternary complex. Resistance
to oxazolidinone antibiotics occurs mainly due to mutation in 23S
rRNA. In 2014, Phetsang et al. reported azide functionalized analogue
of oxazolidinone antibiotic linezolid retaining its antibacterial
activity. Further Click-mediated hybridization of azido linezolid
led to the creation of a library of compounds showing excellent antibacterial
activity against a number of drug-resistant Gram-positive bacteria.
The most potent hybrid, compound18(Figure) with a 7-nitrobenzofuran
moiety showed promising antibacterial activity against VRSA with an
MIC value of 16 μg/mL whereas the standard antibiotic vancomycin
showed an MIC > 64 μg/mL.In-silicostudies and crystal structure analysis revealed
that azide-functionalization promoted fitting of the compound in 50S
ribosomal subunit similar to that of oxazolidinones and contributes
to the antibacterial efficacy.

Representative compounds containing 1,2,3-triazole
hybridized with
antibiotics along with their respective MICs against the tested bacterial
strains.

The cell membrane is an essential component
of bacteria because it provides protection, resistance, and integrity
to the cell by regulating the entry and exit of substances. Cell membrane
disruption is one of the primary mechanisms by which antibiotics function.
It has advantages over other mechanisms as the possibility of resistance
development is comparatively low, as they completely destroy the bacteria
other than suppressing their replication or cell division. Cell membrane
targeting substituents can be attached to 1,2,3-triazole to develop
an efficient antibacterial agent. In this regard, Tague and co-workers
developed cationic biaryl 1,2,3-triazolyl peptidomimetic amphiphiles. They have synthesized 43 compounds in three
distinct classes using CuAAC. The cationic biaryl amphiphile,19(Figure) was identified as the most effective agent with an MIC of 4 μg/mL
against MRSA. The SAR studies suggested that the ratio of cationic
residues to hydrophobic residues within the peptidomimetic amphiphiles
has a strong influence on their antimicrobial activity, hemolytic
activity, and thus membrane selectivity.

Representative 1,2,3-triazole
hybrids that function through bacterial
cell membrane disruption along with their respective MICs against
the tested bacterial strains.

Antibacterial agents derived from basic amino acids,
such as lysine
and arginine, have shown the ability to disrupt the bacterial membrane.
In 2019, Tague and colleagues synthesized a series of 1,2,3-triazole-arginine
hybrids. In their synthesized library, compound20(Figure) with ethylbenzene
substituent showed excellent activity against a variety of bacterial
strains such as MRSA clinical isolates, vancomycin-resistantS. aureus(VRSA) and Vancomycin-resistantE. faecalis(VRE), etc. with MIC values as low as 4 μg/mL. Compound21(Figure) with a cyclohexyl substituent also showed
promising antibacterial activity against MRSA with an MIC value of
4 μg/mL. The obtained MIC values
were comparable with that of the standard antibiotic vancomycin (MIC
of 1–32 μg/mL) against all these strains. Cytoplasmic
membrane depolarization and disruption of membrane potential were
found to be the key mechanism of bacterial inactivation.

In
2017, Bakka et al. reported a library of 29 1,4-substituted
1,2,3-triazoles containing amphiphilic antimicrobial peptides (AMPs)
that can disrupt the bacterial cell membrane. The AMPs’ cationic charge can be drawn to the bacteria’s
negatively charged cell membrane, whereupon the hydrophobic portion
enters the phospholipid bilayer and disrupts the membrane. The hypothesis
behind the incorporation of triazoles into AMPs was to bypass its
limitations such as poor bioavailability and metabolic stability.
Click chemistry allowed them to easily connect the hydrophilic and
lipophilic parts through the triazole ring. Compound22(Figure) with a
guanidium substituent exhibited the most potent antibacterial activity
with an MIC of 4 μg/mL againstS. aureus. Similar
to conjugation with AMPs, Aneja et al. designed and synthesized 1,2,3-triazole
analogues of natural bioactive precursors for potential antibacterial
activity against resistant bacterial strains using Click reaction. Carvacrol, naphthoquinone, and 8-hydroxyquinoline
were used as precursors for modification. The most potent compound23(Figure) exhibited significant antibacterial activity againstS.
pneumoniae(MIC50= 62.53 μg/mL. where MIC50is the concentration that inhibits 50% bacterial growth),E. faecalis(MIC50= 36.66 μg/mL,), andE. coli(MIC50= 15.28 μg/mL). The growth
kinetics onS. pneumoniaeandE. colitreated with23exhibited an extended lag phase attesting
its bactericidal effect. Transmission electron microscopy studies
revealed morphological changes and damage to the cell membrane upon
treatment with these compounds. They were also found to inhibit the
biofilm formed byS. pneumoniaeandE. coli. Together with the membrane disruption property, the added biofilm
inhibitory function can aid in preventing the development of bacterial
resistance to antibacterial drugs, making it a viable option against
MDR pathogens.

The production of ROS has
been found to be a significant contributor to the antibacterial activity
as well as efficacy against multidrug-resistant organisms. ROS include radical and nonradical oxygen containing
species such as hydroxyl radicals (OH•), superoxide
anion (O2–), hydroxyl anions (OH–) singlet oxygen (1O2), peroxide
(O22–), and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Under normal conditions, ROS levels are tightly
regulated by the cellular antioxidant defense system. However, during oxidative stress, ROS levels
can exceed the cell’s capacity to neutralize them, leading
to toxicity. Compared to mammalian cells that are equipped with a
better antioxidant defense system, bacteria are prone to severe damage
in the presence of ROS. Apart from lipids, ROS also affects DNA by
forming cross-links, modification of the bases, and breaking the strands. Similarly, ROS oxidizes proteins, leading to
the alteration of its structure and loss of activity.

Although the 1,2,3-triazole ring itself
may not directly contribute to ROS production, ROS generating structural
elements can be strategically integrated to the 1,2,3-triazole nucleus.
So far, there are only a few reports on the antibacterial activity
of ROS producing 1,2,3-triazole hybrids. However, significant studies
have been conducted on other biological applications of ROS generating
1,2,3-triazole hybrids, such as anticancer, antifungal, etc. This
implies that it is important to highlight the possibility of increasing
the usage of these compounds in antibacterial applications. In this
respect, Hayden et al. designed and synthesized several water-soluble
triazole phenazine derivatives. In their
library, the most potent molecule, compound24(Figure) exhibited an MIC
of 134 μg/mL againstE. coli. One putative
mode of action for its antibacterial effect is the incorporation of
the phenazine portion of the molecule into the cell membrane, affecting
membrane-associated cation transporters and compromising the membrane
structural integrity. This can interfere with cellular redox balance,
leading to the generation of ROS and ultimately to cytotoxicity. Additionally,
phenazine may intercalate with DNA, downregulating DNA-directed protein
expression and disrupting essential cellular processes. The toxicity
of phenazine is primarily attributed to the formation of radicals
within the phenazine structure, which then facilitates the reduction
of molecular oxygen, producing ROS.

Chemical structures of some of the 1,2,3-triazole
hybrids that
generate intracellular ROS are represented along with their respective
MICs against tested bacterial strains.

Another class of ROS generating antibacterial 1,2,3-triazole
hybrids
has been reported by T. Vijai Kumar Reddy and co-workers using 1,2,3-triazole
analogues of short-chain C12-sphinganine in 2016. These compounds were able to target both Gram-positive
and Gram-negative strains with promising antibacterial efficacy. The
most potent compound25(Figure), exhibited antimicrobial effects with
an MIC of 3.9 μg/mL againstM. luteus.It also
showed antibiofilm action against the tested microorganisms such asC. albicans,M. luteus,andS.
aureus. These hybrids could generate elevated levels of intracellular
ROS such as superoxide anions and hydrogen peroxides as observed in
the fluorescence assay using DCFH-DA. In another report, Aljohani
et al. developed 1,2,3-triazole derivatives complexed with Zn that
exhibited antibacterial activity againstK. pneumoniae. Among various hybrids reported, 1,2,3-triazole-sulfadiazine-ZnO
could target bacteria that were resistant to the known antibiotic,
carbapenem. Compound26(Figure) showed antibacterial properties againstK. pneumoniaewith an MIC of 128 μg/mL, and its hybrid
with ZnO showed enhanced antibacterial properties with an MIC of 2
μg/mL. The primary mode of action for its antibacterial activity
was reported as the generation of ROS such as free radicals, superoxide
anions, and peroxides. The presence of zinc ions improved the antibacterial
properties through their penetration and interaction with nucleic
acids, resulting in the inactivation of the enzymes involved in the
electron transport chains and enhanced cytokine release. The molecular
docking studies conducted on metallo-β-lactamase, a diverse
group of enzymes involved in the hydrolysis of a wide range of β-lactam
antibiotics, demonstrated the potential for interaction with the enzyme
through hydrophobic interactions, resulting in potent inhibition.
Additionally, thein vitroenzymatic assay of synthesized
compounds against metallo-β-lactamase exhibited a similar inhibitory
trend.

In 2021, Huang et al. reported ROS generating 1,2,3-triazole
tailored
carbazoles as efficient antibacterial agents and tested against plant
pathogens such asXanthomonas oryzae pv oryzae(Xoo),Xac,andPseudomonas syringae
pv actinidiae(Psa). Compound27(Figure) showed potent antibacterial activity againstXacwith the lowest EC50value of 2.87 μg/mL.
The most potent compound in their library showed antibacterial activity
through the ROS generation mechanism, as experimentally studied by
the DCFH-DA assay. As previously mentioned, 1,2,3-triazole hybrids
have been explored for various other biomedical applications, leveraging
their ability to generate ROS. For example, in 2024, Souza et al.
reported a library of naphthoquinone based 1,2,3-triazole hybrids
that were shown to have ROS mediated anticancer property. Electron transfer from the quinonoid substructure
to molecular oxygen generates ROS that results in irreversible DNA
damage in the cells. The most potent compound exhibited the highly
elevated levels of ROS production in the synthesized library within
2 h of treatment at a concentration of 6 μM. Another such example
is reported by Guo et al., where the authors synthesized a series
of 28 cabotegravir derivatives incorporating a 1,2,3-triazole moiety. Electron microscopic analysis revealed that
their best compound exhibited a large accumulation of intracellular
ROS upon treatment with HuH-7 cells at varying concentrations, which
resulted in mitochondrial membrane damage. These studies suggest that
1,2,3-triazole hybrids can be engineered to effectively induce substantial
ROS generation, disrupt bacterial membranes, and inhibit key enzymes
making them potential candidates for combating multidrug resistant
bacteria.

Combination therapy
is an emerging and promising strategy for treating diseases in which
two or more drugs are used in tandem to achieve better therapeutic
outcomes. This offers several advantages over conventional monotherapy,
including the multitargeting effect, which can improve treatment efficacy.
Combination therapy can also make cells sensitive to other treatments,
thus, enhancing the overall therapeutic outcome. Furthermore, it reduces
the possibility of drug resistance development and minimizes potential
toxicity by using lower doses of individual drugs. Metallo-β-lactamases (MBLs) are a diverse set of
enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of a broad range of β-lactam
antibiotics, rendering them ineffective and significantly contributing
to antimicrobial resistance. Muhammad and co-workers reported a series
of 1,2,3-triazoles in 2020, following a three-step reaction protocol
involving a Banert cascade reaction. The synthesized compounds were
found to inhibit different types of MBLs such as Verona integron-encoded
metallo-β-lactamase (VIM-2) and New Delhi metallo-βlactamase
(NDM-1) exhibiting an IC50value in nanomolar range. The
most effective compounds were then tested for synergistic effects
with Meropenem against 3 clinical bacterial strains. A 64- and 16-fold
improvement in MIC was observed when treated in combination againstP. aeruginosaandE. coli, respectively,
compared to Meropenem alone. In a separate study, Rogers et al. reported
the synergistic effect of 2-aminoimidazole-triazole conjugate and
antibiotics toward the biofilm production/dispersion ofS.
aureus. Bacteria produce biofilms
to protect themselves from harsh conditions and antibiotics for their
survival. Due to this protective layer, most antibiotics become ineffective,
and treating infections becomes challenging. Therefore, creating drugs
with both antibacterial and biofilm-inhibiting properties is beneficial.
The 2-aminoimidazole-triazole conjugate showed potential to inhibit
and disperse the bacterial biofilms of several microorganisms. A 26-fold
enhancement in the activity was also observed when used in combination
with 0.1 μM novobiocin antibiotic. Similarly, Su and co-workers
evaluated 4,5-disubstituted-2-aminoimidazole–triazole conjugates
for the resensitization of antibiotics against multidrug resistant
bacteria such as MRSA andA. baumannii. They were
also found to disperse or inhibit biofilm formation, and desensitization
to the antibiotic oxacillin was observed to be of 2–4 fold. In another report, Negi et al. evaluated the
synergistic effects of metronidazole-triazole hybrids against MRSA
with oxacillin antibiotic displaying a 4-fold improvement in MIC values
compared to the monotreatment. These
findings clearly imply that 1,2,3-triazole scaffolds can be successfully
used to create hybrids that have a synergistic impact on making bacteria
more susceptible to antibiotic exposure.

Triazoles contain a stable heterocyclic structure which is resistant
to hydrolysis, oxidation and reduction. The triazole moiety is commonly metabolized via the phase II N-glucuronidation
process. It has been reported that aldehyde glucuronidation occurs
at the triazole nitrogen in liver microsomes, with the specific site
of glucuronidation varying between organisms. Triazoles have been widely explored in medicinal chemistry
to enhance metabolic stability and biocompatibility particularly in
the case of inhibitor development. For
example, Kuttruff et al. developed potent autotaxin (ATX) inhibitors
where they introduced a triazole group in their lead compound that
exhibited improved pharmacokinetics and safety of the compound. Substitution of benzimidazolone with benzotriazole,
not only enhances metabolic stability but also improves its potency.
Brequinar, a human dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (hDHODH) inhibitor,
was initially abandoned due to its high toxicity. Development of a 1,2,3-triazole based compound by Sainas
et al. in 2017 avoided toxicity toward Jurkat T cells, holding potential
for further research in autoimmune diseases. Replacing imidazoles with triazoles in antifungal agents has also
enhanced metabolic stability and therapeutic effects. Furthermore, five membered heterocyclic compounds
including triazole have been found to have better metabolic stability
compared to their six membered counterparts.

The emergence
of antimicrobial resistance continues to pose a threat
to our healthcare system, necessitating the development of novel classes
of antimicrobial drugs that are less likely to develop resistance.
In this perspective, we have discussed strategically designed 1,2,3-triazole
hybrids that could work via multiple mechanisms of action to treat
bacterial infections. The advantage of multifaceted therapy or multitargeting
antibacterial agents is its low propensity to develop resistance against
them. Compared to a one-drug, one-target approach that becomes ineffective
upon drug resistance, a one-drug multitarget approach offers multiple
modes of action for bactericidal effect. While small molecules that
target critical enzymes required for bacterial survival or replication
have been found effective in antibacterial drug development, these
enzyme inhibitors are prone to gain resistance by the virtue of mutation
or other mechanisms discussed earlier. In this regard, membrane-targeting
antibacterial drugs and/or those capable of producing considerable
amounts of ROS work through nonspecific interactions, making it difficult
for bacteria to build resistance to these treatments. In the past
decade, it has been shown how a 1,2,3-triazole ring can bring various
pharmacophores together to bring about multiple mechanisms of action
to combat bacterial infection. The 1,2,3-triazole ring can act as
a linker for two biologically active molecules, providing an opportunity
to fine-tune different functionalities in a single molecule and, hence,
diversifying their structural aspects. Moreover, 1,2,3-triazole hybrids
have been found to bind to different sites of key enzymes critical
for bacterial survival. The hydrogen bond acceptor/donor capabilities,
biocompatibility, and ease of synthesis make it an attractive class
of compounds. 1,2,3-triazole hybrids can be designed to target bacterial
cell membranes and for generating intracellular ROS which can cause
damage to different biomacromolecules such as lipids, nucleic acids,
and proteins. Targeting various bacterial survival mechanisms (Figure) is essential to
lower the likelihood of drug resistance development, as if one is
rendered inactive, the others will continue to fight. Therefore, 1,2,3-triazole
hybridization offers a modular, simple, and readily synthesizable
method for developing multitarget antibacterial drugs. Nonetheless,
there are still a few aspects that require further attention, though.
Out of the box design of novel hybrids is warranted which would allow
engagement with multiple targets to eliminate pathogenic bacteria,
including drug-resistant strains. Molecular hybridization can really
be a game changer. Novel 1,2,3-triazole hybrids need to be designed
considering the diversity and biological activity of potent pharmacophores
capable of exhibiting bactericidal effects.

Design of multitargeting
antibacterial 1,2,3-triazole-based hybrids
using the Click reaction.

For the past few decades, 1,2,3-triazole hybrids
have been extensively
explored for various biological activities. The major advantage of
these heterocycles is their biocompatible nature emerging out of its
chemical stability, nonreactivity and relatively simple structure.
However, the cytotoxicity of these hybrids can vary, depending on
the substituents attached to the triazole nucleus. To minimize cytotoxicity
with selectivity, the hybrid design can be made in such a way as
to target unique bacterial proteins. Substituents with a positive
charge can interact with the negatively charged bacterial cell membrane,
providing selectivity over mammalian cells. This selectivity arises
because the outer leaflet of the bacterial cell membrane contains
a greater proportion of anionic phospholipids as compared to mammalian
cells. Furthermore, the introduction
of ROS generating functionalities can provide better killing efficiency
in bacterial cells compared to normal cells as the former lacks a
well-organized antioxidant defense system. Despite all of the aforementioned advantages of 1,2,3-triazoles,
there are concerns that warrant further consideration and investigation.
The low water solubility of 1,2,3-triazoles is well recognized and
can have a substantial effect on their pharmacokinetics and therapeutic
effectiveness. To address this challenge, design can be made in such
a way as to attach hydrophilic groups or polyethylene glycol linkers,
thereby improving the bioavailability of the triazole hybrids. Nevertheless,
in a short period of time, 1,2,3-triazole hybrids have witnessed massive
growth in their medicinal applications, particularly as anticancer
drugs, antibacterial agents, etc. Most of the 1,2,3-triazole hybrids
exhibited excellent antibacterial activity against drug-resistant
strains. Therefore, rational development of molecular hybrids with
the 1,2,3-triazole nucleus with other pharmacophores having antibacterial
activity is a promising strategy to design novel antibacterial lead
compounds.

This work was funded by the Indian Institute of
Technology Palakkad, India; the Council of Scientific & Industrial
Research, India (02(0434)/21/EMR-II, 09/1282(12720)/2021-EMR-I) 
Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), India (CRG/2023/002841)
and the Department of Science & Technology (DST), New Delhi, India
(INSPIRE Fellowship 230243).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.