Identifying disease burden among childhood cancer survivors (CCS) can guide tailored care. Physical fitness predicts health and mortality and may help reduce disease burden in CCS. This study aimed to 1) describe the burden of clinically ascertained adverse health outcomes in long‐term CCS, and 2) investigate the association between physical fitness and adverse health outcomes.

This study used baseline data of the SURfit study, a randomized controlled physical activity trial. The authors included 163 CCS, diagnosed <16 years, ≥16 years at enrollment, and ≥5 years since last cancer diagnosis. Clinically assessed health outcomes were categorized using the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events. Physical fitness was assessed by cardiopulmonary‐exercise‐test (CPET), hand‐grip strength, and the 1‐minute sit‐to‐stand test (STS). Using multivariable Poisson regression models, this study investigated the association between physical fitness and adverse health outcomes.

Participants (30.5 ± 8.6 years old, time since diagnosis 22.9 ± 9 years) had 1170 adverse health outcomes, with 99% CCS having at least one. Musculoskeletal disorders were most common (130 of 163 [80%]). Higher levels of physical fitness were associated with fewer adverse health outcomes of any grade (CPET: prevalence rate ratio [PRR], 0.71 per watt/kg bodyweight, 95% confidence Interval [CI], 0.63–0.81,p< .001; hand‐grip: PRR, 0.60 kg/kg bodyweight; 95% CI, 0.35–1.03,p= .063; STS: PRR, 0.95 per five repetitions; 95% CI, 0.93–0.97,p< .001).

CCS participating in an exercise intervention trial experienced a high burden of adverse health outcomes. Increased physical fitness was associated with reduced disease burden for all survivors, emphasizing the importance of encouraging fitness improvements, regardless of cancer history.

Childhood cancer survivors face a significant burden of adverse outcomes long after diagnosis, with musculoskeletal disorders being the most common. Higher physical fitness is associated with a reduced prevalence of adverse outcomes for all survivors, regardless of their cancer history.

Physical fitness is a strong predictor of health and mortality11,12,13and includes body composition, muscle strength, flexibility, and cardiopulmonary fitness. As childhood cancer survivors have lower physical fitness compared to the general population this may further contribute to their overall disease burden.14,15,16,17,18Physical fitness may not affect survivors in the same way as it does their healthy peers, likely due to treatment‐related damage to the cardiovascular and muscular systems.19Understanding the relationship between physical fitness and disease burden is therefore crucial to inform survivorship care, counselling, and targeted physical activity interventions.

Compared to little possibilities to modify cancer treatment, fitness can be improved through lifestyle interventions.17,20,21,22,23Yet, most lifestyle intervention studies are US‐based, where oncologic treatment guidelines and lifestyle differ from European standards,24,25,26leaving a knowledge gap in health burdens and potential modifiable risk factors for European CCS. Babecoff et al.27performed one of few studies that assessed health outcomes in European survivors with grading by severity, however, they did not establish associations to physical fitness. Northern countries with national cancer registries have published large multicenter studies,28however, these either focused on mortality only,4,29relied on self‐reporting (questionnaires),30,31or were assessed on hospitalization data only.32None of these studies draw associations to any fitness component. Thus, our study is the first European Childhood Cancer Survivor Study relating health outcomes to fitness components.

This study aimed to 1) describe the burden of clinically ascertained adverse health outcomes in long‐term survivors of childhood cancer, and 2) investigate the association between physical fitness and prevalence of health outcomes, before and after controlling for cancer‐related variables.

This study is based on data collected during the baseline assessment of the SURfit study (https://ClinicalTrials.gov/study/NCT02730767). The SURfit study is a single‐center, randomized controlled trial (RCT) with a 1‐year physical activity intervention that has been described before.33,34,35,36,37,38,39In short, participants were recruited through the Swiss Childhood Cancer Registry (ChCR) between 2015 and 2019. Eligible survivors had been diagnosed with cancer according to the International Classification of Childhood Cancer third edition (ICCC‐3)40or with Langerhans cell histiocytosis, diagnosed and/or treated in one of four centers of the Swiss Pediatric Oncology Group, <16 years old at diagnosis, ≥16 years old at enrollment, and ≥5 years since last cancer diagnosis (first diagnosis, relapse, or secondary cancer[s]). The study was approved by the ethics committee of Northwest and Central Switzerland (BASEC‐ID: 2019‐00410), and all participants gave their written informed consent before study enrollment. Participation of minors required consent of their guardians.

Participants underwent extensive medical examinations at the University Children’s Hospital Basel including assessing patient history, clinical examinations, blood analyses, physical fitness testing, electrocardiogram (ECG), oral glucose tolerance test, and dual energy x‐ray absorptiometry (DXA).39Outcomes by DXA included body composition and total body, femoral neck, total hip, and lumbar spine areal bone‐mineral‐density by age‐ and sex‐matchedzscores, in line with our previous publications.36All adverse health outcomes that occurred after the first cancer diagnosis until baseline assessment of this study were classified according to the Common Terminology Criteria of Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 541and supplemented by a specified SOP (Appendix S1) using system organ class (SOC) and preferred term (PT). We retained the original categories and names for all SOC, with the following exceptions: “cardiac” and “vascular” disorders were combined into one SOC “cardiovascular disorder”; “general disorders and administration site conditions” were renamed “general symptoms: pain, fatigue, edema”; and “investigations” was renamed “laboratory, imaging, and functional findings.” Each adverse event was graded from 1 to 4 (grade 1, mild, requiring observation only; grade 2, moderate, with minimal or noninvasive intervention indicated, but limiting instrumental Activities of Daily Life [ADL] possible; grade 3, severe, with limited ability of self‐care ADL; grade 4, life‐threatening requiring urgent intervention). Grade 5, death, was not applicable in this study. Whenever no CTCAE criteria were available, predefined criteria were applied (see Appendix S1). Although each CTCAE event was allocated to one specific grade, each patient could qualify for multiple events. Mental health and fatigue was self‐reported using the standardized and validated Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI‐53)42and Checklist of Individual Strength (CIS).43According to CTCAE, the grade 1 event depression and anxiety is defined as “mild depressive/anxiety symptoms,” hence self‐reported depressive/anxiety symptoms in the BSI were classified as such. Patients with officially diagnosed depression/anxiety were classified as grade 1 if not treated and grade 2 if receiving treatment (medical or psychotherapy).

Physical fitness components were defined according to our previous publication37and described in detail in our protocol publication (for detail see Appendix S1).39Aerobic capacity was assessed by means of a cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET) and results expressed as peak work rate in watt per kilogram bodyweight (watt/kg bodyweight). Peak performance (watt) was assessed by a continuous incremental cycling test to volitional exhaustion following a validated protocol.44Upper body strength was assessed by hand‐grip strength test with a JAMAR hydraulic hand dynamometer. We calculated the mean weight of three trials in kilograms reached by the dominant hand45per kilogram of bodyweight (kg/kg bodyweight). Lower body endurance was assessed by a 1‐min sit‐to‐stand (STS) test. The number of repetitions was divided by 5 (the estimated minimal important difference46) to have a meaningful unit in the model.

We additionally calculatedzscores for each fitness variable based on age and sex‐stratified normative populations.45,47,48We then calculated a composite fitness score averaging thezscores of the three fitness measures. If participants had a valid result of at least two out of three measures the average over the available measures was calculated.

Information on age at study, sex, sociodemographic factors, and cancer history was collected. Time since cancer diagnosis was calculated as time from first cancer diagnosis to date of baseline assessment in years. Cancer diagnosis was recorded according to ICCC‐3 and aggregated into five groups: leukemias, lymphomas, central nervous system (CNS) tumors, bone‐ and soft tissue sarcomas, and other tumors. We calculated the cumulative anthracyclines dose as doxorubicin isotoxic equivalent dose (mg/m2)49and the cumulative steroid dose as prednisone equivalent dose (mg/m2).50Radiotherapy was grouped into no radiotherapy, cranial, abdominal, total body irradiation (TBI), or other location. Body weight and height were measured, body mass index (BMI) calculated (weight in kg/height in m2), and allocated to four categories (kg/m2) according to the World Health Organization (WHO)51: underweight (<18.5), normal weight (18.5–24.9), overweight (25–29.9) and obese (≥30).

For descriptive statistics, we used mean, range and standard deviation (SD) and ranges, medians with ranges, or frequencies with proportions, as appropriate. We described the cumulative burden of adverse events (aim 1) by reporting total number of events, frequency, and percentage of survivors with at least one event, and average number of events per person by SOC and PT. All results were displayed for events of any grade (grades 1–4), grades 2+ (grades 2–4), and grades 3+ (grades 3–4).

We investigated the association between physical fitness and adverse health outcomes (aim 2) by applying multivariable Poisson regression models to estimate prevalence rate ratios (IRRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). We performed a separate model for each physical fitness parameter (aerobic capacity, hand‐grip strength, lower body endurance, and composite fitness score) and outcome (any grade, grades 2+, and grades 3+). Model adjustments for each association were based on a directed acyclic graph (FigureS1). Model 0 included only age, sex, and time since diagnosis (to condition on the same time interval when calculating IRRs). Model 1 additionally adjusted for BMI (categorical), and model 2 additionally included cancer‐related variables (cancer diagnosis, cumulative anthracycline dose, cumulative steroid dose, and location of radiotherapy). For comparison of estimates across the fitness parameters, we performed the same models usingzscores instead of absolute values. Participants missing a physical fitness parameter were excluded from the respective models. We performed a sensitivity analysis adjusting the fitness parameters for lean body mass (LBM).

For our main analysis, we included all CPET results (maximal and submaximal) for the association between aerobic capacity and adverse health outcomes. To investigate possible bias, we performed a sensitivity analysis including only maximal tests (n= 128). All analyses were performed using STATA SE v18.0, and apvalue <.05 was considered statistically significant.

Of 1450 eligible study participants identified in the ChCR, 842 met the inclusion criteria and were invited to participate in the SURfit study; 163 CCS underwent the baseline assessment and were included in the analysis (Figure1). At study entry, participants were on average 30.5 years of age (SD, 8.6) with a range from 17 to 49 years old (Table1). Mean time since diagnosis was 22.9 years (SD, 9.0). Most survivors had leukemia (n= 57, 35%), were of normal weight (n= 102, 63%), had received chemotherapy (n= 148, 91%), and nearly half of survivors had received radiotherapy (n= 96, 59%) as part of their cancer treatment.

Flowchart of sample inclusion.aEligible survivors were identified in the population‐based SCCR.bRecruitment was stopped due to participant saturation.cParticipants who received an initial invitation were no longer followed up by phone due to participant saturation. PA indicates physical activity (intervention after baseline assessment); SCCR, Swiss Childhood Cancer Registry.

Characteristics of survivors included in the study (SURfit study,N= 163).

Note: Numbers are presented as mean ± standard deviation [minimum–maximum], median [minimum–maximum], or frequency (percentage).

Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CNS, central nervous system;gh,growth‐hormone.

Prednisone equivalent dose. Six participants who received steroids had missing information on cumulative steroid dose.

Further two patients that did not receive cranial radiation had GH deficiency (i.e. totaln= 7 with GH deficiency); all seven patients received GH substitution.

We recorded a total of 1170 adverse health outcomes (any grade) among the 163 participants (TableS1), with 99% of participants having at least one adverse health outcome (only one participant had no event). The maximum number of outcomes per survivor was 27. On average, participants had 7.2 (SD, 4.5) adverse health outcomes (any grade) and 1.4 (SD, 1.6) severe health outcomes (grades 3+) (Figure2). Survivors of childhood lymphoma had the least average events of any grade per person (5.8, SD, 3.2), whereas CNS‐ and bone‐tumor survivors had the most (8.2, SD, 3.6 and 8.2, SD, 4.2, respectively). Severe adverse events (grades 3+) showed a similar pattern: lymphoma survivors had on average 1.0 (SD, 1.2), CNS‐tumor survivors 1.1 (SD, 1.7), and bone‐tumor survivors 2.0 (SD, 2.0) adverse health outcomes per person (FigureS2). The most common severe health outcomes were injury and procedural complications (15% of participants), followed by complications during or requiring surgical and medical procedures (15%).

Average number of adverse events per individual grouped by SOC, overall (total), and by cancer diagnosis. Average number of events per persons of (A) any grade (1–4) and (B) grades 3+ (3–4) grouped by SOC according to the CTCAE. The total bar combines all primary cancer diagnosis, hence represents an average across all tumor types. The stacked bars show the respective share each SOC contributes to the total individual burden; SOCs that contributed on average <0.25 events/person were combined into “Other.” The full official name of each SOC is given in Table S1. The legend is ordered (from bottom to top) according to the decreasing average number of events from the total bar in (A) (events of any grade) and kept consistent throughout all bars for comparability. The “Other” group was added at the end of the legend/top of each bar. CNS indicates central nervous system; CTCAE, common terminology criteria for adverse events; SOC, system organ class.

Musculoskeletal disorders were most common across all cancer types (260 outcomes, 80% of participants) (Figure3A,C) followed by psychiatric conditions (122 events, 49% of participants), nervous system disorders (97 events, 41% of participants), and cardiovascular disorders (83 events, 44% of participants). Osteoporosis was the most frequent musculoskeletal disorder (101 of 163 [62%]) followed by pain (51 of 163 [31%]) and muscle weakness (31 of 163 [17%]). Insomnia (67 of 163 [41%]), depressive symptoms (grade 1+, 28 of 163 [17%]), and depression requiring therapy (grade 2+, 7 of 163 [4%]) were the most frequent psychiatric conditions (Figure3B; TableS2). Survivors of CNS‐tumors had notably more nervous system disorders (16 of 18 [89%]) and ear and labyrinth disorders (4 and 18 [22%]) (FigureS3). Injury and procedural disorders were more prominent among bone cancer survivors (11 of 19 [58%]) with fractures being the most frequent PT (42 of 63 [67%]). TablesS1and S2provide further detailed information on all registered adverse events by SOC and PT.

Adverse events in the study population of CCS according to different categorization. The total number of events by all participants (n= 163) of (A) any SOC and (B) for the subgroups (PT) of SOC “Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders” according to the CTCAE, categorized into grade 1, grade 2, and grades 3+ (3–4). In (B), variables that describe the same symptom, but are defined as different PT by CTCAE are summarized into their overarching symptom: pain includes “back pain,” “neck pain,” and “pain in extremities”; muscle weakness includes “general muscle weakness,” “muscle weakness left/right side,” “muscle weakness trunk,” and “muscle weakness upper limb”; joint range of motion decreased also includes “joint range of motion decreased lumbar spine.” (C) Display of the proportion of CCS with at least one event in the respective SOC, categorized into grades. All panels are ordered by descending frequency/percentage. The full official name of each SOC is given in Table S1. CCS indicates childhood cancer survivors; CTCAE, common terminology criteria for adverse events; PT, preferred terms; SOC, system organ class.

Higher physical fitness was associated with lower prevalence of adverse health outcomes across all fitness parameters and grades of outcomes, reaching statistical significance in almost all models except for hand‐grip strength (Table2). The strength of associations did not substantially change when adjusting for cancer variables. In the fully adjusted models (including cancer variables), increased aerobic capacity (per watt/kg bodyweight) was significantly associated with lower prevalence of events of any grade (PRR = 0.71; 95% CI, 0.63–0.81,p< .001), grades 2+ (PRR = 0.71; 95% CI, 0.59–0.84,p< .001), and grades 3+ (PRR = 0.64; 95% CI, 0.47–0.86,p= .003). Increased lower body endurance (per five repetitions more in the 1 min STS) was significantly associated with lower prevalence of events of any grade (PRR = 0.95; 95% CI, 0.93–0.97,p< .001), grades 2+ (PRR = 0.95; 95% CI, 0.92–0.98,p= .003), and grades 3+ (PRR = 0.92; 95% CI, 0.87–0.98,p= .002).

Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CI, confidence interval; PRR, prevalence rate ratio.

n= 159 for aerobic capacity,n= 160 for hand‐grip strength,n= 163 for lower body endurance,n= 163 for composite fitness score.

Basic model 0: adjusted for age, sex, and time since diagnosis.

Adjusted model 2: model 1 + cancer types, anthracycline dose, steroid dose, location of radiotherapy. We calculated the cumulative anthracyclines dose as doxorubicin isotoxic equivalent dose (mg/m2) and the cumulative steroid dose as prednisone equivalent dose (mg/m2). Patients who did not receive steroid or anthracycline treatment, received 0 mg/m2as their dose; six participants who received steroids but had missing information on cumulative dose were imputed with the median dose of all participants with steroid treatment.

Averagezscore of aerobic capacity, hand‐grip strength and lower body endurance.

When comparing the estimates using theirzscores, strongest associations were seen for the composite fitness score, followed by aerobic capacity and lower body endurance (TableS3). The sensitivity analyses including only maximal work rate (TableS4) and adjusting fitness‐parameters for LBM (TableS5) were similar to the main results.

Our study found a high burden of adverse health outcomes experienced by survivors years after childhood cancer diagnosis eligible for a fitness intervention and capable of completing CPET and strength testing, thus likely more healthy than the source population. Nearly all survivors reported at least one adverse health outcome, regardless of primary cancer diagnosis. Better physical fitness was associated with having fewer adverse health outcomes regardless of the survivor’s cancer history.

Consistent with other studies, musculoskeletal disorders were the most common disorders, especially prominent in survivors of bone cancer. The Swiss Childhood Cancer Survivor Study reported a prevalence of musculoskeletal health conditions of 26% and a prevalence of 64% in bone‐tumor survivors.53Musculoskeletal disorders have been linked to the cancer itself,54and to cancer treatment directly (corticosteroids and antimetabolites inhibiting formation of new bone)36,55and indirectly (radiation induced hypothalamic‐pituitary‐axis dysfunction, hypogonadism, and growth hormone deficiency [GHD]) affecting the musculoskeletal system.18,36,54,56This may explain the dominance of musculoskeletal disorders in our study population; seven participants had GHD, 28 received cranial radiation (of which 18% showed GHD), and 16 had gonadal insufficiency. This is concerning, as physical limitations complicate everyday tasks and ultimately limit engagement in a physically active lifestyle.

Several studies assessed psychological adverse health outcomes with inconsistent results. Psychological conditions were the second most common events (49%) in our study. An American literature review, also based on self‐reported questionnaires, reports 11%–13% of survivors suffer from depression, lower than our 17%, and 6%–10% from anxiety, which aligns to our 9%.57However, survivors of acute lymphoblastic leukemia reported similar or even higher health‐related quality of life58and lower psychological distress than healthy peers.16These discrepancies likely stem from varied (often self‐reported) outcome measures, and control group selection. Randomized controlled trials (RTC) show that aerobic exercise interventions can decrease depression among adults with cancer.59Fit4life is the only RTC to assess physical activity’s mental health impact in pediatric survivors, although as a secondary outcome in leukemia survivors only.23Further research on exercise interventions for mental health outcomes is necessary as exercise may offer a low‐risk therapeutic addition/alternative.

Overall, we found few differences between the tumor subgroups. Apart from nervous system and ear‐and‐labyrinth disorders (mostly impaired hearing), which were more prevalent in CNS‐tumor survivors, consistent with the neurotoxicity of platinum‐based chemotherapy used in pediatric CNS malignancies,49no consistent pattern emerged in favor of or against any tumor type. Although severe adverse events varied slightly among the tumor groups, the overall low number of occurrences prevents us from drawing clinical conclusions.

Opposed to cancer treatments, fitness levels can be improved through physical activity intervention and may mitigate some of the health burdens of survivors.14,33,34Aerobic fitness has been shown to be one of the strongest predictors of cardiovascular morbidity in population‐based studies and in cancer patients.37,63Treatment‐related risk factors are difficult to modify,60however, cardiovascular fitness can be improved through lifestyle interventions and positively impact cardiovascular disease in CCS.37Higher muscle strength is a predictor for reduced cardiovascular disease risk,19,37less fatigue,33,62and longer survival64,65,66of cancer survivors.

Our study showed that physical fitness is associated with fewer adverse health outcomes regardless of cancer type and treatment history. This relation was found in a selective population of CCS, which was partly already physically active, and therefore possibly healthier. This may have lowered the strength of associations by limiting our sample to the more fit and less sick CCS. However, it remains a challenge to reach behavioral changes,35,75especially considering the high prevalence of psychological conditions and fatigue interfering with exercise motivation and implementation of lifestyle changes. Because the focus during follow‐up care is on somatic illnesses, possible psychiatric conditions could be overlooked.57,76,77,78Clinicians should address psychiatric symptoms and fatigue and involve experienced specialists including psycho‐oncologists to guide PA implementation when needed.

Causality between physical fitness and adverse health outcomes has been shown in other diseases,79but needs to be proven after childhood cancer. Nonetheless, a simple clinical examination as the STS could be easily integrated in clinical practice to assess patients` fitness and guide clinicians in lifestyle education of survivors.

This study included a comprehensive and standardized assessment of a wide range of possible adverse health outcomes in survivors of childhood cancer.41This study is among the first to assess three important physical fitness components in CCS and relate them to adverse health outcomes.

Findings should be interpreted in the context of study limitations. The absence of a control group prevents us from determining the attributable fraction of adverse health outcomes related to childhood cancer and/or its treatment. The cross‐sectional design limits our ability to establish causality between health outcomes and physical fitness; the adverse health outcomes happened between cancer diagnosis and study visit, whereas physical fitness was assessed at study start. However, we view physical fitness as a long‐term construct shaped by lifestyle. The observed associations may be influenced by unmeasured confounders (genetic predisposition) or mediators (socioeconomic and lifestyle factors) that were not adjusted for.

Comprehensive clinical assessments and aim of a physical activity trial may have reduced participation rates leading to a selective fitter and likely healthier population, which may explain the absence of differences by tumor type.80Including a more general population of CCS (e.g., less physically active/fit) may make our association of physical fitness to adverse health outcomes even stronger.

Assessment of fitness parameters showed some limitations. First, there was an overlap between predictor and outcome variables, as reduced fitness performance, used as a proxy for musculoskeletal weakness, was also classified as a CTCAE event. Second, because CPET primarily assesses aerobic capacity, its inclusion to “generalized muscle weakness” may have led to an over reporting of musculoskeletal disorders. Third, because submaximal CPET test were included in the analysis, it cannot be distinguished if reduced watt/kg was reached due to the inability to reach maximal performance versus lacking motivation. Nevertheless, sensitivity analyses including only those with maximal tests did not reveal different results.

Cumulative dose was only available for anthracyclines and steroids due to the primary objective of the SURfit study, and not for other therapies, including alkylating agents, possibly also contributing to the burden of chronic health conditions.

Self‐reported depressive or anxiety symptoms by BSI were equated to grade 1 events, which may have led to over reporting of mental health outcomes. Finally, time from primary cancer diagnosis to adverse event was not available, as most event onset dates were not recorded. As a result, person‐years could not be calculated.

In conclusion, this study emphasizes the substantial burden of adverse health outcomes among young adult CCS that may be underestimated due to the selective population of already physically active and possible healthier CCS. Improved physical fitness is a modifiable factor that might mitigate these adverse events for all CCS, regardless of their cancer history and activity level, however, future research is needed to ascertain causality and its strength of association. Simple physical fitness tests may be integrated into the regular care of CCS to identify survivors potentially at risk for higher morbidity and guide them on how to improve their physical fitness.