Complex crater formation is an incompletely understood phenomenon, referring to instances wherein a high-speed projectile impacts a surface and leaves a crater characterized by a central uplift. We elucidate the mechanism of complex crater formation by examining crater formation on different polymer substrates resulting from microparticle impacts with tunable microparticle diameter (1.8 to 6.1 micrometers) and impact velocities up to 840 meters per second. Central uplift is uniquely observed in craters on amorphous polymers, with the degree of complexity directly linked to the polymer thermal properties and homogeneity. We demonstrate that the complex crater volume scales with the ratio of the specific kinetic energy of the impacting object to the specific energy required to raise the impacted substrate to its glass transition temperature (the Eckert number). Our results also confirm that complex crater formation can occur not only for macroscopic celestial collisions but also during sufficiently high velocity collisions at the micrometer scale.

Heating above the glass transition temperature leads to complex craters during impact events.

When a high-kinetic-energy object impacts a surface, it generates a crater, which is formed through the propagation of shock waves and rarefaction waves in the material. The formation of craters involves three stages: the initial contact and compression phase, where the impact generates shock waves that compress and deform both the projectile and target; the excavation stage, where the material is displaced outward, creating a transient cavity; and the modification stage, where the crater undergoes further changes to achieve its final shape (1,2). The nature of the resulting crater can vary on the basis of the impact, leading to different crater topographies, including simple craters, complex craters, and multiring basins. Simple craters are bowl-shaped concave cavities that may have elevated rims along the perimeter. Meanwhile, complex craters exhibit a hill-like structure within the cavity termed the central uplift; this is believed to be a product of higher-energy impacts than impacts forming simple craters (3). Even higher-energy impact events result in the formation of multiring basins that feature multiple concentric rings (4).

The transition from simple to complex crater formation is not well understood. The onset of complex crater formation is thought to be the initiation of material rebound occurring during the modification stage of crater formation. Several studies suggest that the formation of central uplifts is correlated with decreasing strength of the target material caused by the extreme temperatures and pressures generated during impact. Potential explanations for this strength loss are lubrication because of friction melting (5,6) and dilatancy, where volume expansion under shear stress decreases the strength and density of the material (7,8). An alternative theory is acoustic or vibrational fluidization, where pressure fluctuations generated by the impact temporarily cause the material surrounding the crater to behave as a reduced viscosity fluid (9,10).

A recurring challenge in understanding complex crater formation is the limited data available. Most of what we know about crater formation derives from observations on planetary bodies, specifically Earth, Mars, Venus, Mercury, their rocky moons (11–15), the icy moons of Jupiter (16), and the icy moons of Saturn (17). Several variables affecting impact are known to influence the formation and size of craters on planetary surfaces. The transition from simple to complex craters appears to occur at a critical crater diameter specific to each celestial body. As astrophysical impacts are driven by gravitational forces, this critical diameter is inversely proportional to the gravitational acceleration of the object; hence, planets and moons with lower gravity tend to have larger transition diameters (11,18). The size and characteristics of complex craters are also influenced by the surface properties of the celestial body. For example, the transition from simple to complex craters generally occurs at a larger diameter on rocky surfaces than it does on icy satellites (16). Variations in terrain, such as whether the target rock is crystalline, sedimentary, or a heterogeneous mixture, can further affect the critical diameter (19). Similarly, the porous nature of the Lunar highlands has been suggested as a factor contributing to larger uplifts in craters formed on these surfaces (20). Morphometric studies show that complex craters are shallower than simpler craters, as indicated by their lower depth-to-diameter ratio. The sizes and heights of the central uplifts within these craters are directly related to the kinetic energy at impact, which depends on the size of the impactor (21).

While planetary craters have offered valuable insights into target materials, the properties of the impactor such as its size, mass, and velocity remain less understood yet strongly influence crater formation. Unfortunately, the impactor dimensions are not directly measured or known for astrophysical bodies, and replicating these conditions in the laboratory is challenging because of the immense impact energies involved. Nonetheless, several laboratory experiments have successfully observed central uplift formation during impact studies. Ivanovet al.(22) were among the first to achieve this using rubber sand. Complex craters are frequently observed with granular media, as these materials require considerably less energy to produce central uplifts (23–25). Under comparably highly specific kinetic energy conditions such as impacts from ion cluster beams, nanoscale complex features referred to as “nanohillocks” have been commonly observed on materials including silicon and sapphire (26–28). The size of these structures inversely correlates with the momentum of the cluster ions, where smaller ions result in larger hillocks (29). Again, with cluster ions, the surface properties of the target materials significantly affect the formation process (30).

Polymers are a promising substrate to study the simple-to-complex crater transition. Prior studies have shown traces of complex crater morphology on polymers, involving different mechanisms of crater formation. Brandstädteret al.(31) examined the impact of aluminum oxide particles on bismaleimide polymers, observing that a portion of the impact energy was dissipated through plasticity and material degradation alongside fracture, suggesting that the competition between these mechanisms may govern the erosion rate. Walleyet al.(32) conducted experiments by impacting steel balls on polyetheretherketone samples and identified that the resulting craters exhibited central features at elevated velocities, attributing these formations to localized heating that induced melting and plastic deformation. Bobrovskyet al.(33) studied laser-induced craters on polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) substrates, finding that extended irradiation times led to the emergence of hill-like features in the center of craters. Similarly, Bateset al.(34) investigated pits formed on acrylic substrates by formic acid condensation and observed that these pits featured raised, bumpy volumes in their centers. However, to understand the transition from simple to complex crater formation, the role of the surface material properties, and the effects of impact conditions on this transition, there remains a need to examine crater formation with finely controlled impactor properties (composition, diameter, and impact velocities) on well-characterized surfaces (composition and crystallinity). To this end, we have investigated the impacts of microparticles on multiple polymer targets, observing the simple-to-complex crater transition and well-defined central uplift structures for impact velocities up to 840 m s−1. We precisely controlled and characterized impact parameters, including particle diameter, velocity, kinetic energy, and impact angle, to better understand how impact conditions influence crater morphology. We find that the “complexity” of craters can be quantified in terms of a complex portion of the crater displacement volume relative to the total volume displaced, which scales directly with the dimensionless specific kinetic energy, with the governing dimensionless parameter akin to the Eckert number.

As described in Materials and Methods, we subjected 11 different polymer substrates to high-speed ferrous sulfate (FeSO4) microparticle impact. The particles were highly monodisperse and tuned in the 1.8- to 6.1-μm diameter range (with scanning electron micrographs shown in fig. S1) with tuned impact velocities in the 490 to 840 m s−1range. The latter was controlled by passing particles through a converging-diverging nozzle system and adjusting the gas composition from air to helium, i.e., adjusting the speed of sound. Impact angle was additionally varied as we found pronounced effects of angle on the simple-to-complex transition.

Different substrates led to different impact outcomes (Fig. 1). Particles were found adhered on the surface of low-density polyethylene and high-density polyethylene substrates, while simple crater formation without particle adherence was observed on Teflon polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), nylon 66, and polypropylene (PP) samples. Simple-to-complex transitional craters where the cavity bed is a flat surface were observed in acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) and polystyrene (PS) materials. Last, on polyetherimide (PEI), polycarbonate (PC), PMMA, and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) samples, central uplift formation in the middle of the crater, i.e., complex crater formation, was observed. For substrates with visible craters,Fig. 1displays exemplary atomic force microscopy (AFM) reconstructions of impact outcomes with a 90° impact angle, 1.8-μm-diameter particles, and an impact velocity of 840 m s−1. Reconstructions emphasize how the crater volume and central uplift size scaled distinctly for each material, with PMMA and PVC yielding uplift heights that uniquely exceed the surface level.

(A) PTFE, (B) nylon 66, (C) PP, (D) ABS, (E) PS, (F) PEI, (G) PC, (H) PMMA, and (I) PVC. For all images, the impact angle was 90°, the working gas was helium, the particle diameter was 1.8 μm, and the impact speed was 840 m s−1.

With a range of impact outcomes observed, we seek to (i) confirm that the central uplift observed is not the result of impacted particles embedded into the material and (ii) understand how substrate material properties and impact conditions affect the simple-to-complex crater transition. With regard to (i), we observed that the central uplift heights were two orders of magnitude smaller than the particle diameter. This suggests that these topographies result from material rebounding because of particle impact and are not the impacting particles themselves. We used scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analyses to determine whether these surface topographies result from particle debris. As shown in fig. S2, while particle debris deposited outside the crater, as indicated by the presence of Fe and S atoms, only traces of C and O atoms were found on the undamaged surface as well as in the middle of the crater for PC samples. Similarly, no Fe atoms were detected within the craters of the PVC samples. After conducting SEM/EDS analysis on the PC samples, we repeated additional AFM scans, observing a reduction in the central uplift heights. This reduction appears to be linked to the energy imparted to the samples during the SEM/EDS process. This further supports the notion that the observed formations are complex craters; similar effects have been hypothesized for complex craters on icy moons, where past heat flux events are believed to have caused relaxation, diminishing the central uplift extent (35,36).

To then understand how material properties affect simple-to-complex crater transition, we carried out x-ray diffraction (XRD) and differential scanning calorimetry analyses of samples. The results, presented in figs. S3 and S4, respectively, suggest a correlation between crater complexity and substrate crystallinity. Simple crater formations were observed for all semicrystalline polymers (PTFE, nylon 66, and PP, which all had noticeable peaks in XRD). Of the remaining amorphous materials, styrene-based ABS and PS had a low degree of crystallinity and exhibited “transitional” craters without clear central uplift formation. Meanwhile, PEI, PC, PMMA, and PVC substrates, which had no detectable crystallinity, exhibited central uplift formations, and we conclude that in polymer samples, amorphous materials are capable of yielding complex craters during high-speed impacts.

whereUis the particle velocity, and θ is the angle between the particle velocity vector and the surface. The inverse of πTis similar in functional form to the Eckert number. For perpendicular impacts, πTvalues ranged from 0.5 to 2 (Table 1) with the smallest πTleading to craters of increasing complexity. We therefore propose that for amorphous substrates without crystalline features, πTis the governing parameter for the simple-to-complex crater transition.

Dimensionless parameters are calculated at the highest specific kinetic energy setting. Working gas: helium. Particle diameter: 1.8 μm. Particle speed: 840 m s−1. Impact angle: 90°. Melting temperature values are used for PTFE, nylon 66, and PP samples.

It is also noteworthy that ABS and PS exhibited lowHTvalues, for which central uplift formation would typically be expected. We suggest that the lack of these features may be attributable to the inhomogeneity of these polycrystalline materials, where crystalline pockets embedded within the amorphous regions have distinct mechanical and thermal properties. These inhomogeneities might constrain the flow of the surrounding amorphous matrix during the impact process, reducing the development of complex topographies. This characteristic may also contribute to the lack of complex features in semicrystalline materials, as they have a similar heterogeneous structure with higher crystallinity. Similar observations have been made in simulations, where increasing the thickness of interbedded weak layers led to a lack of central uplifts (40). It has also been reported that certain terrestrial craters lack central uplift formations, even when their size would typically warrant their presence (41). These craters similarly formed in mixed targets with thick sedimentary layers complementing their crystalline structure. Meanwhile, other mixed target craters with relatively thinner sedimentary layers do exhibit central uplift formations. Although our experiments reveal comparable trends, we acknowledge that large-scale impacts involve additional complexities including but not limited to gravitational effects and heterogeneities. These cannot be fully reproduced at the microscale.

Identifying that amorphous, homogeneous substrates are prone to complex crater formation, we investigated four materials that exhibited distinct central uplifts under a wider range of impact conditions. With the particle velocity kept constant, the impact angle was varied between 90°, 75°, 60°, and 45°.Figures 2and3show crater topographies obtained for PC and PMMA, respectively. Similar plots for other materials and conditions can be found in figs. S5 to S7.

(A) 90°, (B) 75°, (C) 60°, and (D) 45° FeSO4impacts. (Top row) 3D reconstructions from AFM measurements. (Middle row) Contour plots. (Bottom row) Crater profiles along a single axis aligned horizontally in the middle of the planes shown in the middle row images. Working gas: helium. Particle diameter: 1.8 μm. Particle speed: 840 m s−1. Impact directions are indicated with arrows.

(A) 90°, (B) 75°, (C) 60°, and (D) 45° FeSO4impacts. (Top row) 3D reconstructions from AFM measurements. (Middle row) Contour plots. (Bottom row) Crater profiles along a single axis aligned horizontally in the middle of the planes shown in the middle row images. Working gas: helium. Particle diameter: 1.8 μm. Particle speed: 840 m s−1. Impact directions are indicated with arrows.

Varying the impact angle, we observe several surface features for craters that are not present in craters formed on metallic targets under similar impact conditions (42,43). There are pronounced elevated rims appearing around polymer crater cavities. With decreasing impact angle, the shape of the craters changes from circular to elliptical, resulting in the crater rims elongated on one side. Consequently, the distribution of the rim volume became asymmetrical, reflecting the angle of the impact. In addition, as the angle of impact decreased, central uplift volumes decreased consistently across all materials examined. For PC samples, crater complexity completely disappeared at a 45° impact angle (Fig. 2D), and the crater bed is flat, similar to what is observed in simple-to-complex transitional craters (44). For PMMA samples, central uplift heights exceeded the crater depth. At 90° and 75° impact angles, a ring-like structure was observed surrounding the central uplift, shown in detail in fig. S8. This topographical feature closely resembles protobasin formation, i.e., the transitional topography from central uplift to peak-ring structures typically seen in meteorite craters (45). PVC samples had an unusual trend with increasing impact angle, where crater complexity completely disappeared after 60° impact, with the largest central uplift for 90° and 75° impact angles (fig. S7).

Figure 4 (A to D)shows crater topographies obtained on PC samples for different particle velocities at 90° and 45° impact angles. ComparingFig. 4AwithFig. 4B, when the velocity of FeSO4particles increased from 520 to 840 m s−1, the craters transitioned from simple to complex forms. ComparingFig. 4CwithFig. 4D, which are both simple craters, it is evident that in the vicinity of the central uplift formation, the particle with higher velocity resulted in deeper cavities. Although complex craters form under conditions with larger impact velocity and kinetic energy, it appears that they have similar depths to simple craters formed under lower-speed impact conditions.Figure 4Eplots the maximum cavity depth observed in craters as a function of the impact velocity normal to the surface for PC substrates. The cavity increases with increasing normal velocity as the impact velocity approaches 600 m s−1but then flattens and decreases. The decrease in cavity depth is associated with the onset of central uplift formation; data inFig. 4Eare also labeled by the degree of crater complexity (defined subsequently), and the onset of complexity is corroborated with the decrease in crater depth. In general, we find that complex craters found on polymers are shallower compared to their simple counterparts; as noted in Introduction, this is commonly observed in complex crater studies on astrophysical bodies and is presumably due to the partitioning of impact energy into the “flow” energy required to form the central uplift (i.e., material rebound) as opposed to solely into material deformation or removal during impact.

Crater cross-sectional profiles along a single axis for different impact angles and velocities: (A) 90° and 520 m s−1, (B) 90° and 840 m s−1, (C) 45° and 520 m s−1, and (D) 45° and 840 m s−1. (E) Cavity maximum depth variation with respect to the particle velocity normal to the surface. Letters correspond to the conditions on the left. Circle: 90°; square: 75°; triangle: 60°; diamond: 45° impact angle. The percentage of crater complexity is represented by a green background. Particle diameter: 1.8 μm. Error bars represent the standard deviation over 5 to 10 individual craters per examined condition.

To further probe how kinetic energy and specific kinetic energy (energy per unit mass) affect the simple-to-complex crater transition, we examined impacts with different diameter particles. Given that the particles were accelerated via a gas drag accelerator system, increasing the particle diameter resulted in decreased particle velocity. Therefore, the larger particles had lower specific kinetic energy, but they had higher overall kinetic energy values.Figure 5 (A to C)shows crater profiles resulting from increasing particle diameters for PEI, PC, and PVC materials, respectively. With PVC substrates, crater complexity exhibited an unusual trend, where the central uplift began to collapse downward centrally with decreasing velocity. However, in general, with increasing particle diameter, the craters transitioned from complex forms to flat-bedded cavities and eventually to simple craters for both PC and PEI targets at the largest examined particle diameters. This confirms that the complexity of the crater scales with the specific kinetic energy (i.e., the denominator of πT) of the particle rather than its total kinetic energy. Specific kinetic energy as the governing parameter for complex crater formation has been difficult to identify via examination of gravitationally driven impact events. In gravitationally driven planetary impacts, the impact velocity does not scale inversely with particle diameter; these two parameters are either positively correlated or uncorrelated depending on the degree of atmospheric drag. For all craters examined, we used AFM reconstruction to compute the cavity volume (excluding the central uplift;Vcavity), the rim volume (Vrim), and the complex volume (the volume of the central uplift;Vcomplex), as defined in Materials and Methods. The total displaced volume is then calculated for each crater as the sum of these volumes.Figure 5 (D and E)shows the variation in cavity diameter and total displaced volume relative to impact kinetic energy, respectively. Both of these properties scale clearly with particle kinetic energy irrespective of whether the crater is simple or complex in topography. While no significant difference was observed in cavity diameter between different materials, both vinyl-based polymers PVC and PMMA exhibited lower total displaced volumes. One possible cause of this could be the brittle nature of PMMA and PVC compared to the ductile engineering thermoplastics PEI and PC (46,47), leading to central uplifts exceeding crater depth.

Crater cross-sectional profiles for different-sized particle impacts on (A) PEI, (B) PC, and (C) PVC targets. Lines with lighter shades and wider dots represent larger particle sizes. (D) Cavity diameter and (E) total displaced volume variation relative to particle kinetic energy for different materials. PEI: orange; PC: black; PMMA: blue; PVC: purple. The green solid lines represent the particle diameter and volume for the impacts examined, showing that the craters are smaller than the impacting particles under all conditions.

(A) Crater complexity percentage variation with respect to the inverse thermal scaling parameter. Logarithmic scaling of the plot is shown in the inset. (B) Cratering efficiency variation with respect to the strength-scaled size. Crater measurements on aluminum and copper targets, as reported by Andrewset al.(42,43), are represented in the data with crosses and stars, respectively. Orange: PEI; black: PC; blue: PMMA; purple: PVC substrate. Circle: 90°; square: 75°; triangle: 60°; diamond: 45° impact angle.

The large negative value for the scaling inEq. 3indicates that the degree of complexity increases markedly as inverse πTincreases in amorphous polymers. With this definition of πT, it is also noteworthy that the onset of complex crater formation begins nearπT−1=1, suggesting that central uplift structures form when the specific kinetic energy of the impact, adjusted for surface normal velocity, exceeds the specific energy required to bring the substrate to the glass transition temperature locally. We note that these results include data from impacts with varying particle diameters and impact angles. As previously noted, PVC samples exhibited unusual behavior among polymers that form central uplifts. We believe that this behavior is likely associated with the distinctly different thermal properties of PVC as the energy required for glass transition is almost four times lower than that of PMMA (compareTable 1).

InEqs. 4and5, substrate density, impacting particle mass, and crater volume (total displaced volume) are denoted by ρt,Mp, andVc, respectively.Yis the material shear strength. We note that usingVcas the total displaced volume inEq. 4here is unique; in prior works, only simple craters with clearly defined volumes were examined.Figure 6Bshows that the cratering efficiency is inversely proportional to πY, which aligns with the observation that higher specific kinetic energy and lower material shear strength yield larger crater volumes. Results for polymer substrates are compared to results obtained for metal substrates (42,43). Although the gap between two sets of polymers is still evident, the data from PC and PEI targets do overlap with those from metallic substrates, suggesting that polymer cratering behavior is not distinct from metal behavior in terms of crater size for a given impact energy once complex crater formation and material properties are accounted for.

In total, our experiments show unequivocally that complex crater formation can occur for microparticle impacts on amorphous polymers below their glass transition temperatures and that the degree crater complexity scales with a dimensionless representation of the surface normal specific kinetic energy. The normalizing parameter was found to be the specific thermal energy required to increase the polymer substrate temperature to the glass transition temperature. Crater complexity is further influenced by the homogeneity of the polymer, i.e., polymers that are largely amorphous but contain nanocrystalline grains were observed to have “transitional craters,” which do not have central uplift features signifying clear complex crater formation. Our experiments provide insight into impact damage to materials at high speeds, which can occur not only for astrophysical bodies but also on high-speed flight vehicles encountering dust or aerosol particles. Future experiments with higher translational energy collisions would enable further probing of complex crater formation, possibly of crystalline materials, which may be governed by the ratio of specific kinetic energy to the energy required to melt the substrate.

PC, PVC, PMMA, PEI, ABS, PS, PP, nylon 66, Teflon PTFE, low-density polyethylene, and high-density polyethylene sheets were obtained from McMaster-Carr. Each sheet was cut into samples measuring 6.0 mm in width, 50 mm in length, and 3.2 mm in thickness.

The crystallinity of each polymer sample was calculated using XRD with Bruker D8 Discover equipment at the Characterization Facility, University of Minnesota. Each sample was scanned over three frames, with each frame lasting 600 s and covering a 2θ range from 5° to 75° in total. The integrated intensity values from each frame were then merged and baseline corrected. To determine the crystallinity degree of each material, the area under the curve was calculated after separating the amorphous humps from the crystalline peaks.

To achieve repeatable production of highly monodisperse and spherical particles, we used ferrous sulfate tetrahydrate (FeSO4·7H2O) as a precursor. Particles were generated using a TSI Inc. Vibrating Orifice Aerosol Generator (VOAG) Model 3450 (49). FeSO4solutions with different concentrations were pumped from syringes at a rate between 25 and 30 ml/s and a pressure of 1.7 bar. Dilution and dispersion gases were fed at constant volumetric flow rates of 13 and 1.1 liters/min for air and 28 and 0.8 liters/min for helium, respectively. A 20-μm-diameter round aperture from National Aperture Inc. was used as the orifice and vibrated at a frequency between 40 and 50 kHz. Desiccant beads placed downstream of the VOAG dried the generated droplets, resulting in spherical-shaped particles shown in fig. S1. The particle diameter was determined by the concentration and flow rate of the FeSO4solution, as well as the orifice vibrational frequency. Spray-dried particles, such as those used here, are polycrystalline with submicrometer grain sizes, often independent of particle diameter (50).

Particles size distributions were measured after drying droplets with a TSI Inc. Aerodynamic Particle Sizer (APS) 3321 before and after each impact experiment to ensure that particles were monodisperse and remained at the target diameter. The geometric diameters of the particles were obtained from SEM images. From these two parameters, the density of the particles was calculated to be 2700 kg m−3.

Generated particles traveling downstream were accelerated through a converging-diverging supersonic nozzle with a throat diameter of 1 mm and an exit diameter of 4.6 mm. The upstream of the nozzle was open to atmospheric pressure, while the downstream pressure was maintained at 3 torr (400 Pa) for air and 5 torr (666.7 Pa) for helium using a two-stage vacuum pump (Edwards E2M80 pump and an Edwards EH500 blower). Accelerated particles impacted on substrates placed 6 mm downstream of the nozzle. From the nozzle exit to the substrate surface, particle velocities were measured at several locations using a laser Doppler velocimetry instrument (TSI Inc. Model PS-TM-1D-532). Particles experienced only a negligible amount of deceleration after the stagnation shock formed above the substrate. Further information on the velocity measurements can be found in (51). Average experimental conditions are given inTable 2. The upper limit in particle velocity with the acceleration and measurement system we use is near 0.84 km s−1. Examining higher velocity impacts would require higher upstream pressures with further gas expansion or using smaller particles. However, higher pressure complicates particle injection, and submicrometer particles are difficult to measure using laser Doppler velocimetry and begin to deviate in trajectory in the shock region before impacting the substrate.

Postimpact features were analyzed using AFM with a Bruker Nanoscope V Dimension ICON instrument located at the Characterization Facility, University of Minnesota. Bruker ScanAsyst-Air probes with 2-nm-radius triangular tips were used to scan each sample with 256 samples/line resolution and 2-kHz peak force tapping frequency. The scan size of each image was varying, while the scan rate was kept below 1 Hz.

Surface topographies obtained from AFM were analyzed by using a computer program by breaking each crater into three main components as shown inFig. 7. The rim and crater volumes were identified as the volumes above and below the substrate surface level, respectively. In complex craters, the uplift volume was defined as the volume inside the crater where the slope transitions to create a hill-like formation. For angled impacts, the baseline for this hill was determined on the basis of a surface aligned with the impact angle. The total displaced volume was determined by summing the cavity, rim, and complex volumes. Crater complexity was then assessed by calculating the ratio of the complex volume to the total displaced volume. All three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions of crater data were obtained using Gwyddion software.

(A) AFM scanning. (B) Volume dissection generated by a computer program. (C) Crater dimensions labeled for normal and angled impacts.

The composition of the crater was determined using SEM and EDS. These analyses were conducted with a Thermo Apreo 2S Lo-Vac instrument, equipped with an Oxford Instruments Ultimax 100 mm2 detector and Aztec Live chemical imaging system.

Funding:This research was conducted with support from the FY2020 MURI grant N00014-20-1-2682 from the Office of Naval Research. All SEM, EDS, AFM, and XRD data were obtained at the Characterization Facility, University of Minnesota, which receives partial support from the NSF through the MRSEC (award number DMR-2011401) and NNCI (award number ECCS-2025124) programs.

Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.