China’s fast development is markedly impacting on migration, which has brought tremendous pressure and severe challenges to family planning services. Moreover, family planning (FP) is mostly regarded as women’s responsibility by some Chinese cultures and societies. Several female contraceptives are easily accessible but only a few are known and widely used. Therefore, this study examined the rural-urban differentials in the factors associated with modern contraceptive usage among married non-pregnant reproductive-aged Chinese women in Hubei Province.

A community-based cross-sectional study was conducted from 1st January 2014 to 30th November 2016 to recruit 6,356 married reproductive-aged women in Hubei Province, China. Descriptive statistics, chi-square tests, and multivariable logistic regression were used to examine associations between sociodemographic and reproductive health factors and contraceptive use. Statistical significance was set atp≤ 0.05.

The study showed that unweighted proportion of contraceptive use among rural and urban reproductive aged women were 88.5% and 87.1% respectively. Usage of contraceptive was found to be predicted by age (< 25 years: AOR = 3.14,p= 0.001; 25 to 34 years: AOR = 2.00,p= 0.018), ethnic minority other than Han (AOR = 0.29,p= 0.001), number of children (no child: AOR = 12.55,p= 0.001; one child: AOR = 1.75,p= 0.002), and knowledge of condom (AOR = 3.19,p= 0.001) among rural dwellers. Age (< 25 years: AOR = 2.82,p= 0.005), number of children (no child: AOR = 10.68,p= 0.001), spouse use of contraceptives (AOR = 1.63,p= 0.001) and discussion on contraception with spouse (AOR = 1.79,p= 0.003) were determinants of contraceptive usage among urban dwellers.

Contraceptive use across both residencies were high. Age, ethnic minority other than Han, parity, and knowledge of condoms were factors associated with contraceptive use among rural settlers. Also, age, parity, spousal usage of contraceptives and discussion on contraception with spouses were determinants of contraceptive use among urban settlers. Thus, family planning education should be all-inclusive, well prepared, and relevant to women to allow them to make informed decisions and improve the uptake of family planning services among rural residents. Men should be encouraged to participate in reproductive health service counselling and support to improve comfort and uptake of contraceptives among female spouses among urban populations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12889-025-24116-x.

Contraception is a key component of reproductive health, contributing significantly to the prevention of unintended pregnancies and unsafe abortions, while also promoting improved maternal health outcomes [1]. Despite these benefits, the uptake of modern contraceptive methods remains constrained by widespread myths and misconceptions [2–4]. In its 2013 report, the World Health Organization (WHO) highlighted notable global progress in contraceptive use; however, uptake across regions has been uneven and lower than anticipated [5]. Globally, contraceptive use increased modestly from 54% in 1990 to 57.4% in 2014 [6].

Currently, approximately 28.7% of women rely on sterilization, while IUD use stands at about 40.6% [11]. Other contraceptive methods such as pills, condoms, and implants are used less frequently and remain relatively underutilized [8,11]. Additionally, China’s rapid urbanization and internal migration have created disparities in access to quality family planning services, particularly for mobile and rural populations [12]. These mobility patterns have complicated the use of reproductive health services, even where services are technically available [13–15].

Understanding women’s perspectives on male involvement in family planning is critical for promoting informed contraceptive choices and empowering women through education and shared decision-making. Enhancing awareness and increasing contraceptive use contribute to sustainable population management and improved sexual and reproductive health outcomes [16–19]. Although a wide range of female contraceptives is available in China, few methods are widely known or commonly used [20,21]. Knowledge of contraception remains particularly low among young Chinese women who have experienced unintended pregnancies [22].

While several studies have examined contraceptive use across China, few have focused on rural–urban differences, particularly in the post-policy reform era. This study seeks to fill that gap by exploring the determinants of modern contraceptive use among married, non-pregnant women of reproductive age in Hubei Province. The findings aim to inform equitable and inclusive reproductive health interventions tailored to diverse socio-demographic contexts.

This paper was extracted from a large population-based cross-sectional study on contraceptive usage and family planning expectations among married couples in the Hubei Province by the Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan. The study area covers approximately 102 counties. Hubei province is found in the central part of China with 38 districts and covers an area of about 185,900 km square with a projected population of about 57.99 million as at 2013. Approximately 45.49% of inhabitants live in rural areas. Correspondingly, 45,958 registered households are women and men with a sex ratio of male: female 103:83 and family size of 3 persons/household (sampling fraction 0.822%) as at 2013 [23]. Wuhan is the capital city of Hubei province with an overall population of approximately 10.607 million people. Most residents in Hubei province are the Han ethnic group (95.6%) and 4.4% ethnic minorities. Conversely, 11.4% of Hubei population are migrants.

The survey employed a community-based cross-sectional study using multistage random sampling to obtain study samples between 1st January 2014 and 30th November 2016 in Hubei Province. Relying on review of literature and expert responses, the Hubei province was selected because it is estimated to have a larger population-based, thus reflecting greater numbers of reproductive-aged women within the Yangtze River Basin area. Primarily, counties/districts, cities, towns and communities were differentiated into urban and rural areas. With support from family planning committees and district health technical professionals, all recognized areas were covered. The key characteristic of area distinction was based on economic growth corresponding to the National Bureau of Statistics database [23]. Also, the primary characteristics were further defined according to population size and density, and number of communities, districts/counties, cities and towns. The study used the random sampling method to select 23 counties/districts from the province. Further, a random sampling method was used to select 4 districts/counties within each city, and 4 townships within each district/county was further sampled randomly for a total of 798 residential areas, segregated into rural and urban localities. The study was then conducted with between 40 and 70 residents sampled from each community or village using a systematic random sampling method. WeChat (Shenzhen Tencent Computer System Co., Ltd, Shenzhen, China) a Chinese online platform was used in addition to paper questions. This online system was used because majority of the Chinese population use it, as it is user friendly. Those who could read, write, understand, interpret and self-administer the questionnaires were sent the online survey form on WeChat to fill and return them to project enumerators. Though, there could be chances of selection bias between those literate and non-literates and those who use WeChat or not, the WeChat platform was mainly used for those who were literate and/or had the app to mitigate this bias. However, those who could not read, write, understand, interpret and self-administer the survey questions, a hard copy questionnaire was provided, and respondents were assisted by enumerators to fill the questions. Responses of respondents were read back to them after the survey for them to confirm their answers and needed amendments were made. To equally reduce the chances of selection bias, those who were non-literates, did not have the app or both had their responses recorded with a hard paper questionnaire. To enhance reach and sample size, WeChat pop-up invitations were deployed within selected enumeration areas to invite additional participants to increase the sample size and subsequently the power of the study; however, only individuals residing in the pre-identified sampling areas were eligible. This method was used to supplement recruitment but not as a replacement for the random sampling procedure. All responses from these recruits were checked against eligibility criteria (residence, age, marital status), and only qualifying participants were included in the final dataset. Although this method introduced a non-random element, its impact on bias was minimized by restricting inclusion to sampled communities and applying the same eligibility filters. All surveys were circulated and gathered relevant information face-to-face at the community level using a semi-structured questionnaire (see Additional file1). The questions were constructed based on demographic health survey (DHS) data, previous local studies [23,24] and consensus of experts on population and reproductive health from the Huanzhou University of Science and Technology. This study was approved by the ethics committee on research of the Huanzhou University of Science and Technology, and informed consent was obtained from each participant prior to completing the survey. The preface of the survey or questionnaire explained the purpose of the study, and all data were collected without recording any identifying data except for sex, i.e. male or female. Pretesting of the survey questions was conducted in three cities of the Hubei province to assess the validity of the questions and needed amendments were made. A total of 17,555 respondents were interviewed. Out of which 11,199 men were excluded from the analyses. A sample of 6356 non-pregnant married Chinese women aged between 18 and 49 years, resident in urban and rural areas were further filtered for analyses (Fig.1). Among them, approximately 61% (3,877 women) completed the survey via WeChat, while 39% (2,479 women) participated through face-to-face interviews. This mixed-mode approach helped increase accessibility while minimizing literacy and technological barriers. The eligible population were selected using age (18–49-year-olds), a member of household and married with a sexual partner, length of stay in the community (for at least 6 months) as the core criteria. The questionnaires were structured into 4 sections: (a) socio-demographic characteristics, (b) family planning status, (c) determinants of female contraceptive use and respondents’ opinion about male involvement in family planning (FP), (d) expectations and unmet needs of populations and barriers to contraceptive usage. Ten district health workers, 7 peer educators, and 13 trained young researchers recruited from the Institute of Reproductive Health, Huazhong University of Science and Technology were recruited and trained to help in the data collection with quality control overseen by two professors specialized in public health. The interview process lasted 20–45 min. Figure1depicts a schematic presentation of data from initial recruitment to those finally used in the analysis.

The socio-demographic variables included ethnicity, residency, age, educational level, and occupation.

Information on the number and gender of living children of the respondents was sourced. Respondents were requested to explain their experience and perceptions of contraceptives they have used or are currently using. Respondents who reported not using any method of contraception were required to disclose the reason for not using any contraceptive method. In this study, the use of modern contraceptive methods refers to the current use of any safe, effective, and legal methods to prevent pregnancy such as the pills/oral contraceptives, implants/Norplant, injectables, emergency contraceptives, lactational amenorrhea method (LAM), condoms, vaginal barriers, Intra-Uterine Devices (IUDs), and sterilization.

A document by the Center for Disease Control (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) [25] with well-illustrated contraceptive methods was shown to respondents to identify male and female contraceptive methods that they were familiar with. For example, respondents were asked whether they knew of Vasectomy as a contraceptive method, Condom and Withdrawal as contraceptives and asked to identify them as such- a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ response was provided.

Married women of reproductive age were clustered into two groups of ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to give an account on their attitude concerning the usage of family planning services. Attendance to family planning education session, discussion of contraceptive methods, spouse opinion on contraception including condoms, and male involvement in Family Planning decisions constitute the attitudes.

The IBM Statistical Package for Social Sciences (IBM-SPSS) version 22.0 was used for analyses after a double data entry and cleaning was done using Epi info 3.5.1. The statistical analysis focused on 6356 married women of reproductive age 18–49 years. Cases with missing data on key outcome variables were excluded from the final analysis. Variables with minimal missingness (< 5%) were handled using pairwise deletion. Results were presented in frequency and percentages as descriptive statistics. A Chi-square test was performed to establish the association between the dependent (current contraceptive use) and independent variables. Additionally, multivariate logistic regression was used to determine the independent factors associated with contraceptive usage. Test of statistical significance atp≤ 0.05 (2-sided) was employed for all analyses. Although data collection was conducted across multiple communities and administrative districts, no survey weights were applied, and clustering at the community or district level was not adjusted for in the regression models. As a result, the standard errors and confidence intervals may be slightly underestimated due to non-independence of observations and may have ignored possible contextual influences (e.g., district-level economic or policy variation). This may further suggest that prevalence might be overstated, and estimates should be considered as sample rates or proportions than population prevalence. Future studies using a stratified or multi-level design could more robustly account for clustering effects. Moreover, the sample was split by rural/urban for separate regression analysis. However, statistical test of interaction (residence × predictor(s) were not considered in this study.

The socio-demographic characteristics of the study respondents are presented in Table1. The mean age of the respondents was 34.14 years (SD = 6.97). There was a significant difference in age of respondents between urban and rural areas. Regarding health education, most (57%) rural women had completed secondary level education, whereas the majority (38.1%) of urban dwellers had either college or university level education.

Compared with rural women, proportion of urban women’s spouses using contraceptives (64.1% vs. 56.9%) and their knowledge of contraceptives were higher (condom 97.3% vs. 96.2% withdrawal 86.2% vs. 79.0%). Moreover, the participation rate of health education in family planning services was lower in urban areas than that of rural areas (76.3% vs. 80.7% Table2).

The use of contraceptive methods was almost similar among rural and urban married Chinese women of reproductive age (88.5% vs. 87.1%) as presented in Fig.2whereas, about 12.9% and 11.5% represent the percentage distribution of non-contraceptive users in rural and urban dwellers, respectively. These rates reflect the study sample and should not be interpreted as population prevalence due to the lack of data weighting.

In rural areas, age (p =0.001), ethnic group (p =0.001), number of living children (p =0.001), spouse ever used contraceptive (p =0.001), knowledge of vasectomy as contraceptive (p= 0.001), knowledge of condom as contraceptive (p =0.001), knowledge of withdrawal as contraceptive (p= 0.015), discussion of contraceptive with spouse (p =0.001) and perception on men’s involvement in FP (p =0.001) were significantly associated with the usage of contraceptive. Usage of contraceptive in urban areas were significantly predicted by age (p =0.001), educational level (p =0.009), number of living children (p =0.001), spouse ever used contraceptive (p =0.001), knowledge of vasectomy as contraceptive (p =0.001), discussion of contraceptive with spouse (p =0.001) and perception on men’s involvement in FP (p =0.002 Table3).

Various reasons provided for not using any form of contraceptives by respondents in rural (n= 454) and urban (n= 324) areas. More than three quarters of respondents in both areas did not provide any reason for not using any form of contraceptive (Fig.3).

Women (81.2%) and (82.3%) in urban and rural areas respectively argued that family planning should be a mutually shared responsibility, and therefore their husbands/partners should be involved in such critical decisions. Interestingly, 7.4% and 6.8% of the women from rural and urban areas do not see a need for their partners’ involvement in family planning as presented in Table4.

Most of the respondents in both areas were not familiar with male contraceptives (Fig.4). The most popular method among the respondents was male condom in both areas. The easy accessibility and easy to use method could have made condom well known among other forms of male contraceptives. Vasectomy was known to only 0.8% and 1.7% of respondents in urban and rural areas, respectively.

IUD was the most known female contraceptive among the respondents, about 57.2% and 53.7% of females in urban and rural areas respectively (Fig.5) whereas 14.7% and 4.5% of respondents in urban and rural areas were familiar with tubal ligation. Vaginal ring, injection, rhythm method, pills were the least known female contraceptives in both areas among the respondents.

Usage of contraceptive was found to be predicted by age (less than 25 years: AOR = 3.14, 95% CI: 1.69–5.81,p= 0.001 25 to 34 years: AOR = 2.00, 95% CI: 1.13–3.55,p= 0.018), ethnic minority other than Han (AOR = 0.29, 95% CI: 0.18–0.46,p= 0.001), number of children (no child: AOR = 12.55, 95% CI: 7.93–19.87,p= 0.001 one child: AOR = 1.75, 95% CI: 1.23–2.49,p= 0.002), and knowledge of Condom (AOR = 3.19, 95% CI: 1.86–5.49,p= 0.001) among rural dwellers. On the other hand, age (less than 25 years: AOR = 2.82, 95% CI: 1.37–5.80,p= 0.005), number of children (no child: AOR = 10.68, 95% CI: 5.94–19.18,p= 0.001), spouse usage of contraceptive approval (AOR = 1.63, 95% CI: 1.21–2.19,p= 0.001) and participation of spouse in FP (AOR = 1.79, 95% CI: 1.22–2.57,p= 0.001) were key determinants of contraceptive usage among urban dwellers (Table5).

From 1994 to 2013, family planning decisions among married couples in China followed the firm “one-child” family planning policy [14]. However, with the introduction of safer and smarter contraceptives, there has been a relaxed one child family planning policy since 2013 [9]. Key socio-economic and environmental factors intricately influence couples’ contraceptive choices [16]. The study explored factors associated with modern contraceptive usage among currently married non-pregnant women by residence in Hubei Province, China. The study revealed that, age (< 35 years), number of children (0 or 1), and knowledge of condoms as contraceptive methods were positively associated with contraceptive usage among married women resident rural areas. Again, ethnic minorities other than Han negatively correlated with contraceptive use among the respondents in rural areas. Alternatively, age (< 25 years), having no living child, usage of contraceptives by spouse and involvement of male partner in FP were key determinants of contraceptive usage among urban dwellers.

Pursuing higher education and career development is very high among Chinese women. The general aspiration is to provide a better future for their children [29]. Therefore, if they are not economically sound to provide their children with the best future, they resort to contraceptives to delay pregnancy until they are well equipped financially, psychologically, and materially [9,10]. The topic of sex is becoming more open, and sex before marriage is not a taboo as it used to be. Therefore, the tendency to use contraceptives to prevent unplanned pregnancy was very high [9,10]. Moreover, the Chinese Government has recognized the importance of promoting the use of condoms in the fight against human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) and other sexually transmitted diseases [30].

Traditionally, it has been argued that high parity is positively correlated with contraceptive usage irrespective of residence [32]. Remarkably, our results showed otherwise as the number of living children among both rural and urban married Chinese women who reported to have no child were 12.55 and 10.68 times more likely to use contraceptives than those who had two or more children. Also, rural married Chinese women who had at least one child been 1.75 more likely to use contraceptive than their counterparts who reported to have two or more living children. This result may be due to the one-child and other related birth control policies implemented over three decades ago, which might have a negative impact on procreative intentions among Chinese couples [10,30]. Other prominent factors that contribute to the departure from procreative aspirations and actual fertility behaviors are the postponement of age at first marriage and childbirth, infecundity, competing factors and opportunity cost, and the costs involved in childcare [33,34]. Among the disincentives, the overly high costs of having and nurturing children have been cited as the top two most important factors militating against reproductive decision-making among couples [33,34].

Also, married Chinese women who revealed that, their partners have never used contraceptives before were positively associated with contraceptive usage in urban dwellers when compared to those whose spouses ever used contraceptives. Conversely, there was no significant association between contraceptive use and partners/spouse who ever used contraceptive among married Chinese women living in rural areas. This may be ascribed to the fact that, most Chinese married women in urban areas are empowered economically to take their personal reproductive health decisions with or without involvement and agreement of their partners/spouse than their counterparts in rural areas [35,36]. Their relatively stable economic status enables them to afford and purchase modern contraceptives without necessarily relying on their partners [35,36]. Again, most married Chinese women in urban areas are highly educated which empowers them to make informed decisions on their reproductive health and contraceptive use [37]. It is also evidenced that, education usually improves the knowledge and attitude of women towards modern contraceptive use [37,38]. However, the data were collected between 2014 and 2016, nearly a decade ago. Since then, China’s family planning policies and contraceptive landscape have continued to evolve. These changes may affect the current applicability of our findings, and updated research is needed to assess contemporary patterns and determinants of contraceptive use.

Additionally, we found that married Chinese women who indicated no knowledge of condom as contraceptives were 3.19 more likely to use contraceptives among rural settlers when compared to respondents with knowledge of condom as contraceptives. Necessary logistics and sexual reproductive health education to these unreached communities in rural China may contribute to such findings [39]. While this finding appears counterintuitive, it may reflect reporting biases or misunderstanding of contraceptive terminology, especially in populations with limited health literacy, as other studies have shown that those from rural areas have low health literacy [40]. Alternatively, it is possible that women relied on provider-driven methods like IUDs or sterilization without being aware of other methods such as condoms. However, this interpretation should be treated cautiously, as the association may also result from unmeasured confounders or misclassification. There is therefore the need to increase dissemination of relevant information and education on contraceptives to women in rural China to equip them to make informed decisions on their sexual reproductive health [10]. Although, these results differ from previous studies, which found a positive correlation between knowledge of contraceptives and usage, they are consistent with previous studies in Nigeria [40].

Our study did not find a significant association between knowledge of condom as contraceptives and contraceptive usage among married Chinese women who live in urban areas. Moreover, the present study showed that partners involvement in FP positively correlated with contraceptive usage among urban dwellers. However, there was no significant association of contraceptive use among married Chinese women living in rural areas. This may be ascribed to the fact that, in the urban areas couples are more enlightened and more open to discuss their sexual and reproductive health concerns as compared to Chinese couples in rural areas who may be more reserved and conservative on the issue of sexuality [39]. Additionally, married couples in the urban areas are more informed and have easier access to FP services as compared to their counterparts in rural areas where access to family planning services is usually limited [40]. Hence there should be a deliberate intensification of family planning education in rural China and inclusive-family decision making on family planning by couples.

The study employed a large sample size. The study also provides relevant context on China’s family planning history and contraceptive trends as well as covering the one-child policy and rapid development. Furthermore, the study adds to the body of knowledge on rural–urban differences in the factors associated with contraceptive usage among married women in China. However, some limitations were encountered in this study. This study used data from only non-pregnant married women; thus, future studies should explore unmarried women of reproductive age to better understand their knowledge and attitudes towards contraceptive usage in Hubei province. The cross-sectional nature of the study may prevent making any causal inference about the associations. Also, information on contraceptive use was self-reported hence the chances of reporting bias should not be discounted while interpreting the findings. The sample population was limited to only females, therefore male perspectives on contraceptive use should be explored in future studies. Again, there are chances of social desirability bias, sampling/selection bias (due to the literacy rates and/or use of WeChat), and reporting or response bias. Further, sampling weights were not generated, and cluster design was not adjusted for in the analysis, thus results of this study should be interpreted with caution and generalizations should not be exaggerated or overly emphasized. Although rural and urban samples differed significantly in age distribution, we did not apply post-stratification weighting or design weights in the analysis. This may introduce bias in comparisons of contraceptive usage across residence types, particularly for age-dependent patterns. The contraceptive usage rates reported reflect unweighted sample proportions and may not represent the broader population. While separate logistic regressions were conducted for rural and urban groups, we did not test for interaction effects between place of residence and key predictors. Thus, comparisons between groups should be interpreted cautiously. It is important to note that the findings presented are based on unweighted data and single-level analysis; applying population weights or conducting multilevel modeling to account for clustering at the community or district level could potentially alter the observed associations, for instance, diminishing rural–urban differences or affecting the significance of certain predictors. Future analyses using hierarchical or multilevel models could provide more nuanced insights by adjusting for community-level variation, particularly in regions with heterogeneous access to family planning services. Even though the study shows contraceptive use disparities across rural and urban areas, the data is not recent and a delay in reporting study findings and a close to 10 years evolution in time may affect the comprehensiveness of results, since modified techniques may have been employed by the Chinese government overtime to limit negative implications of contraceptive non-use and to improve uptake across all levels. Additional studies across both residencies are needed to corroborate the study findings. However, literature points towards a steady improvement in contraceptive uptake among urban settlers but still alarmingly low reproductive health services uptake among rural settlers in China. Nevertheless, this study indicated a significant improvement in contraceptive usage across both rural and urban residencies, highlighting an improvement in policy implementation and attitudes of reproductive-aged women and households towards contraceptive usage. Reproductive-aged women need constant education on health promotion measures, particularly contraception and support to advance their health and limit the burden of adverse health outcomes. However, this study is important in understanding the determinants and barriers of contraceptive uptake among the women in-union for resolute interventions to achieve global targets and to contribute to relevant knowledge on rural and urban variations in contraceptive uptake and its influences.

The study revealed that contraceptive use across both residencies was high. Age (< 35 years), ethnic minority other than Han, number of children (0 or 1), and knowledge of condom as contraceptive were key determinants of contraceptive use among rural dwellers. Alternatively, age (< 25 years), having no living child, partner’s usage of contraceptive and involvement in FP decisions were key determinants of contraceptive usage among urban dwellers. Also, most of the married Chinese women desired men to be involved in family planning services. Moreover, condom and IUD were the most known male and female contraceptives among the respondents in both settings. However, knowledge of contraceptive methods may not necessarily be translated to actual usage. The Chinese government should craft policies to encourage male partners’ involvement in family planning decision-making. Furthermore, husbands or partners should be encouraged to accompany their spouses to family planning centers as support and shared responsibility among urban residents. Service providers should spend quality time with clients from rural settings in counseling and proper education on various types of contraceptives, to enable them to make better-informed decisions on their choice of contraception. Additionally, continuous education and health promotion activities on reproductive health and family planning should be enhanced across all residencies. FP education should also be all inclusive, well prepared, and relevant to childbearing-aged women to allow them to make an informed decision according to their reproductive health needs. However, the sampling was conducted across multiple administrative levels (counties, districts, townships), the data analysis did not include cluster-level adjustments. As such, standard errors and confidence intervals may be slightly underestimated, and results should be interpreted with this limitation in mind. However, future studies can explore mixed methods design with more recent sample data and robust statistical analysis to provide evidence for advanced sexual and reproductive health policy reforms. Therefore, it is prudent to continuously assess the usage of contraceptives among rural and urban populations to provide effective strategies and policies to increase its usage.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We acknowledge the contribution of Dr. Kojo Ahiakpa and Ms. Essence Tshuma in proofreading this manuscript. We are also grateful for the support of the enumerators and participants. YS is receiving funding as Ph.D. student from the Research Network for Design and evaluation of Adolescent Health Interventions and Policies in Sub-Saharan Africa (DASH) Fellowship at the University of Ghana, part of the Research Network on Adolescent Health in Sub-Saharan Africa, a funded program by The German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) executed by the University of Ghana in Ghana, to complete the study.