Effective care integration requires the right information, at the right time, with care and support delivered in the right environment. Patient-reported outcome measures [PROMs] offer a mechanism to support collaborative integrated care to help people understand their conditions better, live well, and remain independent. Through the lens of the delivery of integrated care in England, we consider the opportunities and challenges associated with the use of PROMs across health and care.

Patient-reported outcomes offer important insights on the impact of illness, care, and treatment direct from an individual [1,2]. Initially designed to research the effectiveness and tolerability of treatments, such data are typically collected using methodologically robust self-report questionnaires, called patient-reported outcome measures [PROMs]. Increasingly, digital systems now collect PROMs and contribute to the delivery of patient-centred health care, value-based payments, and self-management approaches [3]. In social care settings measures such as the Adult Social Care Outcomes Toolkit (ASCOT) [4], designed for use with adults accessing services, unpaid and paid carers, and social care support settings, are used to support social care decision-making, research, and evaluation [5].

This commentary outlines the potential opportunities for PROMs use in integrated care [IC], highlights key challenges within this context, and enablers to optimise collection and use of this data. It used experiences within England to draw out learning for their application in other countries.

Policy interest in the systematised use of PROMs in integrated care systems in England aligns with policy aspirations for more holistic approaches and a shift from supporting people when they get ill, to helping people stay well and as independent as possible [6,7]. As a result, the use of PROMs to assess the effectiveness of IC is increasing [8].

At organisational and system levels, PROM data may be aggregated for use in benchmarking of performance metrics to support quality improvement. PROM data supplements other outcome data i.e., place of care, readmissions, mortality rates [11], to better understand the population challenges and overall effectiveness of IC initiatives [8].

Alongside PROM data, patient-reported experience measures [PREMs] assess services from the recipient’s viewpoint. Patient experience is multi-dimensional and includes relational [interactions], functional [result satisfaction] and integration aspects [12]. PREMs are usually completed anonymously, to enable patients to provide honest feedback [13]. Aggregated PREM data can indicate overall care quality [14].However, PREMs have been criticized for not effectively capturing what matters most to people at the service level, and for lacking timely and consistent measurement to support local quality improvement [15]. For example, in England, the NHS Friends and Family test [FFT] invites feedback on the overall experience of using the service. When combined with supplementary follow-up questions, the FFT provides a mechanism to identify services working well and those working poorly [16]. However, for July 2023, the national FFT response rates were only 22% for in-patients and 11% for accident and emergency department attendees [13].

The heterogeneous nature of IC settings, the diverse range of conditions, symptoms, social circumstances, and outcomes and the variations in models of care between sectors result in fragmented PROM selection and use [17]. There is often a disconnect between national policy and the local vision for IC which can lead to conflicting priorities. This is typically orientated around national focus on usage of acute medical care activity over community health and adult social care [18].

A scoping review of 216 PROMs deployed in social and integrated care settings found that while stakeholders viewed PROMs use as feasible and acceptable, major barriers existed including measure selection, administration, and data management [19]. Similarly, although there is evidence from stakeholders in England suggesting that PROMs and PREMs data are the best measures of effective integration, lack of agreement around measure selection and responsibility for measurement are major barriers [20].

In integrated healthcare settings, particularly oncology where PROMs are used to monitor disease symptoms which are linked to care-pathways, there is evidence of overall improved outcomes and cost-effectiveness [21]. However evidence to show the benefit of using PROMs and PREMs for benchmarking is lacking, often due to ineffective implementation strategies [22]. A recent systematic review identified PREMs in use across healthcare and only identified two measures focusing on care integration: they concluded that PREMs largely focus on a single episode of care, exhibiting large variability in both the number and type of validity and reliability testing [14].

An ongoing programme of research within England focused on the use of PROMs within IC has highlighted lack of expertise and awareness amongst professionals, patients, and carers to support their effective implementation [5,10,19]. Insufficient understanding of how PROMs are developed, validated and used will impact both purpose of collection and measure choice leading to measure variability in content, quality, and interpretability. There is also the risk of unvalidated surveys presented as PROMs.

A lack of motivation to complete by patients connected with professionals not explaining questionnaires [23] means that opportunities offered by PROMs and PREMs for individual care or service evaluation are unrealised. Research suggests responses are sometimes not reviewed or analysed and may be collected as a tick box exercise, with PROMs completion rates ranging from 50% to above 80% [24]. For longitudinal PROMs, the rate of completion significantly decreases over time. Missing data has huge implications and may not be random, with factors such as worsening health, inequitable access to health and care and the internet for remote monitoring limiting the use PRO data [24].

Evidence on PROMs use is largely derived from healthcare settings and may not be directly transferable to IC and describing these tools as ‘patient-reported’ outcome measures is implicitly healthcare focused. Arguably a shared common language is required to support uptake if we wish to capture self-reported outcome data across an individual’s journey involving different types of care. Describing these self-report questionnaires in terms of the construct being measured, such as symptom burden, quality of life or activities of daily living questionnaires may resonate better across services and those completing the measures.

The goal is harmonised, flexible, and interoperable digital PROM collection systems which use validated, interpretable measurement tools that can be linked to cross organisational data sources for individual and aggregate use. PROM assessment must be inclusive and equitable [25]. PROMs integration must be grounded in emerging evidence of what works, when and in which contexts; with research undertaken in a variety of IC settings to understand contextual effects. Existing workforce strategies often focus on traditional models of care, ignoring the shifting of tasks in IC from practitioners to unpaid carers and communities. Without careful consideration of PROMs implementation there is a danger of introducing further problems and inequities. When choosing and implementing PROMs we need to consider language and cultural issues [25], together with the potential to cause respondent burden; particularly if people are asked to self-report on multiple outcomes using long or several questionnaires [26].Table 1sets out key enablers to support attainment of these goals.

Enablers for implementing PROMs in integrated care settings.

Shared outcomes at place level using tools such as the Shared outcomes toolkit for IC systems i.e., in Leeds, UK, PROM data for frailty populations is collected using the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System [PROMIS] Global Health measure and a measure of person centred coordinated care to measure the outcome described as ‘Living and ageing well’ [27].

Guidance on systemised approaches to review and action of PROM results and managing expectations.

Development of dashboard approaches supporting PROMs data alerts, effective interpretability linked to tailored decision support and self-management advice.

Investigate cultural applicability of chosen measures including language availability.

Employ PROM/PREM data within quality improvement initiatives using in-depth analysis and Plan-Do-Study-Act-cycles [22].

PROMs offer a mechanism to support the delivery of person-centred integrated care, with opportunities to influence individual care and take a central role in assessing the overall effectiveness of integrated services to inform service design and improvement. However, significant challenges exist in optimising the use of PROMs and PREMs, necessitating a shift in cultural attitudes to place PROMs on par with other forms of data to support care planning and delivery, as well as finding solutions to system and technical barriers.

The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This research is funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Applied Research Collaboration (ARC) West Midlands (NIHR200165). The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.

NAhas received funding from the NIHR, NIHR Applied Research Collaboration (ARC) West Midlands and the NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre (BRC), she declares personal fees from GSK outside the submitted work.

SEHhas received funding from the NIHR, NIHR Applied Research Collaboration (ARC) West Midlands, UKRI, UK SPINE, RIT, Anthony Nolan, and the NIHR Blood and Transplant Research Unit (BTRU) in Precision and Cellular Therapeutics at the University of Birmingham. She declares personal fees from Cochlear, Pfizer, CIS Oncology, Astra Zeneca, Rinri Therapeutics, and Aparito outside the submitted work.

OLAreceives funding from the NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre (BRC), NIHR Applied Research Collaboration (ARC), West Midlands, NIHR Blood and Transplant Research Unit (BTRU) in Precision Transplant and Cellular Therapeutics at the University of Birmingham and University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation, Health Foundation, Innovate UK (part of UK Research and Innovation), GSK, Gilead Sciences Ltd, Merck, Anthony Nolan, and Sarcoma UK. He declares personal fees from Gilead Sciences, Merck and GlaxoSmithKline outside the submitted work.

MCis Director of Birmingham Health Partners Centre for Regulatory Science and Innovation and Centre for Patient Reported Outcomes Research and a National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) senior investigator; has received funding from NIHR, UKRI, NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre, NIHR Applied Research Collaboration West Midlands, NIHR BTRU Precision and Cellular Therapeutics, UK SPINE, European Regional Development Fund-Demand Hub and Health Data Research UK, Macmillan Cancer Support, Anthony Nolan, UCB Pharma, Janssen, GlaxoSmithKline, Gilead and Merck; and has received consultancy fees from Astellas, Aparito, CIS Oncology, Halfloop, Gilead, Pfizer, Takeda, Merck, Daiichi Sankyo, Glaukos, GlaxoSmithKline, Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute and Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated.

RMis an Editor-in-Chief, Integrated Journal of Integrated Care.