The Middle Miocene fauna of La Venta, Colombia, offers a grand opportunity to understand low-latitude South American ecosystems prior to the late Cenozoic Great American Biotic Interchange (GABI). We present new material of two proterotheriid litopterns,Villarroelia totoyoiandMesolicaphrium sanalfonense,and a macraucheniid litoptern,Theosodon, from La Venta. During the GABI, North and South American faunas intermixed, after which some lineages proliferated and others died out. We conducted an ecomorphological analysis of 11 North and South American faunas pre-dating and post-dating the GABI by scoring all mid- to large-sized mammalian herbivores on their body size, tooth morphology, and feeding height.

The fossils studied here offer new information on the deciduous dentition ofM. sanalfonenseand mandible of the La VentaTheosodon. Pre-GABI South American faunas were more ecomorphologically diverse than their North American counterparts. The post-GABI Pleistocene fauna exhibited similar ecomorphological diversity to pre-GABI South American faunas, but modern faunas show this diversity was mostly lost in the end-Pleistocene extinctions.

The new litoptern fossils provide previously unknown information on these species’ morphology, but they do not resolve outstanding systematic and phylogenetic questions. Discrepancies in ecomorphological diversity between pre-GABI North and South American faunas is attributable to the presence of small, high-feeding (arboreal) taxa and hypselodont (ever-growing cheek teeth) taxa in South America, which North America lacked. Arboreal herbivores (porcupines and primates) experienced some success in North America after dispersing during the GABI. Although hypselodont xenarthrans were successful in post-GABI North America, the fact that most other hypselodont lineages went extinct during and after the GABI suggests that dental morphology may not fully capture the ecomorphological diversity in diet of North American herbivores. Future studies could examine faunas immediately before and after the GABI to uncover the precise dynamics of the interchange and why certain lineages succeeded while others failed.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40850-025-00232-4.

The late Middle Miocene (Serravallian) fauna of La Venta, Colombia, is among the most diverse Cenozoic faunas in South America; more than 80 species of mammals have been documented at the site in addition to dozens of birds, crocodilians, lizards, turtles, and fishes [1–4]. Among the most iconic mammals of La Venta are its primates, which have been a major impetus for expeditions to the site since the late 1940s [5] and include far more species than at any other South American locality [6,7]. However, nearly every group of mammals at La Venta is noteworthy in one respect or another. This is due to a combination of remarkably good preservation at La Venta (some species are known from virtually complete skeletons) and the observation that most mammal species of equatorial sites like La Venta are distinct from those of contemporaneous sitees at higher latitudes [8–18], which have traditionally formed the basis for studying the evolution of mammals in South America [19–22].

Despite La Venta’s extensive fossil mammal record, many gaps remain. Until recently, there had been almost no new alpha-taxonomic work on La Venta mammals since publication of the extensive “La Venta volume” [i.e.,4]. That changed during the past decade, thanks to a resurgence of interest in the site (especially among Colombian students, researchers, and residents; Oviedo et al. 2023). Articles on La Venta mammals published during this interval include Zurita et al. [22], the glyptodontBoreostemma acostae; Vallejo-Pareja et al. [23], the astrapothereHilarcotherium miyou; Benites-Palomino et al. (24) platanistid odontocete; Jiménez-Lara (25), the pampathereScirrotherium hondaensis, Boivin et al. [9], caviomorph rodents; Barasoain et al. [26], the dasypodidPlesiodasypus colombianus; López-Aguirre et al. [27](2022 Query ID="Q2" Text="Author name not found in Reference" Resolved="yes"; the batNotonycteris magdalenensis; and Miño-Boilini and Brandoni (28; the slothNematheriumsp. In addition, a thematic volume centering on La Venta was published in Geodiversitas (see [1]. An article by Carrillo et al. [29] in that volume described new remains of the bunodont litopternsMegadolodus molariformisandNeodolodus colombianusfrom La Venta, finding them to be close relatives of each other. In this contribution, we describe new remains of three litopterns previously identified at La Venta:Villarroelia totoyoi, Mesolicaphrium sanalfonense, andTheosodonsp. A sixth La Venta litoptern species may be present at La Venta, but as of this writing, the sole specimen referred to it is an upper molar described by [30].

Litopterns are one of two diverse clades of ungulate-like herbivores that inhabited South America for nearly the entire Cenozoic. Together with notoungulates (the other major clade), astrapotheres, and several smaller groups, they constitute what are commonly referred to as SANUs [South American native ungulates; [31]] or meridiungulates [32,33], a grouping that may or may not be monophyletic [34]. Litopterns are iconic South American mammals, thanks in large part toMacrauchenia patachonica, a giant, long-necked late Pleistocene species; it is generally reconstructed as having a well-developed proboscis e.g., [35–37]. but see [3,38], which makes even silhouettes of this species immediately recognizable. The second-most recognizable litoptern (at least by name) is probably the diminutiveThoatherium minusculum, which trailsMacraucheniain general notoriety but is famous in academic settings as a classic example of convergent evolution; this early Miocene (Burdigalian) litoptern evolved monodactyl limbs even more specialized than those of modern horses (Equusspp.; [39–41]) and did so at least 7 million years earlier than equid perissodactyls [42–44].

MacraucheniaandThoatheriumbelong to the two families of litopterns that were diverse and widespread during the Neogene - Macraucheniidae and Proterotheriidae, respectively - and that are also represented at La Venta. Macraucheniidae includes the largest litopterns (generally > 100 kg), and most species were larger than contemporaneous proterotheriids (generally 15–80 kg; [34,45,46]). Features that characterize macraucheniids include: a complete, closed dentition [41]; lack of molarized third premolar [47]; a unique configuration of the external nasal aperture [48,49]; and limbs with tridactyl support [39]. By contrast, proterotheriids had limbs that are functionally monodactyl [39], and their dentition includes a large diastema and caniniform upper incisor [41,50]. Both macraucheniids and proterotheriids were essentially brachydont, though some Neogene species evolved somewhat higher crowned teeth and/or cement-covered dentitions, potentially reflecting adaptations to a more abrasive diet [35,51,52]. Proterotheriids were more diverse than macraucheniids throughout the Miocene, and although both groups declined during this interval, this pattern reversed during the Pliocene and Pleistocene [16]. When the two clades went extinct in the Pleistocene, macraucheniids were still living throughout much of South America, whereas proterotheriids were restricted to a narrow latitudinal band (~28-33° S) spanning southeastern Brazil, Uruguay, and central and northeastern Argentina [51,53,54,55].

The primary focus of this contribution is to describe new remains ofVillarroelia totoyoi, Mesolicaphrium sanalfonense, andTheosodonsp. from La Venta. In these descriptions, we highlight new information provided by these materials that supplements the original descriptions of these species by Cifelli and Guerrero [30]. As an extension of our taxonomic study, we characterize the ecological structure of the medium to large (> 1 kg) herbivore guild at La Venta (i.e., the guild to which litopterns belong) using a novel taxon-independent approach applicable to the phylogenetically disparate herbivore clades represented at the site. We compare the guild structure of La Venta to that of a series of Early to Middle Miocene sites in North, Central, and South America as well a late Pleistocene and several modern tropical lowland South American faunas and discuss potential explanations for the patterns observed.

The ecomorphological compositions of 11 medium- to large-sized mammalian herbivore communities (Table1; Fig.1) were analyzed: seven from the Miocene, one from the late Pleistocene, and three modern. All Miocene faunas are from the Early and Middle Miocene and thus pre-date the Great American Biotic Interchange (GABI). Although the GABI has been defined differently by different researchers, the consensus is that it began sometime in the Late Miocene ([11;18],56–59), and no ‘immigrant’ taxa are present in these Early and Middle Miocene faunas. These pre-GABI Miocene communities are from the low, middle, and high latitudes of North, Central, and South America, spanning what was once the Panamanian Seaway that connected the Atlantic and Pacific oceans (and separated South America from Central America). The Pleistocene fauna of Barra do Antonião (Piauí, Brazil) was included to provide information on a low-latitude fauna that post-dated the GABI but pre-dated the end Pleistocene megafaunal extinctions. Three modern low-latitude faunas were used to provide modern, post-GABI comparisons to the prehistoric communities (Table1).

Each medium- to large-sized (i.e., > 1 kg body mass), terrestrial, herbivorous mammal taxon of each fauna was scored for three ecomorphological variables: body mass, dental morphology, and feeding height (Supplementary InformationA). For body mass, each taxon was placed in a discrete bin, following the categories of Catena and Croft [60]: 1–10 kg, 10–100 kg, 100–1000 kg, and > 1000 kg. These categories correspond to size categories S3 to S6 of Catena and Croft [60], because, unlike their analysis, our analysis excluded mammals less than 1 kg in mass. Body mass estimates for modern mammals came from the PanTHERIA database ([61], and estimates for fossil taxa came from various primary literature sources, which are identified in Supplementary InformationA–C.

Many extinct South American herbivore lineages pose significant challenges for ecomorphological studies of diet due to a lack of extant representatives (e.g., SANUs) or extant representatives that occupy dramatically different ecological niches (e.g., xenarthrans) (e.g., [34,62–66]). Some studies of entire paleofaunas have attempted to circumvent this constraint by classifying herbivores as folivores rather than browsers, mixed feeders, or grazers (e.g., [60,67]), but this is not an option for a study focused on the herbivore guild itself. Therefore, we used a novel scheme in which we classified herbivores among five categories based on tooth structure (crown height and occlusal pattern) rather than diet: bunodont, lophodont-brachydont, lophodont-hypsodont, hypselodont-complex, and hypselodont-simple. Bunodont refers to cheek teeth that are low-crowned and have rounded cusps (e.g., tayassuids, primates). Lophodont teeth bear elongated cusps, crests, and styli that serve to increase the area of the grinding surface, whereas brachydont versus hypsodont distinguishes cheek teeth that are low-crowned (i.e., the crown extends little into the dentary or maxilla) and high-crowned (i.e., crowns extend far into the dentary or maxilla), respectively. Lophodonty and hypsodonty have convergently evolved in many mammalian herbivore lineages (e.g., equids, artiodactyls, rodents, litopterns). Hypselodont cheek teeth are ever-growing, and this feature has also convergently evolved in several lineages (e.g., notoungulates, xenarthrans, cavioid and chinchillid rodents; [68]). Hypselodont cheek teeth may have relatively complex (i.e., somewhat lophodont) occlusal surfaces or may be very simple with little enamel.

To our knowledge, feeding height has not explicitly factored into studies of extinct herbivore guilds, even though it can be important for modern herbivore niche partitioning [69–71]. Although feeding height is implied by substrate use (i.e., it differs among terrestrial, arboreal, and scansorial mammals; e.g., [72]), broad substrate use categories cannot distinguish among terrestrial taxa that were constrained to feed close to the ground and those that also could have fed on higher vegetation (e.g., glyptodonts vs. litopterns). Therefore, we classified herbivores among three general feeding height categories to account for uncertainties in inferring this parameter for extinct species: < 1 m, 1–2 m, and > 2 m. These estimates were based on correlations between body structure and feeding height in modern taxa applied to skeletal reconstructions of fossil taxa (or their close relatives). Species were categorized based on the tallest possible feeding height to avoid the significant challenge of estimating the most common feeding height (e.g., late-diverging equids were scored as 1–2 m or > 2 m based on stature even though some of these taxa were likely low-level grazers). Arboreal and semi-arboreal taxa were classified as > 2 m. Feeding height is the most uncertain of our three ecomorphological variables. The body shape and size of taxa known from fragmentary remains were estimated based on more completely known relatives. However, body proportions can vary, even among relatively closely related species. Additionally, unaccounted-for behaviors from certain taxa (e.g., scansoriality, habitual bipedal foraging) could enable them to feed higher than we scored, which were based on most taxa being terrestrial (except for primates, erethizontids, and certain pilosans), quadrupedal foragers. Such factors could make some the ecomorphospace of some faunas appear sparser if they enabled certain species to occupy other areas of the ecomorphospace.

Taxon lists for the Miocene and Pleistocene faunas were taken from the Paleobiology Database [73], with additional taxa or taxonomic revisions from the primary literature incorporated as needed. Taxon lists for modern faunas were taken from Malagón et al. [74], Ramirez-Chaves et al. [75], and Tiputini Biodiversity Station [76].

Each taxon was plotted in a three-dimensional ecomorphospace of 60 discrete cells constructed from the three ecomorphological variables (i.e., four body mass categories x five dental morphology categories x three feeding height categories; Fig.2). The cells occupied by each fauna were used to calculate four measures of ecomorphological disparity: (1) ecological richness (ERich), developed by Chen et al. [77], which is the number of cells occupied by a community in a theoretical ecomorphospace; (2) ecological disparity (EDis), also from Chen et al. [77], which is the mean pairwise distance of all species pairs in the community and measures the magnitude of ecological differences among species; (3) functional richness (FRich), developed by Villéger et al. [78], which represents the amount of ecomorphospace filled by a community and it is measured as the volume of the smallest convex hull encompassing all species; and (4) functional evenness (FEven), also developed by Villéger et al. [78], used the minimum spanning tree (the tree that links all the species in the ecomorphospace with the minimum sum of branch lengths] to quantify how regularly distributed the species are within the ecomorphospace. We believed that these indices could be influenced by the presence of singular, outlier taxa, so we conducted a bootstrap analysis. In this analysis each fauna was resampled with replacement 1000 times and each of the ecomorphological indices was run on each resampled taxon dataset.

We selected very well-sampled paleofaunas for our comparisons in order to minimize the chances of species being present but not yet recovered as fossils in a given fauna, which would provide an inaccurate picture of the fauna’s ecomorphological diversity [73]. Four indices were employed to provide complementary data and to build redundancy into our ecomorphological analysis. These analyses were conducted in Python 3.6 using the BioMpy package (79). The code is included as Supplementary InformationD.

VPPLT 729, isolated left complete P3–M1 and M3 and partial M2, isolated right partial P3–M1, fragmentary left mandibular ramus with p1–m3, fragmentary right mandibular ramus with p2–m3, and isolated lower incisors; MT 207, isolated left m3.

Mid-sized proterotheriid, similar toEpitherium laternariumorThoatherium minusculum. Fairly hypsodont for a proterotheriid, similar toTetramerorhinusspp.,Neobrachytheriumspp.,Thoatherium minusculum, andDiadiaphorus majusculus.P3–4 molarized, meaning paraconule, metaconule, and hypocone are well-developed. P3–M2 subequal in mesiodistal and labiolingual dimensions, unlike most other proterotheriids, in which these teeth are more labiolingually elongate (e.g.,T. minusculum, Tetramerorhinusspp.,Mesolicaphrium sanalfonense]. P3–M2 with well-defined labial styles and weak interstylar folds, similar toAnisolophusspp.,M. sanalfonense, andOlisanophusspp. Paraconule and metaconule of M1–2 round and similar in size to protocone and hypocone; M3 hypocone absent; and m3 with paralophid that terminates near labiolingual midline and isolated entoconid.

All adult premolars and molars are represented among the holotype and hypodigm (14 specimens) ofVillarroelia totoyoi[30], and VPPLT 729 resembles both the published descriptions of this material and specimen casts we were able to examine firsthand (i.e., IGM 184501, IGM 250695 [type], UCMP 39970; Supplementary Figs.1–3). As noted by Cifelli and Guerrero [30], the P3 ofV. totoyoiis highly molariform (Fig.3). Nearly all proterotheriids have a somewhat molariform P3, and it is often cited as a synapomorphy of the group [47,50]. However, in most proterotheriids, this ‘P3 molarization’ means that P3 bears a well-developed paracone, metacone, and protocone. InV. totoyoi, P3 also bears a well-developed hypocone that is similar in size to the paraconule and metaconule and slightly smaller than the protocone. In– ofV. totoyoi(i.e., in all ‘molarized’ upper teeth except for M3), the hypocone is larger than in most other proterotheriids, giving these teeth a quadrangular appearance. The paraconule and metaconule are large and fairly circular in P3–M3, whereas in most other proterotheriids (e.g.,Olisanophus, Anisolophus, Brachytherium, Prolicaphrium, Pseudobrachytherium), the paraconule is elongate and/or the metaconule is significantly smaller than the protocone [16,50,82–84].

The lower incisors of VPPLT 729 are small and simple in morphology (Fig.4). The smaller (presumably inner) incisor has a small ridge running vertically down its lingual face (Fig.4). In most respects, the premolars and molars of VPPLT 729 are similar to most other proterotheriids (Fig.5), which matches the description of these teeth inV. totoyoiby Cifelli and Guerrero [30]. The lower molars bear relatively smoothly curving lophids compared to those ofM. sanalfonensefrom the same deposits, which is more typical of other proterotheriids. The entoconids of the lower molars are well-developed and connected to the hypoconulid by a small cristid. The hypoconulid of m3 is very prominent, and there is a notable flexid (i.e., crease) in the labial surface of m3 between the hypolophulid and the hypoconulid, giving m3 a ‘tricrescentic’ appearance (Supplemental Fig.4).

In contrast with previously described specimens ofV. totoyoi, the m1-2 of VPPLT 729 bear a paraconid [30]. However, these cuspids are small and closely associated with the lingual end of the paralophid. We were unable to examine the m1-2 specimens assigned toV. totoyoiby Cifelli and Guerrero [52], so we cannot be certain whether the paraconid is truly absent in those specimens, has been obscured due to wear, or was merely overlooked. Regardless, we do not believe this small difference precludes referral of VPPLT 729 toV. totoyoiconsidering the many other features shared with the initial description ofV. totoyoiby Cifelli and Guerrero [30], especially in the upper teeth.

Figures6–7; Supplementary InformationE; Supplementary Figs.5–7.

Most proterotheriids have two lower incisors of unclear homology (i.e., they could represent i1–2 or i2–3). Most authors refer to them as ‘internal’ and ‘external’ incisors or as i2 and i3 [16,29,41,50,83,84]. In this work, we follow the former convention to reflect the uncertain origin of these teeth. McGrath et al. [16], identified the mesialmost tooth of the holotype ofM. sanalfonense, IGM 182852 (Supplementary Fig.5), as a canine rather than an external incisor (as stated by Cifelli and Guerrero [30]), based on its small size, simple morphology, and parallel orientation with respect to the mandible. VPPLT 1697 includes small, isolated tooth with a long root. This tooth has a simple, spatulate morphology with no crests or cuspids. The only teeth missing from the mandible of VPPLT 1697 are the internal incisors and canines, both of which are small and simple. We believe this tooth is an internal incisor because the canine of IGM 182852 appears more ‘pointed’ in lingual view than the isolated tooth of VPPLT 1697 and has a small crest extending from the main cuspid to the root on its lingual face, unlike VPPLT 1697. VPPLT 1697 preserves both external incisors (Fig.6). This tooth is also smaller and morphologically simpler than any proterotheriid permanent or deciduous upper tooth [50]. These teeth likely represent deciduous incisors because they are relatively smaller than the permanent incisors of other proterotheriids such asD. majusculus, Anisolophus australis, andProlicaphrium specillatum, and all deciduous premolars are preserved in VPPLT 1697 (Fig.6–B). The external deciduous incisors are shorter mesiodistally than dp1 and spatulate in morphology. Like the canine of IGM 182852, there is a small crest on the lingual face of the teeth from their apex to the base of the crown. Lower incisors have been proposed to be dimorphic in several proterotheriids, such asDiadiaphorus majusculusandTetramerorhinus lucarius[50,83], but it seems unlikely that such dimorphism would be observed in deciduous teeth. The mandible is damaged between the incisors and dp1s, but a small, single alveolus for the (deciduous) canine is present approximately halfway between these teeth on the left side.

VPPLT 1118 preserves the right canine (Fig.6C–D). This tooth is identical to that of the type specimen (IGM 182852) in having a spatulate morphology with a ridge extending from the apex to the base of the crown on the lingual face. A short diastema separates this tooth from the alveolus for p1.

LT-0059 bears right dp1–3 and a damaged left dp4 (Fig.7–D), and VPPLT 1697 bears dp1-4 on both sides (Fig.6–B). All of the deciduous premolars are double-rooted. The dp1 is smaller mesiodistally and labiolingually than the other deciduous premolars (Fig.6) and bears a single cuspid, the protoconid, with an apex slightly mesial to the mesiodistal midpoint of the tooth. A small spur extends lingually from the protoconid but has no clear metaconid at its end. The dp2 has the same basic pattern as dp1 but differs in several morphological aspects in addition to its larger size (Fig.6). The paraconid of dp2 attaches to the paralophid near the mesial end of this tooth, making it appear that this crest splits in two. The metaconid spur of this tooth is larger than that of dp1 and widens at its lingual end, suggesting a true metaconid. Also, unlike dp1, this spur/crest attaches to the ectolophid distal to the protoconid. The distal end of dp2 is lower (in occlusal height) than the protoconid, but its moderate wear suggests use in mastication. The part of this region with greatest wear represents the hypoconid. A spur, smaller than the one bearing the metaconid, extends lingually from the hypoconid and ends in a small entoconid. Additionally, a short hypocristid extends distolingually from the hypoconid. Like the p3 ofM. sanalfonenseand other proterotheriids [16,50,30,83], dp3 is molariform, with a double-crescent morphology (Fig.6). As in dp2, the paraconid does not join the paralophid at its most mesiolingual point, resulting in a cristid with a ‘split’ appearance. The metaconid is as large as the protoconid, and the hypoconid and has a distal extension suggestive of a metacristid. The two crests defining the trigonid basin, the paracristid and protocristid, are smoothly curved, whereas the crests defining the talonid, the cristid obliqua and hypolophid, are straight; however, in highly worn specimens such as LT-0059, these crests appear somewhat curved. At the distolingual end of the hypolophid lie two closely associated cuspids, the larger and more labially positioned hypoconulid and the smaller entoconid. The dp3 has a slight labial cingulid and a small, cusp-like ectostylid within the ectoflexid. The dp4 is very similar to the dp3 except in the differences noted here. The crests bordering the trigonid basin, the paralophid and protolophid, are straight. The paraconid of dp4 is relatively smaller than that of dp3 and attaches to the mesiolingual end of the paracristid (Fig.6). At the distal end of the tooth, the hypoconulid and entoconid are relatively larger and further separated than their counterparts in dp3, though the hypoconulid is still the larger of the two. The ectostylid of dp4 is smaller than that of dp3.

As in the deciduous premolars, p1–4 are double-rooted (Figs.6C–D,7A–B; Supplementary Fig.6). The p1 has a simple morphology with a single prominent cuspid that is positioned mesial to the midline (Fig.6). Wear on the distal portion of this tooth indicates that it was used in mastication despite this region being lower occlusally than the main cuspid. The morphology of p2 is similar to that of dp2 except for the absence of an entoconid spur, but this feature may have been obscured by wear in VPPLT 1118, the only specimen preserving this tooth. The p3 and p4 are identical to dp3 and dp4, respectively, in all morphological respects except in the lack of an ectostylid. The high degree of wear of p3–4 in VPPLT 1118 highlights the distal extension of the metaconid, which is also seen in the deciduous teeth.

The m1 is bicrescentic and largely resembles dp4 and p4 in morphology (Figs.6C–D,7A–B,7E, Supplementary Fig.6). The m1s of VPPLT 1697 are unerupted and thus completely unworn. The metaconid of these teeth appears to be comprised of two cuspids separated by a slight labiolingual sulcus, supporting the idea that this feature is actually comprised of a metaconid (the more mesial cuspid) and a metastylid. This sulcus is not apparent in m1s exhibiting even slight wear such as VPPLT 1605 (Fig.7A–B). The paraconid of m1 is small and connects to the mesiolingual end of the paraconid. This cuspid is also positioned lingual and distal to the end of the paralophid, making it appear that this crest curves distally towards its lingual end. The labial cingulid of m1 (and m2–3) is better-developed than that of the p3–4. The m2 is very similar to m1. In the least-worn example of this tooth, LT-0060, no metaconid sulcus is present, but the presence of two distinct cuspids is suggested. The only notable difference between m2 and m1 is the larger hypoconulid and entoconid of m2. The m3 is mesiodistally longer than m1 and m2 and differs more strongly in its morphology. The paralophid terminates approximately halfway between the labial and lingual sides of the tooth. The metaconid exhibits the same distal extension as in the other molariforms. The hypoconulid and entoconid are relatively larger in m3 than in the other molars, with the hypoconulid being equal in size to the protoconid and hypoconid. These two cuspids are also separated by a deeper sulcus than in the other molars. The hypoconulid is separated from the hypolophid by a sulcus that disappears in moderately worn teeth, such as in VPPLT 1118. The hypoconulid has a small spur extending distolingually from it. There is a strong lingual cingulid at the opening of the paraflexid.

The M3 of VPPLT 1264 is the only upper tooth ofM. sanalfonensein our sample (Fig.7). It is bunoselenodont as in other proterotheriids [50]. The paracone is larger than the metacone. The three labial styles decrease in size from mesial to distal. The paraconule is compressed labiolingually and connected to the protocone by a slight preprotocrista. The metaconule is rounder than the paraconule and not connected to the protocone. A crest extends distally from the protocone to meet the labiolingually oriented postcingulum (= distal cingulum). This crest is uniform in thickness, so there is no clear hypocone. The precingulum (= mesiolingual cingulum) is somewhat sinuous and forms the lingualmost end of the tooth.

In mature individuals (i.e., those with permanent dentition), the mandibular symphysis extends posteriorly to the level of p2 (Fig.6). The coronoid crest does not extend anteriorly to the level of m3 in VPPLT 1605 (Fig.7), but it extends to the mesiodistal midpoint of this tooth in VPPLT 1118. The mandible of VPPLT 1605 is dorsoventrally deeper than that of VPPLT 1118, but the former specimen appears to have undergone postmortem deformation that may distort this measurement.

MNHN.F.VIV 5 includes a partial cranium and mandible from a very young individual (Supplementary Fig.7). In the cranial fragment, DP4 is not yet fully erupted, none of the upper or lower teeth show any degree of wear, and several of the cranial sutures [i.e., lambdoid, coronal) appear to be unfused. Overall, the cranium is missing its right half and the entire rostrum, and it is slightly deformed. Little morphological information is discernible. DP1 is poorly preserved, yielding little morphological information. DP2 is nearly complete and larger than DP1. It has a single prominent labial cusp and a wide lingual shelf, making the tooth roughly quadrangular. DP3 is molariform and slightly longer mesiodistally than labiolingually, a condition noted by Soria [50], for this tooth in most proterotheriids. In MNHN.F.VIV 5, DP3 bears a paraconule, protocone, and hypocone, and the metaconule appears to be absent or highly reduced and closely associated with the hypocone There is a broad mesiolingual cingulum. A small labial cingulum connects the bases of the protocone and hypocone. The interstylar folds are prominent. The morphology of DP4 is partially obscured by the surrounding cranium since it is incompletely erupted. The tooth is molariform with a paraconule, protocone, metaconule, and hypocone present. The metaconule is noticeably smaller. The interstylar folds and labial styles appear strong. The DP4 is roughly equal in diameter labiolingually and mesiodistally. This specimen is identified asM. sanalfonensebased on the absence of a crest connecting the protocone and metaconule, a feature noted by Cifelli and Guerrero [30], forV. totoyoi.

Remarks.These specimens include the first known examples of di2–3, dp1–4, and p1 ofM. sanalfonense.Soria [50] stated that external and internal deciduous incisors were similar in size in all proterotheriids that he observed, though he did not state which taxa or specimens preserve deciduous lower incisors. If our identification of the small, isolated tooth associated with VPPLT 1697 as a deciduous internal incisor is correct,M. sanalfonensepresents a different morphology; the deciduous external incisor (the mesialmost tooth within the mandible of VPPLT 1697) is significantly larger than the isolated tooth.

As with most proterotheriids, the deciduous premolars ofM. sanalfonenseresemble their permanent counterparts [50]. P3/p3 and P4/p4 are molariform in proterotheriids, suggesting that they were heavily involved in food processing [47,50]. Therefore, it makes intuitive sense that the deciduous premolars, which bear the full responsibility for processing food prior to the eruption of the molars, would resemble their permanent counterparts. Among other tooth loci, all of which are represented in the sample described by Cifelli and Guerrero [30], the morphology is identical. The p1 ofM. sanalfonenseis simple and does not differ notably from those of other proterotheriids.

IGM-KUM 56 is a left calcaneus that is roughly 9 cm long proximo-distally (Supplementary Fig.8). The poor preservation obscures the shapes of the articular facets. The small size and gracile nature of the calcaneus suggest that it represents a proterotheriid rather than a macraucheniid [41,50]. Unfortunately, isolated proterotheriid calcanei are not identifiable to the genus level, so IGM-KUM 56 must be referred to Proterotheriidae indet.

IGM-KUM 90 is a poorly preserved right mandibular fragment with two very poorly preserved cheek teeth and one nearly complete cheek tooth (Supplementary Fig.9). Based on the molariform morphology of the distalmost tooth and its lesser wear compared to the tooth mesial to it, we interpret this series as p4–m2. No morphology is discernable on the mesialmost tooth. Only the lingual edge of the middle tooth is preserved, but this area indicates that the tooth is highly worn. The distalmost tooth preserves all but the distolingual corner. This tooth is moderately worn and has a paralophid that reaches the lingual edge of the tooth and weak labial cingulids. Based on the lack of diagnostic morphology, IGM-KUM 90 is referred to Proterotheriidae indet.

The type,Theosodon lallemanti[86,87],Theosodon gracilis[78],Theosodon patagonicum[87],Theosodon karaikensis[88],Theosodon garretorum[41],Theosodon pozzii[89],Theosodon frenguellii[90], and ‘Theosodon’arozquetai[46].

Figure8; Supplementary InformationE; Supplementary Fig.1.

VPPLT 186, right M1 or 2; VPPLT 187, left lower molar; LT-0058, right mandibular ramus with alveoli of right i1–2, roots of right c–p3, and partial right p4; VPPLT 1338, left P3.

VPPLT 186 is a worn right upper molar (Fig.8). Macraucheniid M1–2 are very similar to one another, so it is difficult to distinguish them in isolation. Due to wear, few crown features can be distinguished. The protocone is slightly larger than the hypocone and extends further lingually. The mesial edge of the tooth, formed by the precingulum, is relatively straight. The postcingulum forms the distal edge of the tooth and curves to meet the hypocone. VPPLT 1338 preserves a left P3, but this tooth is fairly worn and does not preserve much recognizable morphology.

LT-0058 preserves the mesial half of the right mandibular ramus (Fig.8). The mesialmost region is damaged, so the alveoli for the incisors and canine cannot be observed. The canine and p1 have single roots, though the root of p1 is mesiodistally elongated. The p2 and p3 have two roots, and the latter tooth’s roots are further separated. The p4 is missing its distolingual corner, but the remainder of the tooth exhibits little wear. The paralophid reaches the lingual edge of the tooth, but there is no clear paraconid. A thin crest, likely representing a metastylid, extends distally from the metaconid into the talonid basin. The hypoconid and protoconid are positioned equally labially. Though the distal portion of this tooth is damaged, there is no trace of an entoconid, identifying this tooth as a p4 rather than m1. The surface of the mandible is damaged, but a possible mental foramen is on the lateral (i.e., labial) surface below the canine root.

VPPLT 187 is a moderately worn left lower molar (Fig.8). Macraucheniid m1–3 are similar to one another, so the exact locus of this isolated tooth cannot be determined. The mesiolingual corner is missing, so the extent of the paralophid is unknown. The talonid basin is mesiodistally longer than the trigonid basin. Within the talonid basin, the entoconid is attached anteriorly to the hypolophid (connected to the cristid obliqua), a featured not observed in proterotheriids that might be a Macraucheniidae synapomorphy [29,47]. There is a weak labial cingulid around the protoconid and hypoconid.

Cifelli and Guerrero [30], described several macraucheniid specimens from La Venta that they referred toTheosodonsp. indet. These authors chose not to assign these specimens to an existing or new species because of the problematic systematics of the genusTheosodon, which have improved little since then. The geologically oldest species,Theosodon frenguellii, is known from the Colhuehuapian SALMA [90]. Seven species have been named from the Santacrucian SALMA:T. lydekkeri, T. gracilis, T. lallemanti, T. garretorum, T. fontanae, T. patagonicum, andT. pozzii[41,30,84,91]. Only the first four of these seven are known from sufficiently diagnostic material, and there is no consensus on how many of the seven species should be considered valid [46,91]. When Cifelli and Guerrero [30], was published, ‘Theosodon’hystatus, of the Late Miocene Chasicoan SALMA was the geologically youngest species of the genus. Schmidt and Ferrero [91] reassigned this species to the genusParanauchenia, which made the La VentaTheosodonthe youngest recognized specimens of the genus. McGrath et al. [46], later described a new species, ‘T.’arozquetai, from the Quebrada Honda fauna in southern Bolivia, which is contemporaneous with the La Venta fauna [92–94]. McGrath et al. [46], noted several differences between ‘T.’arozquetaiand the specimen assigned toTheosodonby Cifelli and Guerrero [30], (UCMP 38088; Supplementary Fig.10), such as the former’s less prominent precingula and postcingula [i.e., less separated from protocone and hypocone) and shallower interstylar concavities; those differences led them to conclude that ‘T.’arozquetaiwas not conspecific with theTheosodonfrom La Venta. The lone upper tooth specimen described herein, VPPLT 186, is moderately worn and is more similar to ‘T.’arozquetaithan is UCMP 38088. Perhaps this means that the differences noted by McGrath et al. [46], should be attributed to wear rather than systematic differences. Alternatively, the specimens described by Cifelli and Guerrero [30] and those described in this article may represent different taxa. TheTheosodonspecimens described in this article do not help resolve the affinities between the La Venta and Quebrada Honda ‘Theosodon’ specimens, nor are they complete enough to form the basis of a new, named species. Nevertheless, they provide additional evidence of the presence of macraucheniids at La Venta.

Among the faunas sampled, La Venta has the greatest number of medium to large mammalian herbivores (32 taxa; Supplementary InformationF]. Pre-GABI South American faunas (La Venta, Quebrada Honda, and Santa Cruz) represent three of the four most speciose faunas in our sample (Table1).

La Venta has the highest values for ERich and FRich and second highest for EDis (Figs.9and10; Supplementary InformationF). The Pleistocene fauna of Barra do Antonião has the highest EDis and second highest ERich and FRich scores. Among the fossil faunas, Quebrada Honda has the highest FEven. The Miocene Centenario fauna has the lowest values for all four indices, though it is tied with other faunas for the lowest ERich and FEven scores. The pre-GABI North American faunas (Centenario, Farish Ranch, and Four Corners) have the three lowest values for FRich and FEven, but their ERich and EDis values are variable. The modern faunas exhibit generally similar scores for all four metrics. Compared to the fossil faunas, the modern faunas have scores that are moderate to low for ERich and EDis, relatively high for FRich, and very high for FEven.

The mean of the 1000 bootstrap replicates for ERich was lower than the original analysis for every fauna. This result is not surprising, because by removing taxa from a given fauna’s sample, all of the taxa occupying certain cells will be removed. Most of the bootstrap taxonomic lists likely contained repeat species since the resampling was done with replacement, meaning some taxa were included multiple times to the exclusion of others. Therefore, on average, fewer cells will be occupied in the theoretical ecomorphospace. The mean of the 1000 bootstrap replicates for EDis was higher than the original analysis for every fauna. This result is also unsurprising given that these ecomorphospaces lack extreme outliers. If there were extreme outliers, the bootstrap replicates in which those outliers were not included in the resampled lists would have resulted in lower values for EDis because the largest pairwise distances would not exist. Additionally, many of the faunas’ ecomorphospaces in our sample have cells occupied by multiple taxa, which is demonstrated by their taxon numbers being larger than their ERich scores. The removal of taxa in the bootstrap replicates likely eliminated many taxon pairs that occupied the same ecomorphological cell, meaning they had a pairwise distance of 0. This conclusion is supported by the fact that the ratio of taxon count to ERich (a proxy for the number of cells occupied by multiple taxa) for a given fauna correlates with that fauna’s difference between the actual EDis and mean of the bootstrap EDis. For example, Quebrada Honda and Four Corners have identical scores for ERich (8) and EDis (18), but Quebrada Honda has 22 species, whereas Four Corners only has 13. However, the mean values for the EDis bootstrap analysis for these faunas are quite different with Quebrada Honda being 58.8 and Four Corners being 21.7. It is clear that the bootstrap replicates removed many ‘0 distance’ pairs from the Quebrada Honda sample and left many of the long-distance pairs. The results of these bootstrap analyses were unsurprising based on the non-bootstrap results. Thus, no hidden biases in our sampling techniques were revealed by the bootstrap analysis.

The new litoptern specimens described here offer new morphological information on three previously described taxa. The deciduous dentition ofMesolicaphrium sanalfonenseis described for the first time [30]. VPPLT 729 represents the most completely known adult dentition ofVillarroelia totoyoi, allowing for an emended diagnosis of this taxon to be created. Among the proterotheriids described in this article,M. sanalfonenseis more abundant thanV. totoyoi, whereas the opposite is true in Cifelli and Guerrero [30]. However, the specimens of both articles came from broad geographic and stratigraphic ranges, so there are no paleoecological or faunal turnover interpretations to be drawn from this pattern. Recent phylogenetic analyses have recoveredM. sanalfonenseandV. totoyoiin various positions within Proterotheriidae [29]. The specimens described mainly document the dentition of these taxa but do not provide additional information from other anatomical regions [e.g., crania, postcrania), so a new phylogenetic analysis based on these newly described specimens would likely not change the results of these analyses.

Portions of the lower adult dentition ofTheosodonsp. from La Venta is described for the first time. Unfortunately, the new material combined with that described by Cifelli and Guerrero [30], are still not enough to assign the macraucheniid fossils from La Venta to a known or new species if these specimens are even conspecific.Theosodonfrom La Venta are among the youngest known representatives of the genus along with the nearly contemporary ‘Theosodon’ arozquetaifrom Quebrada Honda [46] andTheosodonsp. from the Cura-Mallín Formation at Lonquimay, Chile [95]. As mentioned by previous authors [46,30,84,91], this genus is in need of revision not only for the large number of species from the Santa Cruz Formation of Argentina, but for these purported youngest members of the genus.

La Venta has the greatest species richness (32 species) as well as the highest values among Miocene South American faunas here compared for three of the four indices (ERich, EDis, and FRich). This is primarily due to high primate diversity. Among the other two faunas, Santa Cruz has higher scores than Quebrada Honda for ERich and EDis, parallelling its greater species richness (27 vs. 22 species). By contrast, Santa Cruz and Quebrada Honda have similar values for FRich, and Santa Cruz has a much lower value than Quebrada Honda for FEven. This result means that although the herbivore communities of both faunas occupied a similarly sized region of ecomorphospace, the taxa of the Santa Cruz fauna were less regularly distributed. Several cells of the Santa Cruz ecomorphospace are occupied by three or more taxa, and interestingly, they are often occupied by species of the same clade (e.g,. folivorans, proterotheriids, typotherians). This relatedness would lead one to expect that these taxa would be utilizing the environment in similar ways. However, their coexistence suggests that they were partitioning resources in some way not captured by this analysis.

North and South American faunas do not differ appreciably in EDis and Erich scores prior to the GABI; faunas of both continents span a broad range of values for both indices (Fig.9). However, the faunas with the highest scores (La Venta and Valentine Railway Quarries) also have the greatest number of taxa. This suggests that alpha diversity has a large influence on EDis and Erich that outweighs any meaningful intercontinental differences. As for EDis and Erich, there is no clear difference in FEven between North and South American faunas (Fig.10), but unlike these indices, FEven does not correlate with the number of taxa [78].

All pre-GABI South American faunas and two of three modern South American faunas exhibit higher FRich scores than pre-GABI North American faunas (Fig.10); Valentine Railway Quarries has a lower FRich than Quebrada Honda and Santa Cruz despite having eight and three more taxa, respectively. It also has a lower FRich score than Tiputini Biodiversity Station and San Juan de Carere despite having nearly three times as many taxa. This suggests that FRich reflects some aspect of pre-GABI South American and post-GABI faunas that is not present in pre-GABI North America faunas. The difference appears to be related to two main ecological categories of medium to large herbivores present in South America but absent in pre-GABI North American faunas: relatively small (i.e., 1–10 kg) taxa with a feeding height > 2 m and hypselodont taxa.

In our dataset, all cells with feeding height > 2 m and body mass of 1–10 kg represent arboreal taxa (exclusively terrestrial taxa of this size cannot reach higher vegetation). During the Early to Middle Miocene, these arboreal niches were occupied by primates and erethizontid rodents in South America but were mostly unoccupied in North America (Supplementary InformationA). Non-anthropoid (i.e., adapiform) primates inhabited North America until the early Arikareean North American Land Mammal age (late Oligocene; [96]), but after the extinction of the adapiforms, no lineage replaced occupied this size/substrate use niche until the arrival of the porcupineErethizonduring the GABI. Platyrrhine primates dispersed to Central America during the GABI but never made it north of central Mexico. Arboreal sciurid and aplodontid rodents were likely present in North America throughout the late Paleogene and early Neogene [97], but they remained smaller than 1 kg. It seems likely that the environment of North America during the Neogene did not favor the persistence or evolution of arboreal herbivores of this size. The spread of open habitats during the Oligocene and Miocene (which continued throughout the Neogene) has been well-documented in central and western North America by various proxies [96,98–100]. Although medium-sized arboreal herbivores can survive in relatively open habitats, as indicated by the presence of primates in the ‘mosaic’ habitat of Santa Cruz [101–105], it may be that a densely forested, tropical region is necessary for such lineages to evolve and diversify. In our dataset, slightly larger (10–100 kg) high-feeding herbivores were present in both North and South America prior to the GABI, though only South American taxa were arboreal or scansorial, and they were also much more diverse: 11 species of erethizontid rodents, dinomyid rodents, and sloths/folivorans in South America versus a relatively small equid (Cormohipparion goorisi) and a camelid (Floridatragulussp.) in North America.

As noted in Material and Methods, hypselodonty was chosen as one of our ecomorphological categories due to the challenges of confidently inferring diet in many extinct South American mammals based only on tooth morphology alone (i.e., it does not seem to correlate tightly with diet in hypselodont South American mammals). Therefore, we do not interpret the absence of hypselodont North American taxa in our study as indicating an absence of mammals occupying certain dietary niches. Rather, we see this as reflecting the very different adaptive trajectories of medium to large herbivores in South and North America. Three major clades of pre-GABI South American mammals evolved hypselodont dentitions (xenarthrans, notoungulates, and caviomorph rodents), and this trait evolved more than once in the latter two clades [3,34,65,106–108]. By contrast, no Miocene North American herbivorous mammals > 1 kg evolved hypselodont cheek teeth, though several smaller lagomorph and rodent lineages did [109–111].

The three groups of medium to large herbivorous mammals that evolved hypselodont dentitions in South America did so in distinctly different fashions, making their co-occurrence somewhat coincidental. For Xenarthra, hypselodonty is the ancestral state, inherited from an ancestor that was probably myrmecophagous and fossorial112); the expansion of xenarthrans into herbivorous (folivorous) niches, which occurred at least twice, appears to be unique among mammals (112). Rodents have evolved hypselodont dentitions many times, but members of this clade tend to be relatively small; notable exceptions include the caviomorph rodents of South America, which are commonly > 1 kg and evolved giant sizes (> 50 kg) at least three times (9 in neoepiblemids, dinomyids, and caviids; [113,114,115). Thus, the unusual aspect of the hypselodont Miocene South American rodents is their expansion into body sizes niches not typically occupied by rodents as a whole. Finally, notoungulates are the only group of ungulate-like mammals to have evolved hypselodont dentitions aside from the Pleistocene rhinocerotidElasmotherium[116]. The evolution of this trait is likely related to particular ontogenetic/developmental characteristics of the notoungulate dentition, and hypselodonty evolved at least three times in both small and large-bodied clades [106,107]. Notoungulates with hypselodont dentitions likely included browsers, grazers, and mixed feeders [62–64], making then analogous to artiodactyls and perissodactyls in terms of trophic niche.

Hypsodonty (and presumably hypselodonty) appears to be an adaptation for higher levels of abrasive materials within an herbivorous mammal’s diet, though there is debate about the degree to which abrasives from within the plants themselves (i.e., phytoliths) and exogenous abrasives such as dust, soil particles, and volcanic ash drive this feature [117,118]. However, other features observed in North American herbivores could also be adaptations for high degrees of dietary abrasives, such as lophodonty (various lineages), serial tooth replacement (proboscideans), and foregut fermentation (which increases the efficiency of nutrient extraction thereby lessening the amount of food which must be taken in from the external environment; ruminants). These adaptations could have compensated for the lack of hypselodonty in North American lineages, at least to some degree, though developmental constraints likely also played an important role [68]. The lack of hypselodont herbivores in pre-GABI North American faunas likely did not make them less ‘ecomorphologically diverse’ than their South American counterparts. Rather the terrestrial species probably exploited similar dietary niches with more limited dental diversity.

The three modern faunas have relatively low mammal herbivore species richness (Table1) and have lower values for all metrics relative to pre-GABI North and South American faunas (Figs.9–10). The generally high scores of the late Pleistocene (i.e., post-GABI) Barra do Antonião fauna suggest that the end-Pleistocene megafaunal extinction resulted in a greater loss of ecomorphological diversity in South America than the GABI did. Nevertheless, the regions of 3-D ecomorphospace occupied by pre-GABI South American faunas and Barra do Antonião differ despite their similarly high ecomorphological indices; pre-GABI South American faunas generally have high levels of dental diversity, whereas relatively small, hypselodont taxa are absent from Barra do Antonião. This seems to be due to a combination of extinction of typothere notoungulates and size increases among herbivorous xenarthrans (i.e., pampatheres, glyptodonts, and ground sloths) that survived the GABI [119–121]. Caviid rodents survived the GABI, but capybaras (Hydrochoerinae) are curiously absent from Barra do Antonião; they are found elsewhere in the Pleistocene of tropical South America and would have filled the size IV category [122,123].

This ‘loss’ of many hypselodont ecomorphological niches across the GABI raises two possibilities. It is possible that factors other than competition with North American herbivores (e.g., predation, climate) led to the loss of these taxa and that the niches they occupied have yet to be occupied by members of post-GABI (including modern) faunas. It is also possible that hypselodonty does not indicate that a mammal was occupying a niche distinct from that of mammals with other adaptations (e.g., lophodonty) for dealing with higher levels of dietary abrasives. If true, then relatively small, non-hypselodont herbivores of post-GABI South America occupied [and occupy) the same niche spaces as hypselodont pre-GABI herbivores of similar size, irrespective of whether they outcompeted them or merely moved into niches that were vacated in the wake of their extinction.

The proterotheriid fossils described in this article represent the first known deciduous teeth ofMesolicaphrium sanalfonenseand the most complete dentition ofVillarroelia totoyoi. Lower teeth of ‘Theosodon’sp. from La Venta are described for the first time but unfortunately do not offer clues as to the affinities of this taxon or if the material described in this article and that of Cifelli and Guerrero [30] are conspecific.

Overall, La Venta was the most ecomorphologically diverse fauna in our sample due to its large number of taxa and primate diversity. Pre-GABI South American and North American faunas did not differ greatly in EDis and ERich, and it appears that these indices are correlated with taxonomic diversity. However, pre-GABI North American faunas had low FRich relative to pre-GABI and modern South American faunas. This pattern likely arose from the lack of arboreal (i.e., small, high-feeding) and hypselodont taxa in pre-GABI North America. Modern faunas scored lower than all pre-GABI faunas for all four ecomorphological indices. However, this pattern was not true for the Pleistocene Barra do Antonião fauna, suggesting that a lot of ecomorphological diversity was lost in the end-Pleistocene megafaunal extinction. Nevertheless, Barra do Antonião differed from the pre-GABI faunas in the regions of the 3-D ecomorphospace its herbivores occupied. Barra do Antonião lost some of the smaller-sized herbivores with variable dental morphologies but made up for this loss in having herbivores of larger body sizes than other faunas, producing overall similar values for many of our ecomorphological indices.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Supplementary Material 1: Supplementary Information A: Table with all taxa used in ecomorphospace analysis and their scores for each of the three ecomorphological variables. Reference for body mass estimation also provided.

Supplementary Material 2: Supplementary Information B: Table with showing calculations for taxa whose body mass was calculated using linear regressions.

Supplementary Material 4: Supplementary Information D: Python code for ecomorphospace analyses.

Supplementary Material 5: Supplementary Information E: Dental measurements of litopterns from La Venta. All measurements provided in mm. * indicates estimated measurement due to breakage. ** indicates estimated measurement due to erupting condition. D indicates deciduous tooth. - indicates locus present but too damaged to estimate. Abbreviations: LLW–labiolingual width; MDL–mesiodistal length.

Supplementary Material 6: Supplementary Figure 1: Cast of right P2–M3 of type specimen ofVillarroelia totoyoi(IGM 250695). Scale bar equals 2 cm.

Supplementary Material 7: Supplementary Figure 2: Cast of right P1–4 and left M2–3 of hypodigm ofVillarroelia totoyoi(IGM 184501). Scale bar equals 2 cm.

Supplementary Material 8: Supplementary Figure 3: Cast of right M1–3 and left M2–3 of hypodigm ofVillarroelia totoyoi(UCMP 39970). Scale bar equals 2 cm.

Supplementary Material 9: Supplementary Figure 4: Isolated left m3 ofVillarroelia totoyoi(MT 207) in occlusal (top), lingual (middle), and labial (bottom) views. Scale bar equals 5 mm.

Supplementary Material 10: Supplementary Figure 5: Cast of left mandibular ramus with canine and p2–m3 of type specimen ofMesolicaphrium sanalfonense(IGM 182852) in (A) occlusal and (B) labial views. Scale bar equals 2 cm.

Supplementary Material 11: Supplementary Figure 6: Specimen ofMesolicaphrium sanalfonense(IGM-KUM 104). A, left p2; B, right p3; C, mandibular fragment with left partial m1? and complete m2?; D, mandibular fragment with right partial m1 and complete m2. Scale bar equals 1 cm.

Supplementary Material 12: Supplementary Figure 7: Specimen ofMesolicaphrium sanalfonense(MNHN.F.VIV 5). Partial cranium in (A) dorsal, (B) ventral showing DP3–4, (C) left lateral, and (D) right lateral views. E, partial DP1–2. F, left mandibular fragment with dp2–4. Scale bar equals 2 cm.

Supplementary Material 13: Supplementary Figure 8: Left calcaneus of Proterotheriidae indet. (IGM-KUM 56) in anterior (left) and posterior (right) views. Scale bar equals 2 cm.

Supplementary Material 15: Supplementary Figure 10: Cast of ‘Theosodon’ sp. from La Venta first described by Cifelli and Guerrero (1997; UCMP 38008). Right maxillary fragment with partial M1 and complete M2–3. Scale bar equals 2 cm.

Supplementary Material 16: Supplementary Information F: Numerical results of ecomorphospace analysis.