High-energy electron beams with energies in the 15–30
keV
range are used to excite optical Mie modes in crystalline Si nanospheres
with radius 80–100 nm. Cathodoluminescence (CL) spectra show
emission from resonant electric and magnetic dipole and quadrupole
modes, with relative intensities that depend strongly on electron
energy and impact parameter. The measured trends are explained by
a coupling model in which the electron-energy dependent CL excitation
probability–and thus the CL emission–is proportional
to the Fourier transform of the modal electric field at a spatial
frequency determined by the electron velocity. As a result, the coupling
to a specific resonant mode is strongly dependent on the electron
energy and the impact parameter of the electron beam. This enables
the selective enhancement of CL emission from a resonant mode by phase-matching
with the electron velocity. A systematic study of spatial excitation
probability for the electric dipole mode as a function of electron
energy further confirms the validity of the coupling model. Angle-resolved
cathodoluminescence measurements show strong directional emission
due to far-field interference of coherently excited Mie modes. By
varying the electron energy and impact parameter the intensity and
interference of these modes can be controlled and the angular distribution
tailored. The insights in the localized deep-subwavelength coherent
excitation of resonant Mie modes explored here are important for studies
in light-emitting nanostructures, sensors, and photovoltaics, in which
the interplay of local modes and far-field directional emission must
be controlled.

Controlling light in photonic nanostructures
at a deep-subwavelength
scale is crucial for many technological advancements, ranging from
quantum technologies to solar applications. In particular, directional light emission from photonic structures
is important for optimizing the performance of light-emitting diodes
and lasers, sensors, and photovoltaics.,As previously
shown, selective coupling to resonant optical nanoantennas provides
a unique means to tailor the directionality of optical emitters.,Both metallic and high-index dielectric nanostructures are of interest
for these applications. While the former can support plasmonic resonances
which are mainly governed by the material properties, high-index dielectric
nanostructures are particularly interesting since they can support
a wide range of Mie resonances that are electric and magnetic in nature
with very low absorption losses (much lower than for plasmons) and
highQ-factor (narrow emission line width).,−Previous works have investigated the resonances of
Si nanostructures due their ability to support dipolar and quadrupolar
Mie modes in the visible spectral range where Si shows relatively
low loss due to its indirect electronic bandgap.,This
allows for strong tunability of light-matter interactions by tailoring
the size, shape and dielectric environment of the Mie particles, thereby
controlling the resonant energy and angular emission distribution
of the electric and magnetic multipolar modes. Furthermore, it has
been shown that the interference of these multipolar modes can lead
to light emission in specific directions, similar to the Kerker effect
in Mie theory. In order to take advantage
of these properties, it is crucial to control and probe the electric
fields at the nanoscale.

To study optical near fields of nanostructures
at a spatial resolution
below the optical diffraction limit, three different electron microscopy
techniques have been developed in recent years: cathodoluminescence
(CL) spectroscopy, electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and, more
recently, photon-induced near-field electron microscopy (PINEM). In
all cases the electron is used to probe the electric field along the
electron trajectory that is either induced by the electron itself
(for CL and EELS) or by an external laser (for PINEM). In the case
of CL and EELS, a bypassing electron polarizes the material, creating
an electric near field that acts back on the electron, causing it
to lose energy. The total energy loss is measured in EELS, while the
radiating part can be detected in the far field as CL. The CL emission from plasmonic or Mie particles
has a coherent phase relation with the electron impact. The advantage of CL spectroscopy is its capability
to probe the electric field with nanometer precision due to the small
focus dimension of the electron beam. The femtosecond electromagnetic field oscillation created by a bypassing
electron offers a broadband source of modal excitation, enabling broad
spectral analysis in a single CL measurement.

In nanophotonics, CL and EELS have mostly been used to study
plasmonic
nanostructures.,−Recently, dielectric
structures have also been investigated using electron beams. Coenen
et al. characterized higher-order electric and magnetic Mie resonances
in lithographically fabricated Si nanodisks using CL in a scanning
electron microscope (SEM). Matsukata et
al. experimentally demonstrated CL spectra of resonant modes in Si
nanospheres in a transmission electron microscope (TEM) and observed
strong directionality in the CL radiation. And recently, Fielder et al. explored the interplay of Mie resonances
and transition radiation in CL spectra of Si nanospheres. These works show the potential of CL spectroscopy
to investigate and control directional light emission. However, so
far, the relation between the strength of the electron-mode coupling,
the spectrum and the directionality of the CL emission in dielectric
nanostructures has not been studied in a comprehensive way.

In this work we demonstrate that we can achieve directionality
of the emission from electron-excited dielectric resonators, showing
the electron beam analogue to the Kerker effect that is known from
optics. It also enables us to sensitively test the model for electron-mode
coupling. We investigate the coupling of the electron beam to specific
resonances in individual Si nanospheres both theoretically and experimentally.
We take advantage of the fact that, at a given velocity, the electron
resonantly couples to specific spatial frequency components of the
oscillating electric near-field distribution in the particle. By varying the electron energy and impact parameter
in an SEM we selectively couple to modes with specific spatial near
field distributions. We then control the interference of the excited
modes to create specific far-field radiation patterns. We take advantage
of the spherical symmetry to exploit analytical solutions for the
mode profiles from Mie theory. Our results provide fundamental understanding
of electron-mode coupling and provide a framework to control and design
directional light emission from single dielectric nanostructures.

withR= (x,y) the impact parameter in Cartesian
coordinates, ω the angular frequency (ω = 2πc/λ),Ezthez-component of the induced electric field,
andvthe electron speed. Classically,eqcan be interpreted as the net energy
loss along the electron trajectory: the integrated effect of the acceleration
and deceleration of the electron caused by its interaction with the
induced oscillating electric near field. The resulting absolute CL
intensity is then determined by this energy loss and the nanostructure’s
albedo, given by the relative contribution of radiative and nonradiative
losses.Equationshows
that the electron beam effectively takes the Fourier transform of
optical near fields at a spatial frequency (q= ω/v): the observed coupling strength (CL intensity) at a given
electron velocity then directly represents the strength of the spatial
frequencyqin the distribution of the near fields
in thez-direction. The CL emission at a given impact
parameter is maximized when the electron motion is phase-matched with
the induced oscillating fields for that impact parameter. For az-oriented dipole mode excited in the center–characterized
by sharp features at the edge of the particle–the phase matching
condition isq∼ (2n+ 1)­π/D, withDthe diameter of the particle
andnan integer.

First, we theoretically study the configuration where an electron
beam couples to thez-oriented electric dipole (ED)
in a Si sphere with radiusr= 100 nm. InFigurea, we show the real
part of thez-component of the electric field incident
at such a particle at λ = 600 nm. The induced electric fields
are calculated using classical Mie theory using optical constants for crystalline Si from Green et al. Next, we study the CL emission for two electron
beam impact parameters in spherical coordinates (b), given by the distance to the center of the particle; (1) electrons
passing through the particle center (b= 0 nm) and
(2) near the outer edge (b= 90 nm).Figureb shows the real part of thez-component of the induced electric field along the electron
trajectory for the corresponding two impact parameters. By taking
the Fourier transform of theEzprofiles, we calculate the CL emission probability associated
with this mode for an electron energy in the range between 5 and 30
keV (Figurec). For
electrons impacting in the center of the particle, we find a maximum
CL excitation probability at 12 keV, corresponding to a spatial frequency
of 0.047 nm–1. Here, the electron is in phase with
the excited mode (ED) causing maximal electron energy loss and hence,
maximum CL emission. This maximum CL excitation probability corresponds
to the second-order phase-matching condition for center excitation,q= 3π/D. The first peak at lowerq(higher electron energy) is found at 0.016 nm–1(165 keV). For an electron beam exciting the nanosphere on the edge,
no clear CL excitation probability maximum is observed in the studied
range and the CL emission increases with electron energy. The analysis
in this section clearly shows that the electron beam coupling to dielectric
Mie modes depends strongly on the impact parameter and electron velocity.
As we will show next, this provides a unique means to tailor the coupling
of the electron to specific resonant modes, thereby controlling both
the spectrum and angular distribution of the CL emission.

(a) Real part
of thez-component of the electric
field of az-oriented electric dipole mode induced
with a plane wave polarized alongzat λ =
600 nm in a dielectric nanosphere with a radiusr= 100 nm. (b) Real part of thez-component of the
electric field along the electron trajectory for two electron beam
impact parameters; one atb= 0 (blue) and the other
atb= 90 nm (red), indicated by the arrows in (a).
(c) Calculated normalized CL emission intensity as a function of electron
energy usingeq. The
CL emission intensity is proportional to the square modulus of the
spatial Fourier transform of thez-component of the
electric field for the two electron trajectories of panel (b). The
top axis shows the corresponding spatial frequency (q= ω/v) for λ = 600 nm.

whereblmIIdenote the magnetic andalmIIthe electric modes of the scattered electromagnetic
field in the far field. Mode indices refer to the mode order–l=1for magnetic or electric dipole modes (MD,
ED),l=2for electric and magnetic quadrupole modes
(EQ, MQ)–and orientation (for an out-of-plane dipole,m= 0, and for an in-plane dipole,m=
±1).

Single-crystalline nanospheres with radii
between 80 and 100 nm were fabricated using the method developed by
Sugimoto et al. and deposited on a 15
nm-thin Si3N4TEM membrane (seeMethodssection). CL experiments were performed using a SEM
operating at acceleration voltages in the range of 15–30 keV.
A half-parabolic mirror placed between the sample and the electron
column collects the emitted CL and directs it to a spectrometer for
spectral analysis. Angular CL emission distributions were recorded
in Fourier mode by projecting the emission on a CCD imaging sensor,
using a 50 nm wide bandpass filter (seeMethodssection).

First, we study the CL
emission for a Si nanosphere with a radius of 96 nm, excited by a
30 keV electron beam.Figurea shows the measured and calculated CL spectrum atb= 86 nm usingeq. The experimental spectrum is corrected considering the collection
efficiency of the parabolic mirror and the spectrometer. In the spectra,
we find four clear peaks, corresponding to the different modes supported
by the Si nanosphere. Experimentally, we find peaks corresponding
to MD at λ = 744 nm, ED at λ = 605 nm, MQ at λ =
563 nm, and EQ at λ = 487 nm. For all experimental resonances,
the peak energy is red-shifted compared to the theoretical ones. We
ascribe this to the effect of mode coupling to the Si3N4substrate.,We observe good agreement between
experiment and theory for the trend in line width of the modes, where
quadrupolar modes exhibit narrower resonances compared to the broader
dipolar modes. The modal intensities for ED and MD modes show a similar
trend for experiment and theory, while an opposite trend is observed
for the EQ and MQ modes. The experimental EQ mode is more intense
than the MQ one, while theory shows the opposite. We primarily attribute
this discrepancy to the increase of the absorption coefficient of
Si below λ = 500 nm due to the direct bandgap at 450 nm, which
strongly reduces the calculated intensity at that wavelength.

(a) Measured
(red) and calculated (dashed black) CL spectra from
ar= 96 nm Si nanosphere excited with 30 keV electrons.
The measured spectrum is taken atb= 86 ± 5
nm, whileb= 86 nm is used for the calculated spectrum.
The inset shows the SE image of the Si nanosphere with the red dot
indicating the position of the electron beam excitation for the experimental
spectrum (b= 86 ± 5 nm). (b–e) Measured
and (f–i) calculated CL maps at the resonance wavelengths of
the different multipoles. The measured CL maps are averaged over a
bandwidth of 4 nm with the center wavelength of 487 nm (EQ), 563 nm
(MQ), 605 nm (ED), and 744 nm (MD). The theoretical CL maps are calculated
usingeqconsidering
all modes untillmax=2and for wavelengths of 450, 557, 595, and
745 nm, respectively. Pixel sizes of 14 nm for the experimental and
12 nm for the theoretical CL maps are used, respectively.

InFigureb–i,
we display the measured spatial distribution of the CL intensity for
the same nanosphere for each of the Mie modes in (a). We show the
CL intensity at the center wavelength of the four resonances. The
experimental data (b–e) are averaged over a 4 nm-bandwidth
at λ = 487 nm (EQ), λ = 563 nm (MQ), λ = 605 nm
(ED), and λ = 744 nm (MD). The corresponding theoretical data
(f–i) are calculated at the peak wavelengths of 450, 557, 595,
and 745 nm, for EQ, MQ, ED, and MD, respectively. We note that CL
analysis is an excitation spectroscopy technique in which the electron
excitation is spatially well-defined and the spatial resolution in
the CL excitation maps is determined by the electron trajectory. The
CL emission is collected from the entire particle within the focal
collection area and numerical aperture of the parabolic mirror. We
further note that the resolution of the secondary electron (SE) image
shown in the inset ofFigurea is much higher than the CL resolution. In contrast to the
electron trajectory-dependence in CL, SEs mainly originate from the
surface of the sample resulting in an estimated spatial resolution
of 1–2 nm. This allows us to accurately determine the radius
of the Si nanosphere with a simple postprocessing step.

The
CL maps inFigureclearly show that electron beam excitation results in characteristic
spatial excitation distributions for the different Mie modes in the
Si nanosphere, similar to what was found before.,Next, we analyze these data using the coherent coupling model described
above. Many trends in the measured maps match well with the calculated
CL emission maps. For all modes, the excitation efficiency is highest
at the edge of the particle, in both experiment and theory. Small
features such as the larger area of reduced intensity in the center
for the ED mode are also observed theoretically and experimentally.

The theoretical ED and EQ modes show higher overall intensities
at the edges, compared to MD and MQ mode; an effect that is also visible
in the measurements. We note that the sharply concentrated ring in
the experiment ofFigured directly shows the high lateral spatial resolution of the
CL measurement. From a comparison with the theoretical map, we derive
that the spatial resolution is better than the pixel size in these
experiments, i.e., below 14 nm. This is a result of the electron beam
focal diameter on impact (5–10 nm) and small straggle of the
electron beam due to inelastic scattering, which is in qualitative
agreement with Monte Carlo simulations of electron trajectories for
the studied geometry.

The nonspherical shape of the CL maps
is attributed to small sample
drift during each of the measurements. Further asymmetries in the
measurements are due to the asymmetry of the parabolic mirror light
collection geometry, which makes the CL collection efficiency for
each mode dependent on its angular emission distribution. This effect
is visible in the CL maps for the ED and MD modes, for which the bottom
left corner is slightly dimmer: CL generated in that area beams toward
the mirror’s opening and is therefore only partly collected.
These results already hint at the specific angular emission characteristics
of electron-excited Mie modes that we will study in detail further
on.

The good agreement between experiment and theory now allows
us
to study the effect of electron energy on the electron-mode coupling
and assess the spatial frequency formalism for resonant modal excitation
as described above. To do so, we study the dependence of CL emission
on the electron energy ranging from 15 to 30 keV corresponding to
a spatial frequency range of 0.044–0.032 nm–1at the ED resonance wavelength (for electron-energy dependent spectra,
seeFigure S1).Figureshows the experimental (a) and theoretical
(b) CL maps as a function of electron energy and impact parameter
along the center line of the sphere (crosscut through the nanosphere
from left to right) for the ED resonance (λ = 605 ± 2 nm
for experiments and λ = 595 nm for theory). The electron-energy
dependency of the other Mie resonances is shown inFigure S3. The main trend of the measurements follows the
calculated data: the excitation efficiency shows a minimum value which
is strongly dependent on the electron energy. This clearly underlines
the phase-matching condition for the ED: the minimal coupling strength
is expected atq∼ 4π/D*, withD* the height of the particle at a certain
impact parameter, which is visualized by the white dashed lines inFigurea,b. In fact, these
electron-energy dependent CL measurements allow us to determine the
thickness of the nanosphere at different impact parameters using the
well-defined phase-matching condition of the ED resonance. Furthermore,
for excitation at the edge of the nanosphere, the model predicts a
decrease in CL intensity with decreasing electron energy; this is
also found in the experimental CL maps, where the intensity at the
edge vanishes at the lowest experimentally feasible energy of 15 keV.
This originates from the lower CL excitation probability of both the
in-plane (x-, andy-oriented) and
the out-of-plane ED modes (z-oriented) near the edge of the particle
(cf. blue line inFigurec).

(a) Measured and (b) calculated CL maps obtained by a crosscut
through the center line of a Si nanosphere of r = 96 nm excited with
electron energies ranging from 15 to 30 keV. The experimental data
are collected at a center wavelength of 605 nm with a 4 nm bandwidth.
The theoretical calculations are performed at the ED resonance wavelength,
λ = 595 nm, usingeqconsidering all modes untillmax=2. The white dashed line in experiments and
theory shows the rule-of-thumb for the expected minima of the phase-matching
condition for the ED,q∼ 2nπ/D*, forn= 2 and withD* the height of the particle at a certain impact parameter
(for a spherical particle with radiusR, the height
at a certain impact parameter is given byD*=2R2−b2).

With the detailed understanding
of selective mode coupling obtained in the previous section, we now
study the angular distribution of the CL emission from an individual
Si nanosphere and explore how it can be controlled by electron energy
and positioning of electron beam. This gives the possibility to control
their interference in the far field, thereby creating directionality
of CL emission.

First, we theoretically study the angular emission
profile for a Si nanosphere (r= 96 nm) excited by
a 30 keV electron beam, as depicted schematically inFigurea. We choose an impact parameter
ofb= 86 nm as we know that close to the edge, the
electron can couple to both magnetic and electric modes at this electron
energy. The calculated CL spectra is shown inFigure S4, decomposed into the different modes. To achieve
directionality, we exploit the Kerker effect known for dielectric
spheres. We study the angular emission distribution at two emission
wavelengths where the interference of the modes creates directional
emission: (1) λ = 760 nm, using the interference between the
ED and the MD mode (Figureb–e), and (2) λ = 595 nm, using the ED and the
EQ mode (Figuref–h).
The data are derived by calculating the Poynting vector for the coherent
sum in the far field of the indicated modes. The full modal solution
is obtained by summing all relevant modes withlmax=2.

(a) Schematic of excitation configuration: a
Si nanosphere withr= 96 nm is excited by a 30 keV
electron beam atb= 86 nm.i (b–h) Far-field
radiation patterns at
two emission wavelengths: (b–e) λ = 760 nm (MD and ED
resonances) and (f–h) λ = 595 nm (ED and EQ resonances).
The radiation patterns are calculated by taking the Poynting vector
(S) of the scattered electromagnetic field ofeq, coherently summing over
the modes. For the full solution, the sum of all modes usinglmax=2is considered. The color map visualizes
thez-direction of the radiation (Sz): red for upward and blue for downward
intensities.

InFigureb we
recognize the typical radiation pattern for an MD mode with dipole
moment along theydirection (MDy). We note that the electron beam does not couple to the
MDxand MDzmodes because their electric field vectors are perpendicular to
the electron beam trajectory. When adding
the contribution of the EDzmode (Figurec), we observe directional
CL emission opposite to the electron trajectory. This corresponds
to the transverse Kerker effect that has been theoretically studied and experimentally observed. When we add the EDxmode as
displayed inFigured, the combined effect with the MD gives a Kerker-type interference
along thez-axis, creating downward directionality.
In the full solution (Figuree), adding up all modes withlmax=2, we observe both horizontal and vertical
directionality: the CL radiation is directed toward negativexand negativez. This is the result of
the interference of the MD + EDzmode
and of the MD + EDxmode, respectively.
We note that the vertical directionality is downward at wavelengths
above the MD resonance wavelength (λMD= 726 nm)
because the ED and MD resonance are in-phase.

InFiguref–h,
we follow the same steps for the ED resonance at λ = 595 nm.
We start by only considering the contributions of the ED modes, namely
EDzand EDx, resulting in a symmetric emission distribution around they-axis (Figuref). Next, inFigureg the contribution of the EQ is added, which leads to directionality
toward the opposite side of the electron beam impact position. This
is due to the interference of the EQ and the ED modes. Comparing this
to the full solution shown inFigureh, we see that this interference is the largest contribution
to the full solution.

This theoretical study shows that controlling
the interference
of coherently excited Si Mie modes creates strong directional CL emission
in the far field, both in the horizontal and vertical direction. For
emission atλ= 760 nm there are two dominant
mechanisms: interference of the MD mode with the out-of-plane ED mode
(EDz) resulting in horizontal directionality,
and interference of the MD mode and the in-plane ED mode (EDx) resulting in vertical directionality. Atλ= 595 nm, the coherent addition of the EQ mode is
necessary to generate horizontal directionality, due to the absence
of the MD mode.

With this theoretical framework for directionality,
we now experimentally
exploit this formalism for the selective excitation of resonant modes
thereby controlling their interference and thus tailoring the angular
emission distribution. In these experiments, in which we use a slightly
smaller nanosphere (r= 85 nm), we vary both the
electron energy and the impact parameter.

Figurea shows
the CL excitation probability as a function of electron energy at
impact parameterb= 42 nm calculated for specific
modes usingeq. We
consider the CL emission atλ= 585 nm, in
between the ED and the MD resonance wavelength. We find a strong dependence
of the CL excitation probability for specific modes on the electron
energy. For example, at 15 keV the electron does not couple to the
EDzmode but excites only the EDxmode, while at 30 keV the contribution of the
EDzmode is strongest. Using these CL
excitation probabilities, we calculate the angular CL emission profile
at two electron beam energies. At 30 keV (Figurec) the theory predicts a strong horizontal
directionality toward the opposite side of the excitation (the negativex-direction), originating from Kerker-like interferences
of EDz+ MD and EDz+ EQ modes. This strong directionality reverses to the
opposite direction, and decreases in strength, for excitation with
a 17 keV electron beam (Figureb). This comparison shows the strong effect of far-field interference
of the coherently excited Mie modes in Si nanospheres on the angular
radiation profile.

Analysis of directional CL emission toward the upper hemisphere
from a Si nanosphere withr= 85 nm excited with
an electron beam with energy ranging from 5 to 30 keV withb= 42 nm. (a) CL excitation probability between electron
and EDz(blue), EDx(orange), MD (green), and EQ (red) modes versus electron
energy, with the low CL intensity modes shown in the inset. (b, c)
Calculated and (d, e) measured far-field radiation intensities in
the positivez-direction (where the electron comes
from), excited with a (b, d) 17 keV and (c, e) 30 keV electron beam.
The experimental data are obtained with aλ= (600 ± 25) nm bandpass filter, and the theoretical data are
calculated atλ= 585 nm.

To experimentally study the far-field radiation
profiles, we perform
angle-resolved CL (AR-CL) measurements at λ = (600 ± 25) nm
for electron energies of 17 and 30 keV (Figured,e). The data show clear right and left
beaming for the two energies, respectively. This is in good agreement
with the calculated radiation patterns inFigureb,c. At 17 keV the interference of the EDzand EDxmodes in
the far field creates strong directionality toward the impact position,
while at 30 keV we see a stronger contribution of the EDzmode superimposed on contributions of MD and EQ
modes that make the radiation pattern asymmetric. Consequently, selective
mode coupling can be used to generate and tune CL emission with strong
directionality by controlling the electron beam energy.

Another
important parameter to tune the directionality of CL emission
is the impact parameterb, which we investigate for
the same Si nanosphere at a fixed electron beam energy of 30 keV.Figurea shows the coupling
efficiency of the electron beam with the EQ, EDz, EDx, and MD modes as a function
of impact parameterb. The inset shows a magnified
view of the lower-intensity modes. We clearly observe two interaction
regimes: close to the nanosphere’s center (b= 20 nm) the EDzmode contributes strongest,
while closer to the edge the electron can couple to all modes. For
two exemplary impact parameters (b= 42 nm andb= 76 nm) we calculate the AR-CL emission, shown inFigureb,c, respectively.
In both cases we notice a strong directionality toward the negativekx-direction, i.e., opposite
to the electron beam excitation. However, for excitation closer to
the edge (b= 76 nm), we also find a contribution
of the EDxmode which radiates into the
upper hemisphere, as well as radiation from the EDz+ MD modes in the horizontal (in-plane) direction.

Measured and
calculated effect of the impact parameterbon the
directionality of the CL emission toward the upper
hemisphere from a Si nanosphere withr= 85 nm excited
with a 30 keV electron. (a) CL excitation probability between electron
and EDz(blue), EDx(orange), and MD (green) versusb, the
gray background shows the inside and the outside of the particle.
The inset shows the magnifiedy-axis for low CL intensity
modes. Calculated (b, c) and measured (d, e) far-field radiation intensities
in the positivez-direction (where the electron comes
from), for excitation at (b, d)b= 42 nm, and (c,
e)b= 76 nm. The experimental data is obtained with
aλ= (600 ± 25) nm bandpass filter, and
the theoretical calculation is done atλ=
585 nm.

Similar trends are also seen in the experiments
represented inFigured,e, where we find
a strong horizontal (in-plane) directionality forb= 42 nm, and an additional radiation component into the upper hemisphere
for excitation atb= 76 nm. While experiments and
theory generally agree well, we also notice in comparingFigurec,e that the relative
contribution of MD + EDz (horizontal directionality) and MD + EDx(vertical directionality) to the overall directionality
do not fully match. The experimental data indicate that the contribution
of the EDxmode is stronger than suggested
by the calculations. We attribute this deviation to the effect of
the substrate: the 15 nm-thin Si3N4substrate
changes the induced electric field in the nanosphere and thereby changes
the relative electron-coupling strength to the EDzand the EDxmode.

In conclusion, we experimentally and theoretically
studied the
effect of the electron beam energy and impact parameter on the cathodoluminescence
(CL) emission of crystalline Si nanospheres. In the experiments, we
spectrally identified electric and magnetic dipolar and quadrupolar
Mie resonances in the Si nanospheres upon electron beam excitation,
in good agreement with theory. Two-dimensional spectral CL excitation
maps show the modal excitation profiles at high spatial resolution,
only limited by the electron beam spot size and small beam straggle.

The spectral and spatial distributions are in good agreement with
a model in which the electron resonantly couples to specific modal
field distributions with characteristic spatial frequencies that are
determined by the electron velocity and resonance wavelength. The
accessible electron energies in the SEM offer a wide range of velocities
and thus probe a wide span of spatial frequencies, enabling the studies
presented here. We use the selective modal excitation mechanism to
control the directionality of the CL emission. Both electron energy
and impact parameter are used to selectively excite resonant modes
that interfere in the far field to create well-defined angular beaming.

The insights in this paper can inspire novel designs of lasers,
light-emitting diodes, sensors, and photovoltaics, utilizing the coupling
of nanosized optical emitters to resonant nanostructures. The resonant
nanostructures can function as effective antennas by directing light
generated at the nanoscale to the far field. With the resonant electron-mode
coupling mechanism solidly confirmed in these experiments it becomes
possible to design this coupling for a wide range of electron-light-matter
interactions, in further advanced CL, EELS and PINEM spectroscopies.

withvthe electron speed.
With this method, valid in the nonrecoil approximation and when considering
the modes individually, we can study the coupling of the electron
to single modes. We calculate the induced electric field for a single
mode using Mie theory. By using vector spherical harmonics, we calculate
the induced electric fields for different modes, excited by a plane
wave. While this model presents an intuitive
way to determine the coupling to different modes, it does not consider
how these modes couple with each other.

withZ0the impedance
in free spaceμ0ε0. By selecting the modes of interest(l,m), either magnetic or electric ineqsand , we isolate the contribution of each multipole to the CL radiation.

The measurements were
performed in a FEI Helios 600, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc. SEM equipped
with a half-parabolic mirror and spectral and angular CL acquisition
SPARC system from Delmic B.V. The acquisition of the CL maps was performed
using a pixel size of 14 nm and an exposure time of 1 s. All spectra
and maps shown in this paper were taken from the same nanosphere,
and the CL background signal from the supporting Si3N4membrane was subtracted. The systems’ response was
calibrated using transition radiation from a single crystalline aluminum
sample as described in literature and
this has been used to correct all experimental CL data. The study
on directional emission was done at a smaller Si nanosphere of a radius
of 85 nm. For the angle-resolved CL emission measurements, the grating
was removed from the optical path, and the reflected light from the
mirror is directed onto a 2D CCD camera to measure in Fourier mode.
For these measurements bandwidth filters with a bandwidth of 50 nm,
and an exposure time of 5 s were used. In both spectral and angular
CL measurements, the electron beam current was 1.4 nA.

The Si nanospheres were fabricated
starting by crushing SiO lumps to powder and annealing it in N2atmosphere. The powder was etched in a hydrofluoric acid
(HF) to remove the SiO2matrices. Finally, the freestanding
Si nanospheres were transferred to methanol and then ultrasonicated
and filtered to particle sizes around 100 nm radius. Next, we drop casted 5 μL from the suspension of
solution onto a 15 nm-thin Si3N4support film
for TEM provided by PELCO and dried it. By postprocessing the SE images,
we determined the particle radii of 96 and 85 nm for the spectral
and angular CL analysis, respectively.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsphotonics.5c00173.

T.S. and E.A. contributed equally to this work. E.A., S.F., and
A.P. conceived the project. H.S. and M.F. fabricated the silicon nanospheres.
T.S. and E.A. performed the measurements and did the analysis. T.S.
and P.E.S. made the model. T.S. and E.A. drafted the original draft.
S.F and A.P. supervised the project, and all authors reviewed and
edited the manuscript.

This work is
financed by the Dutch Research Council (NWO) and has received funding
from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program under Grant Agreements
No. 101019932 (Quantum Electron Wavepacket Spectroscopy (QEWS)), No.
101017720 (Electron Beams Enhancing Analytical Microscopy) (eBEAM)
and No. 101151994 (Electron Transport Experimental Investigation of
Perovskites using Light and Electron Injection at the Nanoscale, EXPLEIN).
This work is partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI No. 22K18949, JST
FOREST Program No. JPMJFR213L and Kobe University Strategic International
Collaborative Research Grant.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): A.P. is cofounder
and co-owner of Delmic B.V., a company that produces commercial cathodoluminescence
systems like the one that was used in this work.