To develop and validate educational clinical vignettes (CVs) based on real-life patients with serious pathology from the disciplines of oncology, internal medicine and orthopaedics that are relevant for physiotherapists (PTs) working in a non-direct access system.

A mixed-methods study using an iterative design was employed to develop and validate CVs that focused on serious pathology.

Academic and clinical settings within health faculties at three universities in Austria and the UK.

Medical doctors (MD) (n=3) and PTs (n=4) developed CVs in the disciplines of internal medicine, oncology and orthopaedics. Validation of the CVs was undertaken in three stages: internal validation by the research team (n=7), external validation by MDs (n=3) and external validation by PTs (n=18).

25 CVs focusing on internal medicine (9), oncology (8) and orthopaedics (8) were developed. Results of the consensus method of Haute Autorité de Santé ranged between 7 and 9 in the internal validation stage. In the external validation stage with MDs, one orthopaedic CV was excluded, resulting in a final total of 24 validated CVs.

This is the first time educational CVs have been developed and validated across such a broad range of pathologies for countries without direct access to physiotherapy, for use in the education of PTs. Furthermore, the approach described in the Methods section of this paper may serve as a template in similar future projects.

The clinical vignettes (CVs) cover a broad spectrum of serious pathologies from the disciplines of internal medicine, oncology and orthopaedics.

A close collaboration between medical doctors (MDs) and physiotherapists (PTs) resulted in these CVs.

The CVs went through several rounds of internal and external validations.

Whilst CVs cannot replace a real patient encounter, they nonetheless represent an important educational tool in the development of PTs’ clinical decision-making skills in identifying the presence of serious pathology.

Physiotherapists (PTs) can play a critical role in the early detection of serious pathologies affecting the MSK system.15,21However, research suggests that PTs and PT students need more support to develop the skills needed to identify the presence of serious pathologies.22,29These results are not surprising, as, for instance, Austrian undergraduate PT students28and qualified PTs in Austria30and Denmark31have already expressed concern about their lack of expertise and/or training on how to recognise the presence of serious pathologies.

There were two issues with previously used CVs in the literature. First, existing CVs were created for a healthcare system with direct access to physiotherapy.22,2631Hence, these CVs might not be ideal for PTs without direct access systems. Second, the CVs were developed to assess the ability of PTs to recognise the presence of a serious pathology.22,29This resulted in CVs that were brief, and the information given was kept to a minimum (due to time constraints). This limitation was highlighted by Beyerlein48and Budtzet al,31who argued that PTs usually collect more detailed patient data, background information and findings from the physical examination to make clinical decisions. Therefore, the previously developed CVs were not suitable for teaching purposes, highlighting the need for CVs with realistic, detailed information to enhance learning and knowledge transfer.

Consequently, our aim was to develop and validate educational CVs based on real-life patients with serious pathology from the disciplines of oncology, internal medicine and orthopaedics that are relevant for PTs working in a non-direct access system. These CVs are intended to form the basis for future teaching purposes for PTs with the aim of improving their ability to detect the presence of a serious pathology.

This mixed-methods study used an iterative design to develop and validate CVs that focused on serious pathology. The study consisted of two phases and was based on the consensus method used in Finucaneet al.49In phase 1, CVs were developed. For this purpose, the internal development group selected the most pertinent serious pathologies in a collaborative process, which was used to develop the CVs.

In Phase 2, the new CVs went through a three-stage validation process: (1) internal validation with the internal development group, (2) external validation with medical doctors (MDs) and (3) external validation with PTs. MDs and PTs were included in the external validation process, as they are the main stakeholders in the detection of serious pathology. Quantitative feedback was used to validate the appropriateness of the CVs, and qualitative feedback was used to incorporate suggested changes.

There was no direct patient or public involvement at any stage of this study. However, other stakeholders in the healthcare system (PTs and MDs) were involved in the study.

First, a list of serious pathologies relevant to the physiotherapy profession in the disciplines of internal medicine, oncology and orthopaedics1549,59was developed from the literature and the clinical experiences of MDs and PTs (seeonline supplemental file 1).

Then, a development group for each discipline (internal medicine, oncology and orthopaedics) was created within the research team. Each development group consisted of one MD, one PT and one research assistant. All MDs were aged between 45 and 55 years and had specialised in their discipline for between 11 and 16 years. The PTs were aged between 40 and 45 years and had between 17 and 23 years of experience. The research assistants were aged between 20 and 25 years.

In these development groups, pathologies that PTs would realistically encounter in a non-direct access system needed to be chosen from the list. Then, one member (MD or PT) with patient experience took the lead in writing a CV from their everyday professional life and/or published case reports.1660,62This was then discussed in the development group and adapted. A maximum of 9 CVs were developed this way, with each development group needing up to three meetings to adapt a CV.

Regarding the therapy intervention referred to in each CV, this was recorded as ‘evidence-based physiotherapy’ to keep the focus on the main aspects of screening for serious pathologies.

Green=no concerning symptoms and signs→refer for physiotherapy.

Yellow=few concerning symptoms and signs→refer to physiotherapy and watchful waiting.

Orange=some concerning symptoms and signs→referral to (referring) MD, no physiotherapy treatment.

Red=some concerning symptoms and signs→immediate emergency referral, no physiotherapy treatment.

In each of the three disciplines (internal medicine, oncology and orthopaedics), a combination of different traffic light colours needed to be presented. To ensure that not every CV resulted in the same level of concern or with the same number of sessions, a variety of different traffic light combinations were given for each discipline. When the internal development group indicated their CVs followed the set structure and were ready, they were put forward to the validation phase.

The three validation stages are listed below: (1) internal validation with the internal development group, (2) external validation with MDs and (3) external validation with PTs.

Internal validation of the CVs was performed by members (n=5) of the other internal development groups and a researcher with international experience in red flag screening (JS/GY). The validation process was conducted in parallel to the development of the CVs. When 6–9 CVs had been developed, members of each group received CVs from the other disciplines. Depending on the number of CVs, 7–14 days were given to provide feedback.

Feedback was of a quantitative and qualitative nature. For the quantitative feedback, the HAS (Haute Autorité de Santé) rating was used.65The HAS rating is suitable for at least 9–15 participants. Each participant rated each CV from 1 (totally inappropriate) to 9 (totally appropriate). The qualitative feedback was collected by asking, ‘Comment on the content, structure, understanding and completeness of information’. Then, one researcher (SG) collected the quantitative and qualitative feedback and sent it in an anonymised form back to the development group.

When a CV received a HAS median score of ≥7 and all scores were ≥5, it was deemed appropriate, did not need to be adjusted based on the qualitative feedback and was ready for Stage 2. When a CV received a HAS median score of ≤3.5 and all scores were ≤5, the CV was deemed inappropriate and was not taken forward to the next round. When a CV received a HAS median score between 4 and 6.5, the CV was deemed uncertain. Qualitative feedback was required to be discussed in the development group and incorporated into the CV. The validation cycle was started from scratch until it was scored as appropriate or inappropriate.

This external validation round was conducted by MDs from the local hospital. The participating MDs received a 60 min training session that provided an overview of the project and the focus group procedure. After providing verbal consent, the focus group was initiated.

What was missing/should be changed? (Comment on the content, structure, understanding, professional aspects and completeness of information).

Then the feedback was summarised and anonymised by one researcher (MEL) and sent to each development group. If major adjustments were required, the CV did not advance to the next stage.

This external validation round was conducted by PTs from the local hospital. PTs could participate if they were registered as PTs in Austria and were working at the local hospital. First, a presentation, including information about red flag screening and an introduction to the current project, was held at the hospital. Then, an online survey was sent out along with an information sheet, consent form and the remaining CVs (n=24). After consent was provided, the PTs had 2 months to complete the survey, and a reminder was sent after 4 weeks. The participants were allocated four working hours from the hospital to complete the survey.

The rating of the CV was conducted similarly to the internal validation stage. The quantitative rating was based on the HAS,65and a qualitative feedback section was added. According to the HAS, the recommended number of participants (9–15) can be adjusted if the group comprises more than 15 participants. Qualitative feedback was anonymised and returned to the development team. For more detailed information, see ‘Stage 1: internal validation’. Afterwards, the qualitative data of Stages 2 and 3 were analysed using an inductive thematic analysis method.66One researcher (SG) analysed the feedback inductively and formed themes. These themes were then reviewed by a second researcher (JJ). Both researchers largely agreed in their analysis. Any disagreements were semantic and were resolved through discussion.

25 CVs were developed. Nine in internal medicine and eight in both orthopaedics and oncology. These CVs are listed in theonline supplemental file 2. The main characteristics of the CVs are shown intable 1.

ACL, anterior cruciate ligament; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CVs, clinical vignettes; enby, non-binary; f, female; m, male.

Four validation stages were held from October 2022 to January 2023, and in each of them, a maximum of 10 CVs were evaluated. 15 CVs passed the first round (table 2). The other 10 CVs (internal medicine CVs 2, 3 and 5; oncology CVs 1, 2, 4 and 5 and orthopaedics CVs 1, 2 and 5) had to be changed based on the qualitative feedback and went through the internal validation stage again before being deemed appropriate.

Green shading, appropriate; Grey shading, uncertain; Nd, not developed.

External validation in this stage was qualitative in nature. In total, six focus groups, two for each discipline, were held from February to March 2023. From analysis of the focus group data, two themes were identified: ‘spelling, grammar and phrasing’ and ‘clinical picture’. A full list of the quotes of the MDs related to the themes is listed in theonline supplemental file 3.

The ‘spelling, grammar and phrasing’ category provided feedback to clarify narrow descriptions or make the text easier to understand, for example, ‘diagnosis and referral reason not clearly formulated’ (internal medicine CV9, MD) or ‘BMI away (remove BMI) and just write obesity’ (orthopaedics CV8, MD).

In the ‘clinical picture’, the feedback focused on providing a clearer picture and more detailed information. The focus group mentioned that ‘restriction in hip, knee and shoulder should be described in more detail; for example, extension deficit in hip and knee and shoulder global restriction’ (internal medicine CV1, MD) or ‘neurodynamic testing? What exactly is tested?’ (oncology CV3, MD).

Following the analysis, the development groups incorporated the findings into the CV. Minor changes were made in all internal medicine and oncology CVs. In the orthopaedic section, CV2 was excluded for having misleading information. The following feedback was given regarding information for differential diagnosis: ‘this CV should rather go in the direction of polyneuropathy’ or clearer hints for cervical myelopathy were missing: ‘active cervical spine movement: not restricted?—This can’t be’ (orthopaedic CV2, MD). Correcting this information would have led to the creation of a new CV with a different underlying pathology. As such, CV2 was excluded.

The external validation with PTs took place from March to May 2023, with 18 PTs completing the survey. 16 PTs were identified as female, and 2 as men. The age of the PTs varied between 20 and 60 years. 9 PTs had 1–10 years of experience, and the other 9 had over 20 years of experience. The main area of work was for 9 PTs in orthopaedics and trauma, 8 were in internal medicine and 1 did not complete the question.

13 CVs (internal medicine CVs 1, 4, 6 and 8; oncology CVs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7 and orthopaedics CVs 3, 6 and 7) were appropriate according to the HAS guideline (table 3). The remaining 11 CVs were considered as ‘uncertain’, and minor adaptations were made by the development group based on the qualitative feedback.

Ex, excluded; green shading, appropriate; grey shading, uncertain; Nd, not developed; PTs, physiotherapist.

From analysis of the data from the ‘uncertain’ CVs, three themes were identified: ‘missing information’, ‘different estimation for the level of concern’ and ‘missing knowledge of red flags’. Feedback from the first two themes was considered for the amendment of the CVs. A full list of the quotes of the PTs related to the themes is listed in theonline supplemental file 4.

In the first theme, ‘missing information’, additional information needed to be included in the CV. Examples of this included: ‘the circulatory collapse could well be related to the previous infection. This was not addressed, although in practice, these problems occur again and again after previous infections!’ (internal medicine CV2, PT9) or ‘in this example, I would need more information regarding the cause of the 2nd pubic bone fracture.’ (internal medicine CV9, PT11).

In the ‘different estimation for the level of concern’ theme, the participants provided feedback on the traffic light decision. One participant mentioned, ‘I would have set the CV to orange earlier, not only after 6 weeks’ (oncology CV8, PT6), while another said, ‘I would have recommended internal clarification for the patient as early as the 2nd therapy session!’ (internal medicine CV5, PT6).

In the last category, ‘missing knowledge in red flag screening’ participants listed feedback which contradicted that given in the literature. For example, one participant said, ‘In my opinion, the positive findings of the cranial nerve test remained without consequence—even if the MRI was without finding—doesn’t it need further clarification?’ (orthopaedics CV4, PT2). Another mentioned, ‘I don’t really find the risk factor osteoporosis conclusive; the last bone density scan was normal. Older age and gender are not significant risk factors for me.’ (orthopaedics CV5, PT9). Following the 3-stage process, 24 CVs had been successfully developed and validated.

The aim of this study was to create educational CVs focused on serious pathology from the disciplines of oncology, internal medicine and orthopaedics, which are relevant for PTs working in a non-direct access system. After the third validation stage, 24 CVs were approved. This is the first time educational CVs have been developed in such a broad range of pathologies for countries without direct access to physiotherapy.

Differences existed regarding the validation of the CVs between the MDs and the PTs. Several factors could have played a part in creating these differences. First, MDs and PTs had different clinical background knowledge, which influenced their clinical decision-making.69Especially in a country such as Austria, where there is no direct access to physiotherapy, MDs are better trained in recognising serious pathologies than PTs. Second, the method of validation was different between the two professions. Where MDs discussed the CVs in a focus group, the PTs provided their feedback in written form. This could have led to a different level of feedback. Third, different professions view information from their own clinical perspective.70Where an MD could assess the signs and symptoms of the serious pathology more clearly, a PT would also assess if the CV would make sense for a PT setting. Both perspectives were important for the development of the CVs. PTs were included in the last validation round, as the CVs needed to be tailored to this profession.

This is the first time that CVs have been developed, not only for spinal pathologies, but also for a broader range of pathologies, including internal medicine, oncology and orthopaedics. This reflects our ageing society, which will experience an increase in the number of people developing serious pathology such as cancer, cardiovascular or visceral disease.2,5The multistage validation process ensured that a close interprofessional collaboration between MDs and PTs took place. The developed CVs are specifically designed for educational purposes and can be used in a non-direct access physiotherapy setting.

Limitations of the study include the limited specialised PTs and MDs included in the study. In Austria, it is currently not possible for PTs to specialise as extended scope practitioners. One way to capture the PTs’ clinical knowledge was to measure their years of clinical experience. The large variation in clinical experience in this study should be considered. Further studies should validate these CVs with more specialised PTs.

Due to the lack of clear national or international guidance on which serious pathologies are most pertinent for PTs to recognise, the selection of relevant pathologies was an important consideration. The first step was to review relevant literature,1549,59which was then supplemented by the clinical experiences of MDs and PTs. However, further research is needed to establish which serious pathologies are most relevant to physiotherapy practice and should, therefore, be included in preregistration physiotherapy programmes.

This study has developed and validated 24 CVs, which can be used as an educational resource for the development of clinical decision-making skills to identify serious pathology, especially for PTs who are not working in a direct access system. While these newly developed CVs can never replace a real patient encounter, they nonetheless represent an important tool in the development of PTs’ clinical decision-making skills in identifying the presence of serious pathology.

It is acknowledged that the set of serious pathologies in the current study does not claim to be exhaustive. Future efforts should be made to create further CVs for other serious pathologies. The approach used in this study may serve as a template for future projects to develop clinically robust CVs concerning serious pathology.

We would like to thank all the physiotherapists and medical doctors who have taken part in the external validation process.