According to the density functional theory, the density contains sufficient information to compute the value of any observable. It is shown that the Fisher information density also includes this knowledge. The Fisher information density functional theory is constructed. The variational principle is extended to the energy as a functional of the Fisher information density. Hohenberg‐Kohn‐like theorems are shown to be valid.

According to the density functional theory the density contains all information about the system. It is now revealed that the Fisher information density also includes all the knowledge of the system. The variational principle stands for the Fisher information density, too. Therefore, the Fisher information density functional theory can be established. Hohenberg‐ Kohn‐like theorems are derived. As an illustration, the Fisher information density and the density of the harmonic two‐electron molecule are presented.

Density functional theory (DFT) has benefited a lot from information‐theoretical concepts (see, e.g., [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]). As the electron density can be considered proportional to a probability distribution function, information quantities such as Shannon [17] and Rényi [18] entropies or Fisher information [19] can be determined from the electron density. The relationship between the information‐theoretical approach and DFT allowed significant conceptual and practical development. It led to a better understanding among others, reactivity, and chemical bonding. For example, the Euler equation of DFT can be derived from the principle of extreme physical information, that is, applying the variational principle to the Fisher information with certain conditions [20,21]. Liu and coworkers initiated information functional theory [22] and demonstrated that several electronic properties can be accurately described by information‐theoretic quantities.

Besides the information quantities, certain information densities have also been studied. Moreover, it has been shown that the Shannon entropy density can be used as a descriptor of a Coulomb system [23]. It means that, in the knowledge of the Shannon entropy density, we can determine the Hamiltonian, and after solving the Schrödinger equation, any property of the system can be computed.

In this paper, it is shown that the Fisher information density defined by Equation (5) below is also a descriptor of a Coulomb system. Moreover, the density can be directly determined if the Fisher information density is known—that is, without solving the Schrödinger equation. If the system is spherically symmetric, the density can be computed by an integral containing the Fisher information density (Equation (22) below). If there is no spherical symmetry, the relationship between the density and the Fisher information density is more sophisticated: The square root of the density and the square root of the Fisher information density satisfy the so‐called eikonal equation. In addition, the DFT variation principle also applies to the Fisher information density. So, we can conclude that the Fisher information density contains all information on the system.

The paper is arranged as follows: Section2contains the definition of the Fisher information and the Fisher information density. In Section3, it is shown that the Fisher information density is a descriptor of a Coulomb system. Spherically symmetric systems with local external potential are studied in Section4. The general case is presented in Section5. The variational principle is extended to the energy as a functional of the Fisher information density in Section6. Sections7and8present the Discussion and the Conclusion.

signifying that an atom occupies a certain amount of space in a molecule.

As it is shown in the following sections, it is not only a natural but an adequate definition, because a Fisher information density functional theory can be built on it.

RαandZαare the position vectors and the atomic numbers of the nuclei.NandMdenote the number of electrons and nuclei.

The Fisher information density determines the electron numberN.

is the ionization potential.E0N−1is the ground‐state energy of theN−1electron system.

Consequently, the first Hohenberg‐Kohn theorem is valid for the Fisher information density.

The density determines the external potential; therefore, the Fisher information density also contains this information. Consequently, the first Hohenberg‐Kohn theorem is valid for the Fisher information density.

The simplest example is the H‐like ions with atomic numberZ. One can easily check that the densityϱ=Z3πe−2Zrand the Fisher information densityϱF=4Z2ϱ=4Z5πe−2Zrsatisfy Equation (22).

Obviously, Equations (25) and (29) satisfy Equation (22). Figure1. presentsϱFandϱforκ/k=2.

(Color online) The Fisher information density and the density of the harmonic two‐electron molecule (κ/k=2).

It can be solved numerically with suitable boundary conditions (see, e.g., [45]). Thus, the density can be in principle obtained from the Fisher information density. As the density determines the external potential, this statement stands for the Fisher information density, too. That is, the first Hohenberg‐Kohn theorem is valid for the Fisher information density. It is proved in the following section that the second Hohenberg‐Kohn theorem also holds for the Fisher information density.

Ev0is the total energy functional of anN‐particle system in the external potentialv0.ϱis any density. Equality stands if and only ifϱequals the ground‐state density.

That is, the energyE˜expressed as a functional of the Fisher information densityϱFis equal to the energyEassociated with that densityϱfrom which the Fisher information density can be obtained from Equation (5).

whereϱ0Fis the ground‐state Fisher information density, whileϱFis any Fisher information density. So the variational principle is extended to the Fisher information density.

E˜can be established by Levy's constrained search. In DFTEv0is obtained by the search for all wave functions providing the givenϱ.

Obviously, any property of the system can be computed if we knowΨ. Therefore, Equations (36) and (37) is in harmony with Equation (34).

Not only is the density a fundamental quantity in chemistry. The density gradient also proved to be important, especially in the quantum theory of atoms in molecules by Bader [46].

In the present theory, the Fisher information density is defined by Equation (5). However, other forms are also possible. An alternative expression forϱFby Liu [47] has turned out to be useful in chemical reactivity theory. This expression was compared with the one utilized here Equation (5) for the Neon atom in Reference [47]. Fisher information density was plotted in Reference [48] for the ethylene and benzene molecules.

Nevertheless, the Fisher information density functional theory presented here can only be built on Equation (5).

It is worth mentioning that there are several other descriptors of Coulomb systems [31,49,50,51,52,53,54]. These descriptors are often related to stability, bonding, reactivity, and other physicochemical properties of the system.

The exact form of the energy functional is unknown at DFT. However, there are a lot of approximations. In the Fisher information density functional theory presented here, the energy is also an unrevealed functional ofϱF. At the moment, it seems rather hard to construct an approximation. Still, the fact that a Fisher information density functional theory can be built provides a novel insight into the relationship between DFT and Fisher information density.

In DFT, it is often emphasized that the density contains all information about the system. Now, it is shown that an information‐type density, namely, the Fisher information density also grasps all the knowledge of the system. There is a variational principle for the energy as a functional of the Fisher information density. Hohenberg‐Kohn‐like theorems also stand, and the Fisher information density functional theory is now established.