Physical therapists report reduced confidence and skills in delivering evidence‐based knee osteoarthritis care. The Physiotherapy Exercise and Physical Activity for Knee Osteoarthritis (PEAK) is a free online course available in four languages that aims to train physical therapists in evidence‐based practice for managing knee osteoarthritis. The Portuguese adaptation (PEAK‐PT) has not been evaluated yet. This study explored the facilitators and barriers reported by physical therapists after completing the PEAK‐PT e‐learning course.

This qualitative study with semi‐structured interviews involved 20 Portuguese‐speaking physical therapists. Participants were predominantly females with an average age of 34 years who had completed the PEAK‐PT 3 months before the interview. Data were analysed using a content analysis method proposed by Bardin.

Five themes were identified as facilitators: (1) Knowledge acquisition and transmission, (2) Interactive and visually appealing resource, (3) Language accessibility, (4) Partially self‐paced and (5) Increased clinical confidence online and offline. Three themes were identified as barriers: (1) Lack of formal recognition of completion, (2) Language inaccessibility and (3) Time constraint.

The PEAK‐PT elicited positive experiences related to content organisation and presentation, learning outcomes and clinical confidence. Physical therapists may benefit from this tool to provide evidence‐based education to individuals with knee osteoarthritis.

Knee osteoarthritis (KOA) is a chronic musculoskeletal condition characterised by symptoms such as pain, oedema, and joint stiffness (Steinmetz et al.2023). It involves degradation and inflammatory changes affecting the articular cartilage and subchondral bone (Roos et al.2011), culminating in joint pain, and impaired physical function and quality of life (Houard et al.2013; Zeng et al.2015). Clinical practice guidelines in the musculoskeletal field recommend physical exercise, patient education, and body weight control (Bannuru et al.2019; Kolasinski et al.2020; Moseng et al.2024) as core management options for people with KOA (Fransen et al.2015), deliverable in‐person or via telehealth (Thurah et al.2022).

Telehealth services were mostly experimental within the physical therapy field before the coronavirus disease (COVID‐19) pandemic. In this context, physical therapists largely reported limited exposure to telehealth, uncertainty about its effectiveness, and insufficient training (Bennell et al.2021; L. G. Fernandes et al.2022; Lee et al.2018). Moreover, they also reported reduced confidence in knowledge and clinical skills for appropriate KOA management (Briggs et al.2019), which led to the frequent use of treatments with limited effectiveness (Spitaels et al.2017). To address these knowledge gaps, comprehensive training programs for health professionals involved in the delivery of KOA care have been advocated (Hinman and Bennell2022; Kobayashi et al.2022).

Increasing knowledge and confidence about KOA management among physical therapists may require behaviour change. This change is also crucial for the successful implementation of evidence‐based practice. Promoting changes in clinical practice depends on initiatives that target capability, opportunity, and motivation of healthcare professionals (Michie et al.2011). The Physiotherapy Exercise and Physical Activity for Knee Osteoarthritis (PEAK) e‐learning course is designed with these principles in mind (Jorge et al.2021). Users are encouraged to engage with its content because it is interactive, self‐paced, and available in a widely accessible format. Lastly, it provides updated evidence‐based content relatable to clinical scenarios, fostering smooth translation of knowledge into practice (Hinman et al.2024). The PEAK programme is an online course with asynchronous learning aiming to train physical therapists to implement evidence‐based practice (in‐person and via video conferencing) for managing individuals with KOA (Hinman and Bennell2022). In April 2020, the PEAK e‐learning course was launched in English (online and free), targeting physical therapists and healthcare professionals worldwide to enhance the quality of remote care for individuals with KOA during the COVID‐19 pandemic (Jorge et al.2021).

A qualitative study with Australian physiotherapists who completed PEAK e‐learning reported good acceptability of the resource, including the telehealth (videoconferencing) aspect, and knowledge acquisition (Jones et al.2021). However, the study sample was limited to physical therapists enrolled and delivering an intervention in a clinical trial (Hinman et al.2020). Furthermore, at the time the study was conducted, the course was only available in English, limiting its applicability to non‐English speakers and those in different socio‐cultural contexts, such as Brazil.

The recent translation of the PEAK e‐learning course into Portuguese (PEAK‐PT) has broadened its access to Portuguese‐speaking clinicians, which may expand its use across diverse healthcare settings (Hinman and Bennell2022). Exploring the perceptions of physical therapists in relation to the translated version of this resource can optimise the course uptake and is crucial given the distinct healthcare landscapes, professional training models, and cultural particularities in Portuguese‐speaking countries. Thus, this study explored the facilitators and barriers reported by physical therapists after completing the PEAK‐PT e‐learning course.

We conducted a qualitative study using semi‐structured interviews and employed a deductive approach for data analysis. The interview schedule was developed based on questions used in a previous study (Jones et al.2021). Data analysis followed the method proposed by Bardin (Bardin2016; Gondim and Bendassolli2014; Hsieh and Shannon2005), following three main steps: (i) pre‐analysis, (ii) categorisation of data, and iii) interpretation of data (Gondim and Bendassolli2014).

This study was reported according to the Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research recommendations (Tong et al.2007).

The PEAK‐PT e‐learning course is an evidence‐based training programme that seeks to optimise the clinical practice of physical therapists managing individuals with KOA (Jorge et al.2021). The course includes content about OA, pain management, strengthening exercise and physical activity (Jorge et al.2021). It also teaches clinicians how to deliver care via video conferencing. Currently, the training is offered for free (limited access for 4 weeks, no completion certificate) or at a cost (unlimited access, completion certificate provided) at the Future Learn platform (https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/peak‐Portuguese). The course is presented in three modules: information about KOA based on scientific evidence; provision of physical therapy services by videoconference; and specific components of the PEAK‐PT programme (patient education, strength exercises and physical activity plan) structured over 5 consultations (Hinman and Bennell2022).

A cooperation agreement between the Federal University of Sao Carlos, Brazil and University of Melbourne, Australia facilitated the translation into Brazilian Portuguese of the English version of the PEAK e‐learning course (https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/peak). Research members involved in the translation included postgraduate students of Physical Therapy (HJAS, GAD, AVFD, and IL) who are Brazilian and native Portuguese speakers holding an English certificate of proficiency. After independent translation, members met for standardisation of terms and peer review. All research members had previously completed the PEAK course in both English and Portuguese. Thus, in addition to the relationship with the translation of the material, they were also students of the PEAK programme in English. These research members were also involved in research in the musculoskeletal area, leading and involved in projects including randomized and controlled clinical trials with individuals with knee osteoarthritis. A physical therapist (AEJ) with a PhD and fluent in English and Portuguese reviewed the translation to ensure clarity and comprehension. Furthermore, a technical team specialising in Brazilian Portuguese orthographically revised the material and dubbed the videos. The University of Melbourne authorised the translation into Brazilian Portuguese and was not involved in the process of translation and dubbing the e‐learning course.

Eligible participants included registered physical therapists (within their respective state councils), regardless of gender or age, who had completed the PEAK‐PT. Exclusion criteria included students of Physical Therapists or professionals who were not registered by a state council. Eligible and interested physical therapists were informed about the aims and procedures of the study. All participants signed the informed consent form.

Recruitment to join the PEAK‐PT occurred between March and July 2023via social media (e.g., Instagram, Facebook, Twitter) in Brazilian graduate programs in Physical Therapy, state councils of Physical Therapy in Brazil, Brazilian associations of Physical Therapy, and with representatives of Physical Therapy from other Portuguese‐speaking countries (Brazil, Angola, Mozambique, Cape Verde, and Portugal). Then, physical therapists who completed the PEAK‐PT were invited by email to participate in this study between March and June 2023.

The number of participants was determined based on data saturation principles (Fontanella et al.2011). This meant that when the researcher (HJAS) noted that similar elements were being repeatedly elicited in the interviews, the authors paused data collection and discussed the available data. Drawing on prior training, academic experience, and richness of data, the authors decided to interrupt data collection after 20 interviews were conducted.

The interview structure was adapted from a previously published study but modified to suit a Portuguese‐speaking context (Jones et al.2021). The semi‐structured interview guide was piloted with members of the research group and two physical therapists to assess interview flow, question relevance and understanding, and potential adjustments that could strengthen data collection. No changes to the interview guide were necessary following this pilot. This data was not included in the final analysis.

Individual semi‐structured interviews were conducted via video conference (Google Meets) by a male PhD student (HJAS, physical therapist, with previous experience in qualitative research). Participants were also given the option to write down their perceptions and experiences and send them to the researchers via messaging apps. All participants answered the same questions. The interviews took place 3 months after participants completed the PEAK‐PT. Questions were formulated to explore expectations and experiences with the PEAK‐PT course, in addition to barriers and facilitators to course engagement and impact of the course on the profession and clinical practice (Supporting InformationS1). These questions were informed by key findings from a prior qualitative study on the English language version of the PEAK e‐learning course (Jones et al.2021).

Questions were phrased in a conversational tone to encourage open expressions of thoughts and experiences. The interviewer had the flexibility to follow up on responses using prompts, allowing for in‐depth data.

Audio data were recorded and transcribedverbatim. The method proposed by Bardin guided data analysis (Gondim and Bendassolli2014). This method comprises a systematic analysis of the content of a set of data, seeking to identify patterns of experiences and perceptions present in the data. We followed three steps: first, we engaged in a pre‐analysis of the data set that consisted of familiarising with the interviews; second, we explored the entire interview data set, developing codes in each transcript and starting to understand how they could be clustered into themes; and third, we performed the final allocation of codes into themes and theme clustering to develop the final themes. Coding and theme development respected the overall interview structure, leading to themes under major umbrellas of barriers and facilitators to engage with the PEAK‐PT. Pseudonyms were assigned to each participant to maintain anonymity.

A total of 20 physical therapists (7 men and 13 women, mean (SD) age of 33.2 (6.95) years) participated in the study. Eighteen participants were Brazilians from various regions (Northeast, Southeast, Midwest, and North regions of Brazil), one was Portuguese, and one was Mozambican (Table1). Half of the participants stated having experience delivering telehealth before joining the PEAK‐PT. Two (10%) participants chose to participate in the writing form.

The work settings of participants varied from private clinic services, research and teaching at public universities, a mix between private and public clinical settings, and no current physical therapy practice. In terms of clinical application of the course content, four (25%) out of the 16 clinically practicing participants reported having used learnings from the PEAK‐PT in their practice up to the interview time.

The findings were collated under umbrella themes of facilitators and barriers. Quotes are used to illustrate our interpretation. Further quotes are shown in Boxes 1 and 2, with complementary data available in Supporting InformationS2.

Participants consistently reported facilitators of the PEAK‐PT linked to acquiring new knowledge, accessibility of the resource, and availability of educational material with high scientific quality and direct language. For example, Lucia associated her good experience with the course with the easy explanation used in the material, in addition to the provision of examples that she could connect with her day‐to‐day practice. Maria endorsed this idea, highlighting the ‘self‐explanatory’ design of the course. According to her, ‘(who is doing the course) do not need anyone explaining it to you, you just read, listen, follow along, it's very easy to understand the course’.

The free course and the possibility to download educational materials were also mentioned as adding value to the course, as emphasised by Maria ‘The fact that it's free, you know, I found extremely interesting, and being able to give feedback below’. Lucia highlighted that having the course material ‘at hand’ contributed to her clinical practice because she was able to revisit the material and discuss it with her clients. This perception was endorsed by the idea of ‘passing information on’ explored by Daniel: ‘… Precisely both for the quality of the material, for the quality of the information and for the way this information is passed on’. Similarly, Laura focused on how the material is relatable and translatable into her clinical practice and interation with patients ‘… with a language that is well‐oriented towards clinical practice and direct patient care’ (Laura).

Acquisition of knowledge and the rapid possibility of its implementation into the work environment seemed to contribute to the confidence of some participants. Confidence was felt in relation to in‐person and telehealth care, as mentioned by Carol ‘[The PEAK] opened my eyes a lot to telehealth and approaching the patient without the need for a direct [hands‐on] contact with the physiotherapist, as we are so used to being taught in graduation […]. [This] is something that PEAK really offers.’ Debora expressed how impressed she was after gaining more knowledge and confidence to deliver telehealth, ‘in relation to telehealth, it was what impacted me the most, because I had never had that experience, right?’.

Participants found the PEAK‐PT to be inclusive, accessible and barrier‐free. Diego exposes the lack of courses in Portuguese and the challenges of having English as a second language when it comes to keeping up‐to‐date with scientific evidence: ‘… both in Portuguese, as I was looking for something in Portuguese, even though my English is good, it changes a little in terms of school, you know, in terms of school formation and interaction with the platform, I found it, like, one hundred percent … I found the interaction wonderful, simple, effective, and direct for healthcare professionals.’. Carol also highlighted that the information was easy to understand and follow: ‘I found the course very comprehensive. It was evident that anyone who read it, even if they were not in the healthcare field, could understand the information provided’, which was endorsed by Rebeca, ‘For me, it was very good in terms of access, the language as well, and the rigour that the programme itself presented in relation to the studies, with the videos’.

Participants reported that the course increased their safety and confidence to prescribe physical exercise and health education. As reported by Eva, ‘I felt very confident, and the expectations during the training really helped me gain more confidence in working with this population.’ Carol expands on that by stating a positive feeling associated with confidence, ‘because it's really good to provide care with confidence in what you're doing, you know’. Lastly, the course was identified as reliable since it focused on recent scientific guidelines and recommendations for treating KOA.

One participant reported the absence of a completion certificate with the free course as a barrier.

Some participants mentioned the time required to complete the course (4 weeks) as a barrier. The difficulty of reconciling studies with other responsibilities, rigid deadlines and the need for more flexible formats for different student profiles. Lucia shared she allocated time to follow the course, but this was not always productive: ‘I think maybe the time limit, because it was only 4 weeks, which was a not enough for me. Not that I wasn't able to do it within the allotted time frame, I was … it's just that, if I'd had more time, if I had taken my time … I would like to continue to have access to the content.’ A mismatch between the time limit to complete the course and the possible time allocated to the course was also mentioned by Beatriz, ‘Well, for me it was mostly the time I could spare to do it, and the time we were allowed to finish everything, the time limit. So my main barrier was the time, both the time’.

Physical therapists valued the PEAK‐PT for its accessible and high‐quality educational content and reported that it enhanced their confidence in delivering in‐person and telehealth care for individuals with KOA. Although challenges were observed and included a limited timeframe to complete the course, the identified barriers were not consistent across the cohort of participants.

The findings of this study corroborate the results of a qualitative study conducted in Australia with 15 physiotherapists exploring their perceptions after using the original version of the PEAK e‐learning course (Jones et al.2021). In this sense, both studies described positive experiences about using the resource and stated how the course improved their care for individuals with KOA. The Australian study by Jones et al. (Jones et al.2021) was nested in a clinical trial (Hinman et al.2020) and participants were required to, and compensated for, completing the course on time to deliver care to people with KOA both in‐person and via videoconferencing as part of the trial intervention. In the present study, some participants reported 4 weeks (which is the maximum duration of access provided for the free version of the course) was too short for completing the course, which was identified as a possible barrier. Although a longer period may be beneficial, this option is currently available upon payment of a fee. The e‐learning offers autonomy to learn independently in a self‐paced manner, requiring dedication and time availability of the users to complete the modules. In the present study, the researchers sent weekly emails as reminders of the activities to improve the adherence of physical therapists to the PEAK‐PT.

Ours and Jones' findings suggest that an e‐learning course for physical therapists based on scientific research about best‐practice care for individuals with KOA is feasible, effective, and interesting for physical therapists. The course contains the core KOA management recommendations from clinical practice guidelines to improve the quality of care for individuals with KOA(Hinman and Bennell2022). Participants reported a positive impact on their profession, and the translation into Brazilian Portuguese benefited participants that faced difficulties in keeping up‐to‐date with scientific evidence due to language barriers. This finding shows the importance of training that is scientifically sound, evidence‐based, free of charge, and translated into the native language of the participants, which facilitates access to information.

In the present study, although most participants were Brazilians, our results also included the perspectives of physical therapists from Portugal and Mozambique. The PEAK‐PT might be a relevant resource to be used in various Portuguese‐speaking countries, helping to expand high‐quality and evidence‐based knowledge about the management of KOA in those contexts and fostering knowledge transmission into clinical settings. Although therapeutic alliance was not a focus of the current study, previous studies suggest that skills and professional confidence similar to the ones reported after completing the PEAK‐PT may contribute to strengthening the collaboration between physical therapists and patients, optimising the physical exercise adherence by individuals with KOA (Bim et al.2021; E. T. P. Fernandes et al.2019). However, our findings also indicate that only 25% of participants who were clinically practicing applied the learnings from the PEAK‐PT to their working routine. This could be related to the length of time that had lapsed between course completion and the interview, which might not have left enough time for participants to fully assimilate the PEAK‐PT content and translate it into their clinical practice.

A previous survey with English‐speaking participants reported that 50% of respondents had implemented learning from the English version of the course into their practice at 4 months (Jorge et al.2021). The PEAK‐PT appears to address key components of behaviour change. The course contributes to physical therapists' capability through the delivery of scientific knowledge derived from clinical guidelines on KOA management. Additionally, the asynchronous format and the free access to materials create opportunities for physical therapists to engage with the content at their own pace, overcoming common barriers such as time constraints. The combination of these factors fosters motivation by showing participants the tangible benefits of implementing evidence‐based interventions in their clinical practice. Attention to behaviour change components is crucial to encourage knowledge translation into practice. Moreover, it can lead to sustained encouragement for physical therapists to engage with best practices in both in‐person and telehealth care for individuals with KOA. Future studies should assess the implementation outcomes of the PEAK‐PT. Because behaviour change requires more than only training and provision of information (Michie et al.2011), a better understanding of motivations for using and applying the PEAK‐PT into clinical practice may foster optimal implementation and uptake by physical therapists and allied health professionals.

This study is not without its limitations. Although some physical therapists reported greater confidence in offering physical exercise and health education after training, this study did not investigate changes in OA‐related knowledge and/or telehealth proficiency using objective measures. Further studies within implementation science design are needed to evaluate the efficacy of the PEAK‐PT for improving knowledge or clinician confidence. Research has previously shown that the original version of the PEAK e‐learning course increased learner confidence with videoconferencing, and also increased the likelihood of using education, strengthening exercises and physical activity for a KOA treatment plan (Jorge et al.2021).

As an exploratory study, our findings indicate that the PEAK‐PT may benefit physical therapists by facilitating access to evidence‐based resources relevant to their population they work with (clinical demand) and their native language.

Physical therapists had positive experiences and perceptions about the PEAK‐PT e‐learning course. Gaining knowledge about KOA management and easy translation into clinical practice was highlighted by participants. Furthermore, the PEAK‐PT endorses evidence‐based, scientific and high‐quality information that can benefit professionals in Portuguese‐speaking countries. Engaging with this resource may contribute to clinician confidence in delivering in‐person and telehealth care focused on exercise prescription, health education, and physical activity for individuals with KOA.