The prevalence of coronary heart disease (CHD) is higher in patients with depression than in the general population. Recently, multiple novel biomarkers have been proposed to predict CHD risk, and these factors have been reported to be altered in patients with depression.

To explore whether these new biomarkers are associated with an increased risk of CHD in patients with depression.

We recruited 279 healthy controls and 164 sex- and age-matched patients with depression and collected their clinical characteristics and laboratory values of novel cardiovascular biomarkers. The Framingham CHD risk score was used to assess the CHD risk of all individuals, and the cardiovascular markers related to the CHD risk in patients with depression were analyzed.

Patients with depression had an increased CHD risk of 5.3% (95% confidence interval: 4.470-6.103) and altered novel cardiovascular biomarkers compared to healthy controls, which included lower levels of thyroid stimulating hormone, albumin, total bilirubin, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and higher levels of triglyceride (TG) and uric acid. Further regression analysis showed that illness duration, family history of depression, serum TG, and urea acid levels were significantly correlated with the Framingham risk score in patients with depression.

Patients with depression had a higher CHD risk and that their illness duration, family history of depression, serum TG, and uric acid levels could play important roles in predicting CHD risk. Moreover, elevated CHD risk in patients with depression was not only related to physiological changes caused by depression but also to their genetic susceptibility.

Core Tip:This study evaluated the Framingham risk score of coronary heart disease (CHD) in patients with depression and detected their cardiovascular biomarkers. It was found that the risk of CHD in patients with depression was increased, and the levels of new cardiovascular biomarkers, triglyceride and uric acid, were related to the risk of CHD in patients with depression.

Depression is a mental illness with high incidence and heavy social burden[1,2]. Its clinical manifestation is characterized by a depressed mood and lack of pleasure, interest, and energy. However, its pathogenesis remains unclear. Recent studies have suggested that depression is a disease characterized by multiple systemic changes, including endocrine, metabolic, and oxidative stresses[3]. Coronary heart disease (CHD), which is also a chronic disease with high morbidity and heavy social burden[4], is considered to share significant physiological overlap with depression[5]. Therefore, several researchers have focused on the comorbidities of depression and CHD.

Some studies have reported that the prevalence and mortality of CHD in patients with depression are higher than those in the general population; depression has been identified as an independent risk factor for CHD[6,7]. The Framingham risk score (FRS), which can predict the 10-year CHD risk, has been validated and widely used in different populations. Several studies have reported that more severe depression is related to a higher risk of CHD[6,8] and addition of a depression variable to the Framingham risk equation improves the overall accuracy of the model for predicting 10-year CHD events in women[9]. Another study found a stronger association between CHD and depression prevalence in women than in men[10]. These results support an association between CHD and depression, particularly in women. However, the participants in these studies were from the general population. Furthermore, their depression was assessed using scales, including self-rating and other-rating, rather than diagnosed by professional psychiatrists based on diagnostic criteria. Therefore, exploring CHD risk in patients diagnosed with depression is of great significance.

Some novel cardiovascular biomarkers have been proposed as predictors of CHD risk in recent years, such as: (1) Creatinine and blood urea nitrogen[11,12]; (2) Albumin (Alb)[13], and total bilirubin(TBIL)[14], which are related indicators of oxidative stress; (3) Metabolic related indicators, uric acid (UA)[15]; (4) Endocrine hormones, such as thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)[16]; and (5) Other indicators of lipid metabolism, for example, triglyceride (TG)[17] might increase the risk of CHD. Changes in these biomarkers have been observed in patients with depression[18-24]. However, few studies have explored whether alterations in these novel cardiovascular biomarkers in patients with depression contribute to an elevated risk of CHD. Based on this background, we sought to use the FRS as a tool to evaluate the CHD risk of inpatients with depression in this study and preliminarily explore biomarkers associated with CHD risk in patients with depression.

All inpatients were recruited from the Department of Psychiatry at the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University and diagnosed with major depression according to the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. The inclusion criteria for patients were: (1) Age between 30 years and 74 years; (2) No severe somatic disease, particularly cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, and diseases that might affect endocrine, metabolic, hepatic, and renal function, except for hypertension and diabetes; (3) No other diseases that met the diagnostic criteria of the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders at present; and (4) The ethnic group was Han. Healthy controls were recruited from the Department of Physical Examination of the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University. The inclusion criteria were the same as those described above. All participants received a detailed introduction to the study and provided written informed consent.

All clinical and laboratory data were anonymized and retrospectively collected from the electronic medical system. The clinical information included sex, age, year of education, smoking status, systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), illness duration, number of depressive episodes, medication duration, family history of depression, score of 17-item Hamilton Depression Scale, and complications. Initial clinical data were used for patients with multiple admissions.

Laboratory data, including serum levels of TSH, Alb, TBIL, total cholesterol (TC), TG, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, and UA, were collected. All fasting blood samples were collected in the morning after the patients were admitted to the hospital and examined at the Laboratory Department of the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University.

The FRS is a scoring system that uses age, sex, smoking, blood pressure, TC, HDL-C, and diabetes to estimate the CHD risk over 10 years among individuals with no previously diagnosed CHD. In this study, the FRS was assessed using the Framingham Heart Study website (https://www.framinghamheartstudy.org/fhs-risk-functions/coronary-heart-disease-10-year-risk). In addition, we strictly limited the enrollment criteria of the participants to meet the application criteria of the FRS.

SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 24 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, United States) was used for the statistical analysis. Categorical variables were analyzed using theχ2test. Continuous variables were analyzed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to determine whether they conformed to a normal distribution. Normally distributed parameters were tested using a two-tailed independent samplet-test, and non-normally distributed parameters were analyzed using a Mann-WhitneyUtest. Factors correlated with the FRS were calculated using Spearman’s correlation and multiple linear regression. Unstandardized coefficients (B values) with 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) were computed. All statistical tests were two-tailed; differences were considered significant atP< 0.05.

This study included 279 healthy controls and 164 patients with depression. Table1presents sociodemographic characteristics and clinical variables. Compared with healthy controls, more participants with depression were smokers (χ2= 21.694,P< 0.001), had hypertension (χ2= 27.203,P< 0.001), diabetes (χ2= 7.751,P= 0.005), and had higher levels of a high level of education (χ2= 8.355,P= 0.039), SBP (Z= -9.974,P< 0.001) and DBP (Z = -7.036,P< 0.001). In this study, healthy controls had a mean FRS of 2.3% (95%CI: 1.999-2.503), while patients with depression had a mean of 5.3% (95%CI: 4.470-6.103), which was increased compared with that in healthy controls (Z= -8.538,P< 0.001). All factors related to the FRS assessment of patients with depression were included in the regression model. The results showed that age [B = 0.520, 95%CI: 0.448-0.591, beta = 0.639,t= 14.357,P< 0.001, variance inflation factor (VIF) = 1.201], SBP (B = 0.037, 95%CI: 0.001-0.074, beta = 0.121,t= 2.008,P= 0.046,VIF = 2.204), DBP (B = 0.118, 95%CI: 0.061-0.175, beta = 0.237,t= 4.101,P< 0.001, VIF = 2.027), and diabetes (B = 4.605, 95%CI: 2.639-6.570, beta = 0.193,t= 4.628,P< 0.001, VIF = 1.051) was related to FRS (R2= 0.738).

HC: Healthy controls; MD: Major depression; SBP: Systolic blood pressure; DBP: Diastolic blood pressure; FRS: Framingham risk score.

Compared with healthy controls, patients with depression showed lower levels of TSH (Z= -2.861,P= 0.004), Alb (Z= -14.690,P< 0.001), TBIL (Z= -7.512,P< 0.001), TC (Z= -4.947,P< 0.001), and HDL-C (Z= -14.901,P< 0.001) and higher levels of TG (Z= -8.088,P< 0.001) and UA (Z= -3.087,P< 0.001), see in Figure1. Moreover, the FRS was positively correlated with illness duration (r= 0.173,P= 0.028) and serum TG levels (r= 0.342,P< 0.001) in patients with depression (Figure2).

Novel cardiovascular biomarkers between groups.A: Thyroid stimulating hormone; B: Albumin; C: Total bilirubin; D: Total cholesterol; E: Triglyceride; F: High-density lipoprotein cholesterol; G: Creatinine; H: Blood urea nitrogen; I: Uric acid. HC: Healthy controls; MD: Major depression; TSH: Thyroid stimulating hormone; Alb: Albumin; TBIL: Total bilirubin; TC: Total cholesterol; TG: Triglyceride; HDL-C: High-density lipoprotein cholesterol; Cr: Creatinine; BUN: Blood urea nitrogen; UA: Uric acid.

Correlations among Framingham risk score, illness duration, and serum triglyceride level in patients with depression.A: Framingham risk score and illness duration; B: Framingham risk score and serum triglyceride level. FRS: Framingham risk score; TG: Triglyceride.

To explore the impact of cardiovascular biomarkers and clinical characteristics on the 10-year CHD risk in patients with depression, we performed a multiple linear regression of the FRS; the results are presented in Table2. The results of patients with depression showed that illness duration (B = 0.018, 95%CI: 0.005-0.032, beta = 0.262,t= 2.628,P= 0.009, VIF = 2.201), family history of depression (B = 2.292, 95%CI: 0.266-4.318, beta = 0.156,t= 2.235,P= 0.005, VIF = 1.078), serum levels of TG (B = 2.625, 95%CI: 1.693-3.558, beta = 0.415,t= 5.560,P< 0.001, VIF = 1.233) and UA (B = 0.010, 95%CI: 0.001-0.020, beta = 0.155,t= 2.105,P= 0.020, VIF = 1.195) had significant correlations with FRS in patients with depression (R2= 0.658).

TSH: Thyroid stimulating hormone; Alb: Albumin; TBIL: Total bilirubin; TG: Triglycerides; UA: Uric acid.

To explore the relationship between novel cardiovascular biomarkers and CHD risk in patients with depression, the FRS was used to evaluate CHD risk. We found that patients with depression had an increased risk of CHD and altered novel cardiovascular biomarkers, including TSH, Alb, TBIL, TG, and UA, than did healthy controls. Further regression analysis showed that illness duration, family history of depression, serum TG, and UA levels significantly correlated with FRS in patients with depression. Previous studies have shown that diabetes[25], hypertension[26,27], smoking[28], TC[29], and HDL-C[30], which are traditional biomarkers of CHD, are strongly associated with depression[31,32]. For instance, Casey[33] reported that persons with affective disorders had a high prevalence of risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD), such as diabetes and obesity, which were on the order of 1.5 times to 2.0 times higher than those in the general population. In this study, patients with depression had a higher prevalence of cardiovascular risks, including hypertension, diabetes, higher TC, and lower HDL-C. In addition, it was revealed that cardiovascular risks contributed to a higher CHD risk in patients with depression, which presented higher FRS in this study.

Pathophysiological mechanisms that may explain the effect of depression on coronary artery disease include hypercoagulabilityviaplatelet activation, hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis and autonomic nervous system dysregulation, and an altered inflammatory response[34]. Serotonin improves platelet aggregation, while serotonin levels are reduced in patients with depression[35]. However, the platelet aggregation ability in patients with depression is enhanced, making them prone to cardiovascular events. Whether antidepressants can reduce CHD risk in patients with depression remains controversial. Some studies indicated that drugs, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, are uniquely able to block serotonin reuptake and reduce platelet aggregation[36]. Thus, successful treatment of depression would reduce the risk of CHD[37]. Further evidence includes that patients with CHD who respond to treatment of depression are at a lower risk of mortality than are non-responders[38]. These findings suggest that the response to antidepressant treatment in patients with depression is associated with their CHD risk. As we know, the longer the illness duration of depression, the poorer the response of patients to antidepressants[39,40]. Moreover, this study did not find an association between the duration of medication use in patients and the risk of CHD. Therefore, in this study, it was observed that the longer the course of the disease was, the higher the CHD risk was, which indicated that the risk of CHD in patients with depression was more closely related to the depressive disease itself rather than the duration of medication. This prompts us to pay more attention to patients with depression with a long course of disease in clinical practice, even if they may have no medication experience. In addition, studies have identified that both depression and CHD share genetic determinants[41], which reflects that a family history of depression in patients was closely related to CHD risk in this study. Thus, increased CHD risk in patients with depression is associated with both genetic and disease-related factors.

Elevated TG levels represent a diagnostic criterion for metabolic syndrome (MetS). Hypertriglyceridemia is associated with several atherogenic factors, including increased concentrations of TG-rich lipoproteins, an atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype consisting of small, dense low-density lipoprotein particles, and low levels of HDL-C[42]. Thus, MetS and serum TG levels were considered risk factors for CHD. Elevated TG levels[21] and higher prevalence of MetS[8,43] have been widely reported in patients with depression. In details, TG, rather than the other lipid traits, exerted the major risk, contributing 18.3% to the overall CVD risk of 92.7%. The CVD risk was odds ratio of 2.9 in male and odds ratio of 1.3 in female patients, with 30% of MetS prevalence in those with depression[8]. These results suggest that elevated TG levels are a significant predictor of CHD in patients with depression. In this study, the regression analysis revealed that TG was a novel cardiovascular risk factor associated with FRS in patients with depression. Consistent with the results of Wanget al[44], our findings illustrate the critical role of TG in predicting CHD risk in patients with depression.

A large cross-sectional population study in the United States emphasized a significant nonlinear negative correlation between serum uric levels and depressive symptoms[45]. This phenomenon may be related to sex differences in UA, and supporting evidence comes from two sources, Chenet al[46] suggested that higher UA levels were associated with depressive symptoms/depression in postmenopausal women. Moreover, Zhanget al[24] found that high serum UA level may reduce the incidence of depression in men, but in women, it is an independent factor that increases the risk of depression[24]. Although there are sex differences in the relationship between UA and depression, this study found that its impact on the risk of CHD is independent of sex factors. UA plays a protective role in brain disorders. Normally, serum UA can interact with a variety of oxidants, including hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals, to clear reactive oxygen species, inhibit lipid peroxidation, avoid oxidative damage. However, elevated oxidative stress inevitably leads to vascular endothelial damage, which in turn causes the occurrence of various vascular diseases. That is to say, UA may be involved in the pathological processes of depression and CHD simultaneously through the dual effects of oxidative stress and vascular damage. Sohnet al[47] suggested a significant association between altered white matter connectivity and serum UA levels in patients with major depression, possibly through demyelination. This result may link the biological mechanism of high UA level with increased risk of depression and CHD.

This study has some limitations. First, the FRS has an age limit and strict inclusion criteria in this study, which may have resulted in an inability to assess CHD risk in adolescents with depression. Second, this is a small sample size, single-center, cross-sectional study, did not include patient follow-up; it only used the FRS risk prediction model to predict the risk of CHD in patients with depression. Therefore, no causal conclusions could be drawn. In the future, multi-center and large-sample cohort studies are needed for further in-depth research. Third, although FRS has been used in numerous studies to assess the risk of CHD in Chinese people, some studies have also pointed out that the FRS overestimates the risk of CHD in Chinese people. This result might be related to factors such as race and living environment[48]. We hope to develop a prediction model for CHD risk based on large Chinese samples in the future.

In conclusion, this study presented evidence that patients with depression had a higher CHD risk and that their illness duration, family history of depression, serum TG, and UA levels could play important roles in predicting CHD risk. Moreover, elevated CHD risk in patients with depression was not only related to physiological changes caused by depression but also to their genetic susceptibility. The future direction should focus on longitudinal cohort studies to deeply explore the causal relationship between depression and CHD, and to deeply investigate the mechanisms of TG and UA involved.