Most people seek to stay connected to their community as they age; this has been a major focus in the development of innovative community programs in Australia. This study aimed to explore what influences older people to join a community hub to engage in healthy ageing programs.

Semi‐structured interviews (n= 29) were conducted during an Open Day in early 2023 at an urban community hub in Western Australia, followed by telephone interviews (n= 9) of a purposive sample of older individuals, community hub facilitators and coordinators of national community hubs. Analysis used a socio‐ecological framework.

Deductive content analysis identified social prescribing as an overarching influencer for older people to join and engage in healthy ageing programs and main themes of (i) supporting community hub facilitators to harness community assets, (ii) link‐supports provided to older members by paid community hub concierges triggered positive outcomes at individual and community levels, (iii) online and in‐person social and physical healthy ageing activities tailored to member interests and (iv) nurturing social networks and reciprocity between members sustained engagement in healthy ageing activities.

The dynamic process of social prescribing was a central influencer for older adults to engage in healthy ageing programs, and the social network perpetuated through community hubs was an immeasurable social investment that boosted the resilience of intergenerational populations in Australian communities. Policy support is required for communities to meet the challenge of being responsive to the needs of members who seek to remain independent as they age in place.

Harnessing local assets and connections at community hubs influences older people to engage in healthy ageing programs and perpetuates social networks and resilience. Policy support is required as a social investment for communities to meet the challenge to be responsive to the needs of older members as they age in place.

The dynamic process of social prescribing was a central influencer for older people to engage in healthy ageing programs. Themes of supporting facilitators to be responsive to older members' needs by linking support with local resources triggered memberships and perpetuated a social network that bolstered resilience, reciprocity and intergenerational well‐being.

Community hubs provide structural and social infrastructure for multipurpose services that reflect the needs of the local community, featuring local facilitators and programs developed using a person‐centred approach for people of all ages.17Though there is no one single formula for person‐centredness, community hubs feature ‘key attributes of high‐performing person‐centred health‐care organisations’18to achieve the outcomes that matter the most to people in the community. The concept of community hubs as necessary social infrastructure to support physical and social connections for healthy ageing amongst community members who are ageing in place has gained significant recognition in recent research.17,19However, there is less recognition of community hubs in government policy as critical ‘anchor institutions for addressing vulnerability and community resilience’.17In 2019, the Australian government provided limited funding for community hub development, leaving them reliant on local community assets to foster sustainability.20In supporting the vision of promoting healthy ageing of older people who are ageing in place in their community,14,15,16our study aimed to address the research question of what influences older people to join a community hub to undertake healthy ageing programs.

Ethics approval was obtained from the University Human Research Ethics Committee of the University of Western Australia (2022/ET000540). All participants provided written informed consent prior to participation, and additional verbal consent was obtained at the start of each telephone interview. The Consolidated criteria for Reporting Qualitative research (COREQ)21were used in the reporting of this study (AppendixS1).

A qualitative phenomenological design22and realist approach23were used to address the study aims. The realist approach acknowledges that community hub healthy ageing programs might suit individuals in different situations and circumstances.23A socio‐ecological framework24was used to explore what influences older people to join community hubs to engage in healthy ageing programs from the context of the individual person (micro‐level), community hub organisation level (meso‐level) and national representative level (macro‐level).

The primary researcher led the research in close collaboration with her research team, the community hub partner organisation and consumer reference group to enable recruitment, surveys and interviews for data collection in this study. She is an experienced physiotherapist and implementation researcher who approached Connect Village Hub CEO and consumer representatives to be co‐investigators (CIs) of this study.

Individual level: community‐dwelling older people aged 55 years or older may have already attended a community hub and are accessing formal or informal social supports. Potential participants were approached during an Open Day in 2023 at Connect Village Hub.

Community hub organisation level: paid and unpaid staff who were coordinators, concierges and instructors who delivered programs to older people at a community hub. Potential participants present at the Open Day (n= 10) were approached to complete a semi‐structured survey; in addition, those working at other community hubs in regional and remote areas were approached using email introductions by the primary researcher.

The web‐based audit included identification of coordinators and fund managers of national community hubs who were potential participants, invited through an introductory email to make a time at their convenience to complete an in‐depth telephone interview.

a semi‐structured survey administered during an Open Day hosted at Connect Village Hub from individual older people (AppendixS2). The survey was anonymous and included open questions about their engagement in healthy ageing activities, community hub programs and any facilitators to their engagement from their perspective for themselves.

an audio‐recorded telephone semi‐structured interview that was conducted with a purposive sample of older individuals, community hub facilitator and coordinators of national village hubs (AppendixS2). Purposive sampling considered a representative mix of participants with consideration of inclusion criteria at national, community and individual older person levels who had direct experience with community hubs and healthy ageing programs located in urban and remote areas of Australia. A funnel approach was used during telephone interviews that involved initially asking broad, open‐ended questions about healthy ageing programs in the community, success factors of community hub programs and any suggestions for improvement.

Audit and web‐based data that included features of community hubs at the organisation and national levels.

Table2presents the main themes identified using deductive content analysis of experiences from the context (C) of participants at national, organisation and individual levels (socio‐ecological framework).24The main themes were categorised using the CMO framework,26which captures participants' experience as mechanisms (M) or features of the community hub that influenced older people to join and engage in healthy ageing (outcomes, O).

An overarching theme of social prescribing28was identified through participants' experiences at the national, organisational and individual levels, and these were further described through the main themes as mechanisms or influencers that triggered membership and engagement of older people in community hub‐based healthy ageing programs. The experience of social prescribing described by participants was a linking of supports that took place at community hubs, in which local assets, such as health professionals, artists and choir leaders were harnessed during healthy ageing programs to meet the interests and needs of older community members. Figure1provides a schematic of the social prescribing model formulated from deductive analysis of main themes categorised according to the CMO framework,26capturing participant accounts of how social prescribing influenced the membership and engagement of older people in community hub‐based healthy ageing programs.

Supporting community hub coordinators and conciergesat the national level using regular community of practice meetings enabled paid hub facilitators/concierges to share ideas and expand the offerings of healthy ageing activities, which had positive effects on membership and sustainability of community hubs. A national fund manager (SE, female) described her experience of the social prescribing model in inviting guests to talk about their services in different communities to enable linking support at the older individual (micro) level and streamlining of community, health, social services at the community (meso) level.

National participants described their experience of limited funding to operationalise community hubs as a barrier to community hub sustainability, membership and engagement of older people in healthy ageing programs. A national fund manager reported fixed funding grants necessitated diversifying funding sources and transforming their service offerings to guarantee operation of community hub‐based healthy ageing activities.

The flexible and responsive actions taken by the concierge roletriggered positive outcomes at the community hub‐level and influenced older people to join and engage in healthy ageing programs (see Table1and Figure2). The paid concierge was a member of the community with local knowledge, hence key functions of this role were outreaching to community members, information sharing, overcoming barriers for individuals to join and engage in healthy ageing activities, such as education support to access digital technologies for virtual/online attendance and local transport services for in‐person attendance. The beneficial functions of the concierge model were described by a variety of community hub facilitators, ‘…we reach out to members with information about renewing their senior's card, updating mobile phones and accessing rebates for transport’ (LS, Manager of virtual community hub). The social network facilitated by the community hub concierge perpetuated ‘two‐way relationships’ (JM, choir leader) and ‘sustained engagement in healthy ageing activities including exercise’ (HH, exercise leader).

A dynamic program of online and in‐person events tailored to individual interest and needsenabled older people from across regions to connect remotely and sometimes in‐person, which provided the social benefits of a lifestyle village as they could age in place in their community. The facilitator of an online/virtual and in‐person exercise group at an urban community hub (HH, male) described the benefits of expanding the offerings of social and physical activities using Zoom technology to trigger engagement in physical activities; ‘there were older people coming for social groups in‐person and online (using Zoom) who then stayed connected for the next activity, which was an exercise group that they could also attend online’.

We have introduced Aboriginal language groups, an all‐age choir, a wellness program for older members of the local LGBTQI community, and African drumming for people of all ages; we also fly flags to represent different groups in the community at different times of the year.

A remote community hub manager (LS, female) described the nurturing of local farming culture through the online/virtual community hub in remote Western Australia that also brought them together in‐person for small bus tours of farms in the regions; ‘… the farming bus tour was such a success in bringing generations of retired farmers together in‐person that included stops along the way on country to share a billy‐tea’.

Linking support between older members using online technologiesat community hubs was an influencer that enabled engagement in healthy ageing programs and nurtured social connections, friendships and reciprocity between members; ‘…once connections were established, and buddy systems set up, they supported one another to attend events, share rides, and create social gatherings’ (LG, CEO urban community hub). ‘Belonging to a group of people who work together to help others is very satisfying and fulfilling, it felt like winning the lottery to see people so happy’ (PC, female, 74 years old). Members described their experience of mutually supporting one another in‐person and online/over the phone; ‘when one of our older singers who is 92 years of age was sick in hospital due to Covid‐19, our choir sang to her through the phone’ (JM, singing teacher).

Web‐based audits found more than 100 community hubs operating across Australia that focused on connecting families who are culturally and linguistically diverse with local services, and often based in primary schools. In response to a mental health inquiry report,29the Australian Government introduced The Village Hubs project30that established 12 community hubs across Australia between 2021 and 2024 to reduce the impact of loneliness and social isolation for older community‐dwelling people. The co‐designed initiatives were administered by a National Fund Manager who was a national‐level participant in this study. The 12 community hubs feature different healthy ageing activities based on the local community target population, leveraged by existing resources. There were three community hubs in Western Australia, one with a multicultural focus, one with an LGBTI focus and another with in‐person and online/virtual aged care focus. There were two hubs in South Australia, one providing a range of supports through the Council on the Ageing and another hosted at a local coffee house. In Queensland, there were two hubs: one based with a community aged care organisation and another focused on supporting older people with brain injuries. In Victoria, there was a range of meeting places located through the Macedon Ranges Shire. There were three hubs in New South Wales, one a culturally safe space for Aboriginal and non‐Aboriginal community members aged 50 years or older; and two local hubs in Hornsby and Orange offered a range of activities. There was one in Tasmania's Huon Valley that provides an information support service.

National and community hub organisation participants described their experience of fixed‐term government funding in Australia that has forced community hub managers to diversify funding and transition to providing formal home and community care, including training of local contractors to deliver services. We know from the experiences of participants in this study that a collaborative approach is required at national, organisational and individual levels to enable shared learnings, streamlined services and vocational training, which will future‐proof community hubs as an anchor of the community,17where social networks can be more fully realised and strengthened.16,28This was personified through the older community hub members in this study who enjoyed reciprocity in sharing their stories with one another, to support each other through a crisis, realise their capacities and share their strengths; and so the social network grows.

This study was supported by a grant awarded to Chiara Naseri by the Australian Association of Gerontology Research Trust (Hal Kendig Development Grant). The funders had no role in the design of the study; preparation, review or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication. Anne‐Marie Hill receives funding support from the Royal Perth Hospital Medical Research Foundation.

I wish to acknowledge the Australian Association of Gerontology Research Trust and Hal Kendig Research Development grant committee; thank you for the opportunity to complete this research and to disseminate the findings using real voice. I also want to thank my research team led by my mentor Professor Anne‐Marie Hill and to thank the participants who dedicated their time to provide the valuable data for this research, with acknowledgement of Connect Victoria Park Village Hub; Pingelly Somerset Alliance; and iLA, the fund administrator of the National Village Hubs grant. Open access publishing facilitated by The University of Western Australia, as part of the Wiley ‐ The University of Western Australia agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.