Adhesive intestinal obstruction is a common clinical condition caused by obstruction of the intestinal contents. Adhesiolysis is an effective treatment, but traditional open or laparoscopic adhesiolysis is traumatic and often causes a recurrence of adhesions. In this study, we investigate the feasibility and safety of adhesiolysis via transumbilical endoscopic surgery (TUES) with a gastric endoscopy.

Eight beagles were used to establish a model of adhesive intestinal obstruction through open simulated surgery. TUES adhesiolysis with a gastric endoscopy was performed 2 weeks later. The time of adhesiolysis, vital signs of beagles, intraoperative hemorrhage, intraoperative and postoperative complications were recorded and analyzed. Three months later, the abdominal cavity was re-explored to observe whether there were recurrences of adhesions, abdominal infections, and other complications.

The modeling of all 8 beagles was successfully achieved in the formation of adhesive intestinal obstruction, and the TUES adhesiolysis was successfully completed. The median (interquartile range) time of adhesiolysis was 83(9) minutes. The vital signs of the beagles were stable, and there were no adverse events, including heavy bleeding, perforation, or mortality during the operation. All 8 beagles survived without postoperative complications such as delayed bleeding, peritonitis, intra-abdominal abscess, and abdominal wall incisional hernia three months after adhesiolysis.

TUES adhesiolysis has been preliminarily proven to be minimally invasive, safe, and effective, which provides a new option for adhesive intestinal obstruction.

Adhesive intestinal obstruction is a common clinical condition caused by obstruction of intestinal contents due to intestinal or intra-abdominal adhesions. Postoperative adhesions are the main cause of intestinal obstruction, accounting for about 60% of the total number of intestinal obstructions [1]. Compared with upper abdominal surgery, the risk of adhesive intestinal obstruction after lower abdominal and pelvic surgery is higher [1,2]. More than 30% of patients were readmitted to the hospital due to postoperative adhesions 5 years after abdominal surgery [3]. More than a quarter of readmission occur in the first postoperative year [4]. In the absence of signs of strangulation or peritonitis, non-operative management can be extended up to 72 h [5]. Although conservative treatment can temporarily relieve symptoms, it may cause recurrent adhesion, chronic pain, and female infertility due to the failure of adhesion release [6].This affects the patient's long-term quality of life. In addition, if symptoms persist or worsen despite conservative treatment, aggressive surgical intervention is still required, which will increase the patient's mortality rate, hospital stay, and treatment costs [7,8]. Studies have shown that compared with non-operative management, surgical treatment can reduce the risk of recurrence and readmission of adhesive intestinal obstruction and improve the long-term survival rate of patients [9,10].

Surgical methods include traditional open adhesiolysis and laparoscopic adhesiolysis. Although open adhesiolysis can relieve adhesions, it is more traumatic, causes more bleeding, and has a higher risk of wound infection, incisional hernia, and other complications as well as future adhesions [11]. With the increase in the number of surgeries, the rate of adhesion also increases, and it often enters a vicious circle of “surgery-obstruction-reoperation-re-obstruction”. Laparoscopic adhesiolysis is gradually replacing open surgical management as the preferred method for the treatment of adhesive intestinal obstruction due to its advantages of less trauma, less abdominal interference, and faster recovery of gastrointestinal function [12,13]. However, laparoscopic adhesiolysis requires multiple incisions in the abdominal wall, resulting in surgical scars in the abdomen. Additionally, the high pressure of carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum during laparoscopic surgery has a negative impact on peritoneal perfusion and the removal of reactive oxygen species, which can induce the formation of adhesions [14].

The World Society of Emergency Surgery guidelines state that the formation of adhesions can be reduced through minimally invasive surgical techniques [5]. In recent years, with the advancement of minimally invasive surgery technology and people's requirements for cosmetology, abdominal wall scarless surgery, represented by natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES), has become a hot topic [15]. In 2004, Kalloo et al. demonstrated the feasibility and safety of transgastric endoscopic approach to the peritoneal cavity [16]. American laparoscopic surgeons and endoscopists jointly established the Natural Orifice Surgery Consortium for Assessment and Research (NOSCAR) and issued a white paper on NOTES technology in 2006 [17]. The umbilical is the natural orifice connected to the outside world during the embryonic period. Based on its special anatomical location during embryonic development, the operation via umbilical approach is called embryonic-natural orifice transumbilical endoscopic surgery (E-NOTES), and some scholars also describe it as transumbilical endoscopic surgery (TUES) [18]. The incision is hidden in the umbilicus, so the navel is “almost scarless” after surgery [19]. Currently, single-port laparoscopy used in clinical practice requires a large periumbilical surgical incision, which increases local trauma and complicates the surgical procedure. Moreover, the single-port laparoscopy has a “swordfighting” or “chopsticks” effect between the observation mirror and multiple operating instruments through a single hole [20]. There are no forceps available to assist in separation, making the operation much more difficult than that of a multi-port laparoscopy [21]. Due to the flexible bending and reversing capability of the front end of the gastric endoscopy, it has the advantages of flexible, convenient and efficient operation. As a super minimally invasive surgery, TUES has been successfully performed in numerous surgeries such as gallbladder-preserving polypectomy and thoracic sympathectomy [19,22]. In this study, we explored the safety and feasibility of adhesiolysis via TUES, providing a new solution for the diagnosis and treatment of adhesive intestinal obstruction.

This experimental protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of the 900th Hospital of PLA Joint Logistic Support Force (approval No.2023–53) and was conducted in accordance with relevant institutional and national guidelines and regulations for the care and use of laboratory animals. The experimental process was carried out in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines (Animal Research: Reporting In Vivo Experiments) [23]. If any situations that might endanger the life of beagles during the experiment, such as persistent convulsion, sepsis caused by wound infection, continuous loss of mobility, the experiment was terminated early and professional treatment was given.

The instruments used in this study included the gastric endoscopy (GIF-Q260J; Olympus Optical Co., Ltd.), transparent cap (D-201–11804; Olympus Medical Systems), Hook knife (KD-620LR; Olympus Medical Systems), hot biopsy forceps (FD-410LR; Olympus Medical Systems), high frequency electrical equipment (VIO-300D; ERBE Electronic Medical Instruments Co., Ltd.), Trocar (12mm diameter; Hangzhou Kangji Medical Equipment Co., Ltd.).

Beagles were selected as research subjects, which had similar anatomical characteristics to humans. Eight beagles (age, 1–2 years; weight, 10–12 kg) were provided by Jinan Jinfeng Experimental Animal Co., Ltd. and raised in the experimental animal center at our hospital. Beagles were fasted for 24 h before surgery, and 10 mg/kg were injected intramuscularly into the buttocks with tiletamine hydrochloride and zolazepam hydrochloride to induce anesthesia. When the beagles had stable breathing and heart rate and were not responding to the stimulation, it was regarded as successful anesthesia. An ECG monitor was connected to monitor the vital signs of beagles, and anesthesia was added during the operation according to the physical resuscitation. The gastroscopy was cleaned and disinfected by the disinfectant center and then sterilized with ethylene oxide. The experimenter operated in accordance with the principle of surgical sterility.

Abdominal postsurgical adhesions develop following trauma to the mesothelium, which is damaged often by surgical handling, instrument contact, foreign materials, desiccation, and overheating [24]. The model preparation procedure was based on previous studies and improved [25]. Skin preparation, disinfection, and draping were routinely performed, and the beagles were placed in a supine position. After laparotomy through a midline incision, 1–2 segments of the bowel were exposed and randomly selected. A sterile gauze was rubbed on the serous surface until the serosal shine was lost and punctuated hemorrhagic spots oozing blood were formed. A drop of absolute alcohol was applied to the punctuate hemorrhagic areas to further stimulate adhesion formation (Fig.1). Sterile gauze was used to wipe the parietal peritoneum so that there was an unsmooth wound between the organ and the peritoneum. Interrupted sutures were used to close the abdominal muscles and the skin.

Beagles were reared normally for 2 weeks and then underwent abdominal exploration and adhesiolysis. The classification of adhesions was used according to the Bologna guidelines for diagnosis and management of adhesive small bowel obstruction (Table1) [5]. The experimenters who participated in abdominal exploration and adhesiolysis were not involved in the modeling process. The beagle was placed in a supine position, and the umbilicus was used as the center for routine disinfection and draping. A 1 cm arc incision was made along the lower edge of the umbilicus, and a Trocar was inserted. The incision wound was kept clean, and the gastric endoscopy with a transparent cap was passed through the Trocar into the abdominal cavity. The pneumoperitoneum was established by endoscopic carbon dioxide delivery, and the abdominal pressure was monitored by a laparoscopic pressure detector to maintain the abdominal pressure at about 8 ~ 10 mmHg. The abdominal cavity was explored in the order of right lower quadrant—right upper quadrant—left upper quadrant—left lower quadrant. Hook knife was used for adhesiolysis. After adhesiolysis, the abdominal cavity was rinsed with normal saline. If uncontrollable bleeding, intestinal perforation, adhesion that could not be released by gastroscopy and other serious situations occurred during the operation, it was converted to open surgery. Following verification of absence of hemorrhage or damage to abdominal organs, intra-abdominal carbon dioxide was absorbed. Finally, the Trocar was extracted and the umbilical incision was closed with silk sutures.

All beagles were fasted for 24 h after the operation and then given liquid diets and gradually resumed normal diet. The pain intensity of the beagles was evaluated by observing the behavior, consciousness, posture and barking, and meloxicam was given to relieve postoperative pain if necessary. The incision healing was evaluated by observing the presence or absence of blood and pus in the incision. Cefazolin sodium was injected intramuscularly for three consecutive days to prevent infection. Subsequently, after a three-month interval, re-exploration of the abdominal cavity was conducted.

The observation indicators comprised the modeling situation, timing of adhesiolysis, vital signs of the beagles during surgery, and presence of complications such as massive bleeding, perforation, and abdominal organ damage. Postoperatively, the beagle's activity, response to external stimuli, food intake, defecation, weight, and incision healing were observed. Survival status was assessed along with any occurrence of abdominal adhesions or infection within 3 months after surgery.

SPSS 26.0 statistical software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL) was used to analyze all the study data. Measurement data conforming to the normal distribution were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (± s); measurement data with skewed distribution were expressed as median and interquartile ranges M(IQR), and count data were expressed as percentages.

The modeling of all 8 beagles was successfully achieved, resulting in the formation of adhesive intestinal obstruction. All beagles showed a decrease in food intake, defecation and weight loss 2 weeks after operation, and 3 of them showed vomiting. Intraoperative exploration showed the dilation of the partial bowel and the formation of adhesions between the bowel and the abdominal wall or between different segments of the bowel (Fig.2).

The adhesiolysis procedure was successfully completed using TUES in all 8 beagles, achieving a 100% success rate (Figs.3,4). The M(IQR) time of adhesiolysis was 83(9) minutes, with minimal intraoperative blood loss (< 10 mL). Throughout the operation, the vital signs of the beagles remained stable, with blood pressure fluctuating between 112–154 mmHg, heart rate fluctuating between 73–109 times/min, and blood oxygen saturation fluctuating between 94–100%. No complications occurred during the surgery, such as significant hemorrhage, perforation, or damage to abdominal organs.

After three months of adhesiolysis, all 8 beagles survived and gained weight compared to before the procedure and 3 beagles with vomiting symptoms were also relieved. Normal drinking, dieting, and defecation were observed, along with good activity ability and state. No instances of incision infection, intra-abdominal infection or associated complications were observed. Upon re-exploration of the abdominal cavity three months after adhesiolysis, erythema and mucinous material were observed at the original site of adhesion; however, no formation of adhesive bands was noted (Fig.5).

In recent years, the incidence of adhesive intestinal obstruction has been increasing. In a national cohort study, the overall incidence increased by 50% over the past 30 years, placing a significant financial burden on patients and the healthcare system [26,27]. Previous studies have shown that laparoscopic adhesiolysis has a lower mortality rate and a lower risk of surgical infection and cardiopulmonary complications than traditional open surgery [28,29]. In addition, laparoscopic surgery has been found to reduce the incidence and severity of adhesion formation compared with open surgery due to the reduction of trauma and bleeding and the ability to maintain the humidity of the natural environment, thereby reducing the recurrence rate of adhesive intestinal obstruction [30,31].

Although laparoscopic surgery is less invasive, some patients still experience significant pain and discomfort after surgery. Some scholars believe that this postoperative pain may be due to carbon dioxide retention in the abdominal cavity, which in turn stimulates the phrenic nerve and diaphragm, leading to referred pain in the shoulder and upper abdomen [32]. In addition, the high carbon dioxide pressure during laparoscopic surgery not only increases the risk of compression syndrome and subcutaneous emphysema, but also leads to peritoneal hypoperfusion, hypercapnia, and reduced clearance of reactive oxygen species, which can induce the formation of adhesions. A study published in The Lancet pointed out that as minimally invasive surgery continues to increase, it is expected to further reduce the incidence of adhesion-related diseases in the population [3]. As one of the super minimally invasive technologies, NOTES has become a research hotspot in recent years because of its advantages of less trauma, faster recovery, lower cost, and no new scars on the abdominal wall after surgery, which can bring many benefits to patients [33]. With the advancement in endoscopic technology, including inverted observation, closure, resection, and haemostasis in the abdominal cavity, endoscopy can be used for observation and a series of other operations as a laparoscopy [34]. On the other hand, since the photography and various operating instruments are integrated into the same tube, the surgeon can operate alone without the need for an assistant to use the lens, thus saving labor costs.

NOTES can be performed through different natural orifices, each with its own advantages and limitations. Transvaginal natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery is the earliest surgical method, but because the vagina is a female-specific organ, it can only be limited to female patients. Moreover, due to the influence of traditional culture and the fear that the surgery may affect sexual life, pregnancy and fertility, some people are resistant to it [35]. Although there is no gender restriction for transgastric or transrectal natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery, the mouth, stomach, and rectum are connected to the outside world, thus their microecological systems are very complex and contain a large number of bacteria, which increases the risk of infection [36]. Moreover, the incision is difficult to close and anastomotic leakage is prone to occur, which limits its further development.

TUES has no gender limitations and does not need to pass through the wall of the digestive tract, so there is no need for intestinal cleaning preparation. By using the natural fold of the umbilicus as an entrance, disinfection can be performed directly on the body surface, which can not only greatly reduce the incidence of infection, but also improve the field of view and maneuverability of the endoscopy. In addition, the umbilicus is the channel for the exchange of substances between the fetus and the mother during the embryonic period. Its wall is thin and there are fewer nerves and blood vessels. Therefore, puncture at this site will cause less stimulation and damage to the abdominal nerves and blood vessels, and the postoperative pain is less, making it an ideal approach. Moreover, since the incision at this site is small, sutures can be used directly, which is simpler than endoscopic wound closure and can effectively reduce the risk of anastomotic leakage. In terms of beauty, the postoperative scar can be hidden in the natural wrinkles of the umbilicus, which is extremely concealed. The incision is almost invisible on the body surface after surgery, which can achieve a “scarless” visual effect, which greatly satisfies people's pursuit of minimally invasive beauty [19]. Therefore, TUES using a flexible endoscopy has its unique advantages compared with other approaches, which has shown benefit in the treatment of abdominal diseases such as pancreatitis [37].

Compared with traditional open adhesiolysis, TUES adhesiolysis only requires one incision during the entire surgical process, so the preoperative preparation procedures are simpler and the requirements for anesthesia are relatively low. At the same time, compared with single-port laparoscopy, gastric endoscopy, as an important tool for the diagnosis and treatment of digestive tract diseases, integrates light sources, water injection, air injection and other channels, so that operations such as lighting, observation and treatment can be performed simultaneously. During the operation, various treatment instruments can be inserted according to the needs of the operation, and operations such as separation and hemostasis can be performed safely. The endoscopy can magnify the lesion, and the front end of the mirror body can be freely turned. Compared with rigid laparoscopy, its angle is more flexible, and adhesions can be flexibly observed and loosened from multiple angles, thereby reducing damage to the intestines to a certain extent.

Many studies have also explored solutions to reduce adhesions from different directions. The risk factors for adhesion formation mainly include tissue damage caused by tissue exposure to the external environment, tissue dryness and ischemia during the surgery [38]. Moreover, the presence of reactive foreign bodies and contamination of surgical areas can also promote adhesion formation. In addition, regulating the pneumoabdominal parameters of carbon dioxide, to maintain a appropriate flow and pressure range, and preventing hypoxia, acidosis and intestinal dryness are also conducive to reducing the recurrence of adhesions.

In our study, TUES adhesiolysis was successfully completed with no serious complications and the vomiting symptoms of the beagles were relieved after surgery. TUES adhesiolysis has been proved to be safe and feasible. All beagles were generally in good condition and no new adhesions were observed 3 months after surgery, which we believe is related to the unique advantages of this procedure. The main advantage of TUES over traditional laparoscopic adhesiolysis is that the umbilical cord is the weakest part of the abdominal wall, and transumbilical puncture is less invasive and almost no bleeding, which can reduce damage to the abdominal wall. Secondly, the 2–4 incisions in the abdomen of traditional laparoscopic surgery can be converted into a small incision of 10 mm in the umbilical cord, reducing the pain of the surgical wound and the body's stress response. In addition, the whole process of adhesiolysis is completed within the abdominal cavity, ensuring the normal humidity and temperature of the intestines. Moreover, there is no contact with gloves, talcum powder or other foreign objects during the operation, which reduces the reaction of foreign objects in the abdominal cavity. Finally, compared with laparoscopic adhesiolysis, the abdominal pressure during TUES adhesiolysis is smaller, which reduces the impact on peritoneal perfusion and reactive oxygen species clearance, thereby reducing the formation of adhesions to a certain extent.

Although compared with laparoscopy, gastric endoscopy lacks sufficient rigidity and may not be accurately positioned due to insufficient support after entering the abdominal cavity, we have successfully overcome this problem by cleverly combining the use of Trocar. Trocar can not only guide and assist the endoscopy to reach the designated operating position but also fix the endoscopy body, making the operation more convenient. It should be noted that the Trocar should be inserted gently and slowly to avoid iatrogenic damage caused by excessive force, which may damage the intestines or other abdominal organs and blood vessels adhered to the abdominal wall. In addition, the operation is relatively complicated, requiring the operator to be familiar with the abdominal anatomical structure and the methods of using endoscopic instruments. Therefore, doctors with rich endoscopic operation experience and a solid surgical foundation can better perform this type of operation.

There are also some limitations to our study. First of all, as an exploratory study of new technology, this study focuses on feasibility and preliminary safety. This study is not compared with traditional open adhesiolysis or laparoscopic adhesiolysis, which limits the meaningful statistical comparison of key outcome indicators, including operation time, blood loss and incidence of complications. Comparing the key outcome indicators of different surgical procedures in a larger sample is the focus of further research. Secondly, the interval between postoperative re-exploration of the abdominal cavity and adhesiolysis is relatively short. Although no significant recurrent adhesions were observed at 3 months after adhesiolysis, it may have been documented if the follow-up period had been extended. In addition, gastrointestinal transit time, feeding tolerance and behavioral indicators of chronic pain should be increased to comprehensively measure the effect of the technology on physiological function. Thirdly, the models prepared in this study are most commonly caused by adhesions between the intestine and the abdominal wall, and the degree of adhesions is relatively mild, ranging from grade 1 to 3, which may not fully reflect the clinical cases caused by surgery, infection, inflammation and other factors. They Therefore, it is necessary to further study the pathophysiological process of simulating chronic adhesion to confirm whether this method is also feasible for adhesive intestinal obstruction with more severe adhesions or obstruction located in deeper areas. Finally, since the sample size of this study is small, this result represents only preliminary safety and feasibility, and subsequent confirmatory studies will expand the sample based on power analysis calculation. And its clinical application value needs to be further explored in multi-institutional clinical randomized controlled trial studies with larger sample sizes. The initial clinical application should be limited to localized mild adhesion and exclude multiple organ involvement and dense adhesion. Subsequent clinical transformation requires the establishment of complete inclusion and exclusion standards, and a careful surgical plan and early warning scheme are formulated to systematically verify the universal value of this technology.

Minimally invasive and refined procedures will be an inevitable trend in the future development of medicine. NOTES has made an outstanding contribution to modern medicine entering the era of super minimally invasive surgery. It has the potential to bring another major shift in surgical practice, just as laparoscopic surgery has developed faster than many experts expected in the past three decades. However, there are still great challenges to overcome in the clinical application, including incision closure, device optimization, multidisciplinary training, indication selection, etc. [39,40]. As for TUES adhesiolysis, the operation is difficult, covering internal medicine and surgical majors. The operator needs to be familiar with abdominal anatomy and operating equipment, and should have rich clinical experience. As a new technology, it needs to be reviewed for ethical support before it is officially launched, and active surgical preparation and preoperative training should also be carried out. Secondly, the choice of patients is crucial, and the initial clinical application should be limited to patients with localized mild adhesions. A thorough surgical plan and alternative plan need to be formulated, and should be performed under the guidance of an operators with rich experience in laparoscopic and open adhesiolysis. If there are problems that cannot be solved during the operation, the surgical plan should be replaced in time. We believe that appropriate patient selection, professional experience of doctors, and rigorous training in minimally invasive surgery are key factors in promoting TUES.

In summary, TUES adhesiolysis provides a new option for adhesive intestinal obstruction. The operation has been preliminarily proven to be minimally invasive, safe and effective, and has the potential for clinical application.

We extend our gratitude to all members who contributed to the manuscript.