The rapid CO2rise during the early deglaciation is often linked to enhanced ventilation by intensified Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) overturning. The recorded radiocarbon ventilation seesaw during the early deglaciation, which describes improved Southern Ocean and reduced North Atlantic abyssal radiocarbon ventilation, has been interpreted as intensified AABW and reduced North Atlantic Deep Water convections. However, abyssal radiocarbon records also reflect changes in surface reservoir ages and interior water mass mixing. Using isotope-enabled simulations, we show that this seesaw results from weakened AABW overturning and decreased Southern Ocean surface reservoir age. With AABW occupying the abyssal ocean, weakened AABW overturning increases transit time, with the magnitude increasing northward. This transit time increase outpaced the decliningΔ14Catminduced Southern Ocean surface reservoir age decrease in the abyssal North Atlantic, but not in the abyssal Southern Ocean, thus producing a radiocarbon ventilation seesaw. Our results suggest sluggish deep water overturning from both poles during the early deglaciation.

Reconstructed radiocarbon ventilation seesaw and reduced Southern Ocean surface reservoir age imply reduced Antarctic Bottom Water overturning parallel to the weakened North Atlantic Deep Water overturning during the early deglaciation.

Understanding past rapid changes in atmospheric CO2is essential for grasping the mechanisms and consequences of swift climate changes, thereby guiding projections and strategies for future climate scenarios. Notably, during the early phase of the last deglaciation (~ 17 ka to 15 ka), atmospheric CO2increased by ~ 30 ppm over a span of 2000 years1. This increase constituted about half of the total CO2rise during the last deglaciation, but occurred within just a quarter of the entire period. A predominant hypothesis attributes this CO2rise to enhanced ventilation of the abyssal ocean2–6. Given the abyssal ocean is primarily filled with the Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW)7,8, strengthened AABW overturning rate would improve abyssal ventilation and thereby increase atmospheric CO2due to enhanced outgassing and reduced carbon sequestration in the abyssal ocean on millennial time scales9–12.

A key evidence that is used to support this enhanced AABW overturning hypothesis lies in deglacial reductions in radiocarbon ventilation ages reconstructed from marine sediments. Radiocarbon enters the ocean through surface gas exchange and is transported in the ocean interior with radioactive decay along the transport pathway, thus providing a unique tracer to quantify past water transit time and, in turn, circulation rates13. The radiocarbon ventilation age is defined here as the radiocarbon age difference between the ocean and the contemporary atmosphere (“Methods”). Specifically, there was a noticeable decrease in radiocarbon ventilation ages in the abyssal Southern Ocean during Heinrich Stadial 1 (HS1, ~ 17.5-14.7 ka)14when the North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) convection nearly collapsed15. This suggests enhanced ventilation in the abyssal Southern Ocean during the early last deglaciation. Concurrently, increased radiocarbon ventilation ages during HS1 were recorded at both mid and abyssal water depths at the Iberian Margin in the North Atlantic16,17. These opposite radiocarbon ventilation age trends between the Southern Ocean and the North Atlantic are referred to as the “bipolar radiocarbon ventilation seesaw”17, traditionally interpreted as a consequence of antiphase changes in NADW and AABW productions, a phenomenon termed as the “deep water production seesaw”18,19.

However, the use of radiocarbon ventilation age as an indicator for deepwater production changes is ambiguous. In addition to the water transit time from the surface to the interior ocean, which is the “true ventilation time”, radiocarbon in the ocean interior is influenced by surface gas exchange and the mixing of water masses originating from different sources13,20. Modeling studies suggest that deepwater radiocarbon ventilation ages are only weakly affected by the true ventilation time determined by the deep water convection rate21. Instead, they strongly depend on changes in the surface reservoir age, which is defined as the radiocarbon age difference between the ocean surface and the contemporary atmosphere (“Methods”). This surface reservoir age effect is particularly critical in the Southern Ocean21,22. During the early deglaciation, opposite trends in the radiocarbon surface reservoir ages were observed in the subpolar North Atlantic and the Southern Ocean23, which urges careful consideration of potential influences of surface gas exchange in explaining the bipolar radiocarbon ventilation seesaw16. In addition, deepwater radiocarbon ventilation ages are affected by water mass mixing in the ocean interior20,21,24, which is poorly constrained by proxy reconstructions during the early deglaciation and thus complicates the interpretation of the radiocarbon records in terms of past deepwater convection changes.

To interpret the radiocarbon ventilation seesaw, we utilize an isotope-enabled transient ocean simulation that effectively reproduces the overall trends in the reconstructed radiocarbon records. Our simulation reveals that the radiocarbon ventilation seesaw in reconstructions can be explained by weakened AABW production, coupled with a decrease in the Southern Ocean surface reservoir age during the early last deglaciation. In addition, we explore the associated mechanisms underlying the AABW overturning rate and Southern Ocean surface reservoir age changes.

C-iTRACE is a transient ocean-only simulation driven by surface forcings from a fully coupled transient simulation (TRACE21K)25(“Methods”). C-iTRACE is capable of reproducing multiple isotopic changes as revealed by proxy records at the LGM26and during the last deglaciation27,28, suggesting a reasonable model representation of deglacial ocean changes. With freshwater inputs in the high latitude North Atlantic during HS1, the simulated NADW nearly collapses, with the simulated231Pa/230Th reproducing231Pa/230Th records from the Bermuda Rise15(Fig.1A). In C-iTRACE, AABW transport rate weakens from 11 Sv at the LGM to 5 Sv at HS1, parallel to the NADW reduction during the deglaciation (Fig.1Aand Supplementary Fig.1). Therefore, no deepwater production seesaw is simulated in C-iTRACE. The parallel reductions in NADW and AABW overturning rates during the early deglaciation are also produced by a fully coupled transient deglacial simulation with a higher model resolution (iTRACE)29(Supplementary Fig.1).

ANorth Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) (black) and Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) (red) overturning rates (unit: Sv) in C-iTRACE. Simulated231Pa/230Th (navy curve) and231Pa/230Th records (navy dots) from the Bermuda Rise are overlaid as a proxy for NADW overturning rate.BSimulated abyssal (below 3000 m average) radiocarbon ventilation age (unit: yr) on the Iberian Margin (solid line) compared with radiocarbon records (dots)16,17. Error bars represent 2σ uncertainties in radiocarbon records.CSimulated abyssal (60°W-20°E, south of 60°S, below 3000 m average) radiocarbon ventilation age (unit: yr) in the Southern Ocean (solid line) compared with radiocarbon records (dots)14,78. Error bars represent 2σ uncertainties in radiocarbon records.DSimulated Southern Ocean surface reservoir age (Rage) (unit: yr) (average over 60°W-20°E, south of 60°S, which is the AABW formation region in the model based on the winter mixed layer depth in Supplementary Fig.11) compared with records (dots)23. Error bars represent 2σ uncertainties in radiocarbon records.ESimulated ideal age (iage) of the deep Iberian Margin (blue) and deep Southern Ocean (red) (unit: yr).FSum of the Southern Ocean surface reservoir age anomaly and ideal age (dash) anomaly compared with simulated radiocarbon ventilation age anomaly (solid) of the abyssal Iberian Margin (blue) and abyssal Southern Ocean (red) (unit: yr).GSimulated AABW% indicated by the idealized dye tracer (“Methods”) in the abyssal Iberian Margin (blue) and deep Southern Ocean (red). The gray shading indicates Heinrich Stadial 1 (HS1, 17.5 ka-14.7 ka).

C-iTRACE reasonably reproduces the first-order trends in reconstructed radiocarbon ventilation age changes during the early deglaciation, thus presenting a useful tool for understanding radiocarbon records. The simulated surface reservoir ages in the Southern Ocean decreases by ~ 660 years from the LGM to HS1, in agreement with the compiled reconstructions23(Fig.1D). The simulated radiocarbon ventilation age changes between the LGM and HS1 in the ocean interior also agree with published reconstructions in the Southern Ocean and the Atlantic within data uncertainties (Supplementary Table.1)30(Fig.1B, Cand Supplementary Figs.2and3), although the magnitude of the radiocarbon ventilation ages seems to show a systematic bias from reconstructions especially at the Iberian Margin (Fig.1B). The higher simulated deepwater radiocarbon ventilation ages than the reconstructions at the Iberian Margin might imply that AABW overturning rate was not strong enough during the LGM in C-iTRACE. Nevertheless, the bipolar radiocarbon ventilation seesaw trend is simulated qualitatively in C-iTRACE. From the LGM to HS1, the simulated B-Atm age increases by 141 years at the Iberian Margin but decreases by 329 years in the Southern Ocean below ~ 3 km water depth, capturing the first-order increasing and decreasing trends in reconstructions from the Southern Ocean and Iberian Margin respectively (Fig.1B, Cand Supplementary Fig.4). The decrease of radiocarbon ventilation age record at the Iberian Margin staring at 15.5 ka is related to the transition into the Bølling–Allerød (BA), which is earlier than the transition in231Pa/230Th records from the Bermuda Rise15probably due to chronological uncertainties and bioturbation in the radiocarbon records. Combined with the simulated parallel reductions in AABW and NADW production rates, we find that the radiocarbon ventilation seesaw occurs without a deep-water production seesaw in C-iTRACE.

The simulated abyssal ocean is occupied mainly by AABW and experiences little change in water mass mixing ratio during the early deglaciation as indicated by the idealized dye tracer released in the surface Southern Ocean (Methods) (Fig.1Gand Supplementary Fig.5). At the LGM, NADW shoaled to above 3 km, and the abyssal ocean is dominated by AABW below 3 km (Supplementary Fig.5A). Under this LGM water mass geometry, C-iTRACE reproducesδC13,εNdand231Pa/230Th in agreement with reconstructions26. At HS1, reduced NADW overturning leads to a decrease in the NADW percentage at the mid-depth above 3 km28. However, the AABW percentage is changed by less than 10% in the abyssal ocean below 3 km (Supplementary Fig.5C): the abyssal Southern Ocean is occupied by 100% AABW at LGM and 98% AABW at HS1, while the Iberian Margin below ~ 3 km is occupied by 91% AABW at the LGM and 82% AABW at HS1 (Fig.1G). The limited change in abyssal water mass mixing might be supported by little changes inεNdrecords from 20 ka to 15 ka31–35, although the interpretation ofεNdrecords might be complicated by benthic fluxes32,36,37. Under such conditions, deglacial radiocarbon ventilation changes in the abyssal ocean is mainly affected by changes in AABW, instead of NADW as previously suggested17,38.

The deglacial radiocarbon ventilation seesaw resulted from a synergy of reduced Southern Ocean surface reservoir ages and weakened AABW overturning rate in the model. Since the abyssal ocean is almost entirely occupied by AABW from the LGM to HS1, radiocarbon ventilation age changes can be decomposed into (1) changes in Southern Ocean surface reservoir ages and (2) changes in water transit time from the surface to the interior ocean represented by the ideal age in the model (“Methods”). The sum of anomalies of these two components reproduce, qualitatively, the trends of radiocarbon ventilation age anomalies in both abyssal Southern Ocean and the Iberian Margin (Fig.1F), although the sum of water transit time and Southern Ocean surface reservoir age anomalies (Fig.1Fdashed lines) is systematically higher than the deep ocean radiocarbon ventilation age anomaly (Fig.1Fsolid lines) due to the decreasing trend in the atmospheric radiocarbon activities (Δ14Catm) during the deglaciation (Supplementary text). From LGM to HS1, a weaker AABW overturning rate increases the ideal age in the abyssal Southern Ocean and North Atlantic (Fig.1E). The magnitude of the ideal age increases linearly with the distance away from the AABW source region (Supplementary text). Therefore, the ideal age increases more at the Iberian Margin than in the Southern Ocean. From 19 ka to 15 ka, the slightly increased transit time (~ + 557 years) is smaller than the decreased surface reservoir age (~ − 654 years) in the abyssal Southern Ocean, while the much larger transit time increase (~ + 1274 years) is larger than the decreased surface reservoir age (~ − 654 years) for abyssal waters at the Iberian Margin, leading to the net radiocarbon ventilation age decrease in the abyssal Southern Ocean and increase in the abyssal North Atlantic, which generates the bipolar radiocarbon ventilation seesaw.

Both weakened AABW overturning rate and reduced Southern Ocean reservoir ages are essential in producing the bipolar radiocarbon ventilation seesaw. If there is no significant decrease in Southern Ocean reservoir ages, as shown in the sensitivity experiment Fix_pCO2&14C (“Methods”, Fig.2Dred), reduced AABW overturning rate alone would increase transit time and, in turn, increase the radiocarbon ventilation ages in both the abyssal Southern Ocean and the North Atlantic (Fig.2E, Fred). If there is no change in AABW overturning rate, as illustrated in the sensitivity experiment Fix_circulation (Methods) (Supplementary Fig.6Bblue), reduced reservoir ages in the Southern Ocean (Fig.2Dblue) would be propagated into the entire abyssal ocean, leading to reduced radiocarbon ventilation ages in both the Iberian Margin and the Southern Ocean (Fig.2E, Fblue). Therefore, reduced Southern Ocean surface reservoir ages23combined with increased radiocarbon ventilation ages at the Iberian Margin must require an increased AABW transit time, suggesting a weaker AABW overturning rate during the early deglaciation.

AAtmospheric CO2(unit: ppm).BRadiocarbon carbon abundance in the atmospheric CO2(unit: per mil).CSea ice coverage in the AABW formation region (60°W-20°E, south of 60°).DSouthern Ocean surface reservoir age (average over 60°W-20°E, south of 60°S) (unit: yr).EDeep ocean ventilation age (B-A age) in the Southern Ocean (unit: yr).FDeep ocean ventilation age on the Iberian Margin. Solid black lines: C-iTRACE; dash red lines: Fix_pCO2&14 C; dash blue lines: Fix_circulation; dash yellow lines: Fix_sea_ice; and solid magenta lines: Fix_circulation&pCO2. The gray shading indicates Heinrich Stadial 1 (HS1, 17.5ka-14.7ka).

The surface reservoir age is influenced by air-sea gas exchange modulated by sea ice insulation39,40, physical circulation41, atmospheric CO2levels (pCO2)42andΔ14Catm41,43, all of which favor reduced Southern Ocean reservoir ages during HS1. Decreased NADW overturning during HS1 leads to surface cooling in the North Atlantic and warming in the Southern Ocean, a phenomenon referred to as the “thermal bipolar seesaw”44,45. In addition, increasing atmospheric CO2would also warm up the Southern Ocean (Fig.3E). This warming results in reduced sea ice coverage (Fig.2Cand Supplementary Fig.7), dominating the change in CO2gas exchange velocity (piston velocity) in the Southern Ocean during the early deglaciation (Supplementary Fig.8). This enhanced air-sea gas exchange by sea ice retreat leads to a younger Southern Ocean surface reservoir age (Supplementary Fig.9I). However, the associated sea ice insulation effect contributes only approximately 20% to the deglacial Southern Ocean reservoir age decrease in the AABW formation region, as illustrated by the difference between C-iTRACE and experiment Fix_sea_ice (Methods and Supplementary Table2) (Supplementary Figs.9Iand10). This suggests that sea ice coverage is not a dominant factor controlling the early deglacial Southern Ocean reservoir age changes46. Other Southern Ocean physical condition changes, including sea surface warming (Fig.3E) and shoaling of mixed layer depth (Supplementary Fig.11), can also contribute to younger surface reservoir ages. However, their contributions are even smaller, as shown by the difference between experiment Fix_sea_ice and Fix_circulation (Methods and Supplementary Table2) (Supplementary Figs.9G and10). We find that the deglacial Southern Ocean surface reservoir age changes are reduced, mostly contributed by atmospheric CO2changes, as manifested by the difference between C-iTRACE and experiment Fix_pCO2&14C (Methods and Supplementary Table2) (Supplementary Figs.9and10). Without changes in atmospheric CO2, Southern Ocean surface reservoir ages would only experience a small decrease, as demonstrated in experiment Fix_pCO2&14C (Fig.2D).

AAverage zonal wind stress (unit: dyne/cm2) over 60°S-40°S in C-iTRACE (black) and experiment SO_wind (blue).BAABW overturning rate (unit: Sv) in C-iTRACE (black) and experiment SO_wind (green).CDensity flux (black), thermal density flux (blue), haline density flux (red) and brine density flux (magenta) in the AABW formation region (60°W-20°E, south of 60°) (unit: 10-6kg m−2s−1).DSea ice fraction in the AABW formation region.ESea surface temperature (SST) in the AABW formation region (unit: °C). The gray shading indicates Heinrich Stadial 1 (HS1, 17.5ka-14.7ka).

The decreased surface reservoir ages in the Southern Ocean are contributed predominantly by the decliningΔ14Catm. The atmospheric CO2forcings include the increasing pCO2level and the decliningΔ14Catm, both of which might contribute to the decreasing surface reservoir ages in the Southern Ocean. Ignoring mixing with underlying waters, the surface water reservoir age has been suggested to be linearly related to 1/pCO242. As a result, increasing pCO2during the early deglaciation would be accompanied by decreasing surface reservoir ages. However, mixing with deep waters cannot be neglected in the AABW formation regions due to deep convection resulting from sea ice production and brine rejection. Because deglacialΔ14Catmwas declining, mixing with deep waters which exchanged14C with the atmosphere with higherΔ14Catmat an earlier time (e.g., a millennium ago) will increaseΔ14Cin the surface ocean and, in turn, decrease its reservoir ages (memory effect)43. To explore the relative importance of the increasing pCO2and decliningΔ14Catmin the reduction of surface reservoir ages in the AABW formation region, a sensitivity experiment, Fix_circulation&pCO2, is carried out, with changingΔ14Catmand fixed circulation and pCO2(“Methods”). The Southern Ocean surface reservoir ages in Fix_circulation&pCO2 are almost identical to those in experiment Fix_circulation (Fig.2D), suggesting a limited contribution by increasing pCO2 but a dominant contribution by decliningΔ14Catmon reservoir age changes in the AABW formation region during the early deglaciation.

Surface wind and buoyancy forcings, along with internal mixing, drive the global ocean circulation. A previous modeling study suggests that intensified Southern Hemisphere westerlies during HS1 enhance AABW overturning rate, based on artificial wind stress forcing10. However, the surface momentum forcing in C-iTRACE, taken from a fully coupled simulation that reproduces major observed climate changes25(“Methods”), shows little change in Southern Hemisphere westerlies during the early deglaciation (Fig.3Aand Supplementary Figs.12A, B), consistent with another fully coupled simulation with higher resolution29(Supplementary Figs.12D, E). The evolution of AABW overturning rate in C-iTRACE during the early deglaciation is predominantly influenced by surface buoyancy flux, with the haline component playing a key role47(Fig.3C, “Methods”). From the LGM to HS1, the Southern Ocean warms due to the thermal bipolar seesaw as NADW weakens (Fig.3E), which results in sea ice retreat (Fig.3Dand Supplementary Fig.7), consistent with sea ice records48. Less sea ice production contributes to a decrease in the haline density flux associated with brine rejection (Fig.3C). Although stronger AABW overturning rate are simulated during Heinrich Stadials in previous studies using LOVECLIM and UVIC models10,12, these apparently opposite AABW responses during Heinrich Stadials in different numerical experiments can be reconciled, in terms of physical mechanisms, by considering opposite surface buoyancy forcings (see details in “Methods”): a negative freshwater forcing/increasing density flux over the Southern Ocean leads to the enhancement of AABW overturning rate in LOVECLIM and UVIC models10,12, while a decreasing density flux due to sea ice retreat over the Southern Ocean leads to the decrease of AABW overturing in C-iTRACE (Fig.3). Therefore, freshening surface Southern Ocean results in weakening of AABW overturning rate and vice versa is a robust feature in different climate models. The reconstructed sea ice retreat and thus reduced density flux in the Southern Ocean during the early last deglaciation48probably suggests a weakened AABW overturning rate, based on the above physical mechanisms.

Moreover, with a fixed surface buoyancy forcing, a 30% increase in the Southern Hemisphere westerlies strength (experiment SO_wind) causes little change in AABW overturning rate (Fig.3A, B). This suggests that the surface buoyancy forcing is the primary factor influencing AABW overturning rate during the early deglaciation. Our results suggest parallel decreases in AABW and NADW convection during the early last deglaciation, driven by surface buoyancy forcings which are connected by the thermal bipolar seesaw.

The reduced AABW overturning rate during HS1, resulting from the surface Southern Ocean warming in C-iTRACE, is also a robust feature in other climate models49,50and aligns with observed and projected AABW weakening in the recent and upcoming decades51,52. Sensitivity experiments with different magnitudes and locations of meltwater in the North Atlantic (“Methods”)53also consistently show weakening of AABW parallel to NADW slowdown (Fig.4). While sea ice retreat may not significantly contribute to the early deglacial surface reservoir age changes in the Southern Ocean as discussed above, it does play a crucial role in determining the transit time in the interior ocean by controlling the AABW production. This, in turn, influences the radiocarbon ventilation age in the ocean interior.

NADW and AABW overturning rate evolutions in idealized water hosing experiments under preindustrial conditions in CESM53. In experiment 0.25 Sv_North_Atlantic and 0.5 Sv_North_Atlantic, 0.25 Sv and 0.5Sv freshwater are added to 50°–70°N North Atlantic, respectively. In 0.5Sv_Gulf_of_Mexico, 0.5Sv freshwater is added to the Gulf of Mexico (15°–33°N, 255°–279°E).

The global overturning circulation comprises an upper cell associated with NADW and a lower cell associated with AABW54. Based on the increased biological productivity55, enhanced upwelling in the Southern Ocean during the early deglaciation has been invoked to strengthen the AABW overturning rate and improve the abyssal ocean ventilation5,9, because part of the wind-driven upwelled water moves southward and subsequently feeds the formation of AABW. However, while the upper cell relies on the wind-driven upwelling in the Southern Ocean to balance the NADW formation56, AABW formation by brine rejection57is balanced by interior diapycnal mixing in the lower cell58. The intensified wind-driven Southern Ocean upwelling would increase the NADW overturning56,59, but its exact role in the AABW overturning has not been firmly determined58. Therefore, enhanced Southern Ocean upwelling does not necessarily indicate an enhanced AABW overturning rate, which is supported by experiment SO_wind. In SO_wind with fixed surface buoyancy forcing, a 30% increase in the Southern Hemisphere westerlies results in enhanced upwelling and opal productivity in the Southern Ocean (Supplementary Fig.13) and strengthening of the NADW overturning rate although it still remains relatively weak (Supplementary Fig.6A). By contrast, AABW overturning rate remains nearly unchanged (Supplementary Fig.6B). Consequently, Southern Hemisphere westerlies appear to primarily influence the upper cell circulation. Therefore, Southern Ocean upwelling and AABW overturning are driven by distinct physical mechanisms, that is, enhanced Southern Ocean upwelling is not necessarily associated with a stronger AABW overturning rate or abyssal ventilation during the early deglaciation.

We show that with AABW dominating the abyssal ocean, the decreasing trend in Southern Ocean surface reservoir ages and the increasing trend in radiocarbon ventilation age at the abyssal Iberian Margin in reconstructions signify a weakened AABW overturning rate during the early last deglaciation. The “radiocarbon ventilation seesaw” does not reflect the “deepwater production seesaw” as previously proposed. Instead, it is associated with the reduced Southern Ocean surface reservoir ages, mainly resulting from the decliningΔ14Catmand the reduced AABW overturning rate resulted from the reduced density flux from retreating sea ice during the early last deglaciation. Our results highlight the importance of considering surface reservoir age histories when interpreting deep ocean radiocarbon records. The decreased Southern Ocean reservoir ages alongside increased radiocarbon ventilation ages in the abyssal North Atlantic suggest an increased transit time of AABW during the early deglaciation. This downstream increase in radiocarbon ventilation age is not exclusive to the North Atlantic. Recent reconstructions from the abyssal Indian Ocean60,61and the North Pacific62also exhibit increased radiocarbon ventilation ages during the early deglaciation, providing additional support for reduced AABW overturning rate during the early last deglaciation. Therefore, radiocarbon records may not be linked directly to the “deepwater production seesaw” during the early last deglaciation. Instead, the “thermal bipolar seesaw”44favors parallel decreases in NADW and AABW overturning rates during HS1 as surface warming in the Southern Ocean44,45triggered sea ice retreat48and surface density reductions, consequently decreasing the AABW overturning rate49,50,52. Although current climate models still remain deficient in representing Southern Ocean processes63, our conclusion of a weakened AABW overturning during HS1 is mainly drawn from radiocarbon records and the mechanism is physically grounded. Therefore, our study represents a possible scenario of the AABW overturning change during the early deglaciation. Nevertheless, we encourage further studies using next-generation models that can more accurately represent Southern Ocean processes in the future.

In addition to radiocarbon records, the sortable silt record east of New Zealand further supports a reduction in AABW overturning rate during the early deglaciation64. However, theεNdrecord from the North Pacific have been interpreted as indicating an increase in the AABW overturning rate65, but this interpretation may be complicated by uncertainties associated with whetherεNdprimarily reflects sedimentary influences or water mass mixing36,66. Therefore, future studies should combine multi-proxy constraints and model-data comparisons to better reconstruct the deglacial history of AABW.

While sluggish ocean circulation has been proposed to enhance carbon sequestration in the abyssal ocean9, our simulated weakened AABW overturning does not necessarily contradict with the rising atmospheric CO2during the early deglaciation. The simulated piston velocity in the Southern Ocean increased (Supplementary Fig.8), indicating intensified outgassing in the early deglaciation. In addition, despite the decreased AABW overturning rate during HS1, the simulated AABW volume expands in the Atlantic at the expense of the NADW shrinkage (Supplementary Fig.5), consistent with the AABW expansion during HS1 inferred from proxy records67. Compared to NADW, AABW is less efficient in sequestering atmospheric CO2because this water mass contains high dissolved inorganic carbon and thus tends to outgas CO2when upwelled and exposed to the atmosphere68,69. Consequently, expansion of AABW by itself would reduce the atmospheric CO2storage in the deep ocean, causing atmospheric CO2to rise. Future work is required to refine our understanding of AABW’s impacts on the global carbon cycle during the last deglaciation.

The Parallel Ocean Program version 2 (iPOP2)70implemented with several isotopes, including radiocarbon71is used for the deglacial transient simulation and sensitivity experiments. The biotic version of radiocarbon71is analyzed in this study. The ocean model configuration is nominal 3° horizontal resolution and 60 vertical layers, with a 10 m resolution in the upper 200 m, expanding to 250 m resolution below 3000 m.

In addition to isotopes, idealized dye tracer and ideal age are implemented to quantitatively represent the water mass mixing ratios and water transit time in the model, respectively. A dye tracer is released with a surface value of 0 except in the source region, where its surface value is specified at 128. In the interior ocean, dye tracers are transported as other conservative passive tracers. For example, a dye tracer is released over the Southern Ocean (south of 34°S) with surface values of 1 and 0 within and outside the Southern Ocean, respectively, which indicates the percentage of AABW in the abyssal ocean. The ideal age is set to 0 at the surface and increases with 1 yr/yr in the ocean interior, which therefore indicates how long since the water mass has left the surface.

A transient simulation of the last deglaciation (C-iTRACE) is simulated using iPOP227, which is forced by monthly surface forcings from a fully coupled simulation TRACE21K25. TRACE21K is a transient simulation under reconstructed insolation, greenhouse gas, and continental ice sheet using CCSM3, and the magnitude and location of the meltwater flux in TRACE21K are developed under the constraint of reconstructed sea level, Greenland temperature and AMOC72. Although the meltwater scheme in TRACE21K can be further improved to reach better agreement with the recent sea level estimate73, TRACE21K captures major climate changes during the last deglaciation, thus presenting a useful tool for paleoclimate research25,45. In the meltwater scheme developed in TRACE21K, there is no freshwater flux added to the Southern Ocean during the early deglaciation. C-iTRACE is forced by monthly surface momentum, heat and freshwater fluxes and surface sea ice fractions in TRACE21K, with surface temperature and salinity restoring to the monthly average of TRACE21K output. The restoring time scale is 30 days for temperature and 60 days for salinity. C-iTRACE reproduces the physical circulation in TRACE21K27. C-iTRACE is able to reproduce different isotope changes consistent with observations during the deglaciation27,28. The atmospheric pCO2andΔ14Catmare prescribed by reconstructed records74,75(Fig.2A, B). The physical circulation and radiocarbon are initialized from the LGM state in reference No76. and further spun up for another 6788 years, therefore, radiocarbon reaches quasi equilibrium under the LGM condition.

(1) Experiment Fix_pCO2&14C: the atmospheric CO2and radiocarbon are fixed at LGM values (Fig.2A, B), which are 188 ppmv and 393, respectively. The surface fluxes and sea ice are transient, which are the same as in C-iTRACE. The NADW and AABW overturning rates are identical to C-iTRACE (Supplementary Fig.6). The difference between C-iTRACE and Fix_pCO2&14C shows the effect of atmospheric CO2forcings, including pCO2 andΔ14Catmon marine radiocarbon (Supplementary Table2).

(2) Experiment Fix_circulation: the ocean circulation is fixed at the LGM condition by looping the TRACE21K surface fluxes (heat flux, freshwater flux, momentum flux) and sea ice from 20ka to 19ka (Fig.2C), while the atmospheric pCO2andΔ14Catmare transient (Fig.2A, B). The NADW and AABW overturning rates stay at LGM values (Supplementary Fig.6). The difference between Fix_sea_ice and Fix_circulation shows the effect of deglacial physical condition change, including sea surface temperature, mixed layer depth and mixing with underlying deep water, on marine radiocarbon (Supplementary Table2).

(3) Experiment Fix_sea_ice: the sea ice coverage for gas exchange is fixed at the LGM state (Fig.2C), with transient surface fluxes and atmospheric pCO2andΔ14Catm(Fig.2A, B). The sea ice effect on the buoyancy forcing is included in the transient freshwater flux so that the physical circulation, such as the AABW overturning rate is the same as C-iTRACE (Supplementary Fig.6). Therefore, the difference between C-iTRACE and Fix_sea_ice shows the effect of insulation of gas exchange by sea ice on marine radiocarbon (Supplementary Table2).

(4) Experiment Fix_circulation&pCO2: the ocean circulation is fixed at LGM condition by looping the TRACE21K surface fluxes (heat flux, freshwater flux, momentum flux) and sea ice from 20 ka to 19 ka (Fig.2C). The atmospheric pCO2is fixed at 188ppm (Fig.2A) and theΔ14Catmis transient (Fig.2B). The difference between Fix_circulation&pCO2 and Fix_circulation shows the effect of deglacial atmospheric pCO2change on marine radiocarbon (Supplementary Table2).

(5) Experiment SO_wind: the westerlies over the Southern Ocean (40°S-60°S) is increased by 30% from 17 ka to 15 ka (Fig.3Aand Supplementary Fig.12C). This experiment shows the direct effect of momentum forcing on AABW overturning rate and abyssal ventilation.

The overturning streamfunction used in the analysis considers both Eulerian velocity and bolus velocity, which represents the eddy effect through eddy parameterization77. Therefore, the residual overturning circulation is used, which is more representative of tracer property transports56. NADW overturning rate is defined as the maximum of the Atlantic overturning streamfunction in the North Atlantic between 500 m and 1600 m. AABW overturning rate is defined as the minimum of the global overturning streamfunction between 33°S and 10°S below 2000 m.

The responses of AABW and NADW overturing to the freshwater input in the North Atlantic are analyzed in idealized sensitivity experiments with varying locations and magnitudes of freshwater input under preindustrial initial conditions using fully-coupled CESM53. In experiments 0.25 Sv_North_Atlantic and 0.5 Sv_North_Atlantic, 0.25 Sv and 0.5Sv freshwater are added to the 50°-70°N North Atlantic, respectively. In 0.5Sv_Gulf_of_Mexico, 0.5Sv freshwater is added to the Gulf of Mexico (15°–33°N, 255°–279°E). Each experiment has been integrated for 200 years. In the year 200, the NADW overturning rate has reached quasi-equilibrium, and the AABW overturning rate is still adjusting. With different magnitudes of reductions in NADW overturning rate, AABW shows a long-term decreasing trend in all three idealized experiments, suggesting a robust parallel weakening of AABW and NADW in response to meltwater input in the North Atlantic.

The density flux is calculated using the linearized equation of state of seawater:Fρ=−α*QCP+ρ0,T*β*E−P−R−I*S1−S, whereα=−1ρ∂ρ∂TP,Sandβ=1ρ∂ρ∂SP,Tare the thermal expansion and haline contraction coefficients, respectively. Here, S is salinity and T is temperature. Q is the total heat flux. Cp is the specific heat capacity.ρ0,Tis the density of freshwater with salinity of 0 and temperature of T. E, P, R, and I represent the freshwater fluxes related to evaporation, precipitation, river runoff, and sea-ice melting and brine rejection, respectively. The density flux can be further separated into the thermal density flux (−α*QCP) and the haline density flux (ρ0,T*β*E−P−R−I*S1−S). The contribution of the brine rejection can be estimated asρ0,T*β*−I*S1−S.

The radiocarbon ventilation age is calculated as the benthic-atmosphere age differences:8033×lnΔ14CAtm1000+1Δ14COcean1000+1(14C Libby half-life is 5568 years). The reservoir age in the model is defined as the difference of the radiocarbon age between the surface ocean (0–100 m average) and the atmosphere:8033×lnΔ14CAtm1000+1Δ14COcean−surface1000+1.

This study is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2023YFF0805300, S.G. and S.C.; Grant No. 2023YFF0806100, S.G., N.Z., and S.C.), Science and Technology Innovation Project of Laoshan Laboratory (Grant No. LSKJ202203303, S.G.), Chinese National Science Foundation (Grant No. 42476002, S.G. and Grant No. 42330403, J.Y.), and Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Polar Research (S.G., S.C., and Z.Z.). J.Z. acknowledges support from NOAA/PMEL (Contribution No. 5744) and UW/CICOES (Contribution No. 2025-1447). We acknowledge the high-performance computing support from NCAR and Laoshan Laboratory, as well as prior NSF support of the C-iTRACE project (awards 1566432 and 1810681). We thank Dr. Jiang Zhu for providing the idealized hosing experiments in reference No. 53.