Increasing life expectancy will lead to more people living with dementia (PLwD) and, consequently, more caregivers experiencing burden. Caregivers burden is influenced by characteristics of both PLwD and caregivers themselves, as well as healthcare services organisation. The COVID‐19 pandemic and lockdown measures implemented in Italy worsened PLwD and their caregivers' well‐being. Recognising the importance of understanding the profiles and care needs of PLwD and their caregivers, a national survey was conducted within the Italian Fund for Alzheimer's and Dementias to investigate the sociodemographic characteristics of PLwD caregivers and their care recipients in Italy. This study aimed to describe the characteristics of Italian caregivers of PLwD, their use of services, and satisfaction with the latter.

A cross‐sectional national survey was conducted. A self‐administered questionnaire was developed consisting mainly of multiple‐choice questions.

A total of 2369 caregivers participated in the survey. Most of them resided in Northern Italy (60.1%), were females (73.4%) and care recipients' children (74.1%). Median diagnostic delay ranged from 7 to 36 months. Diagnosis was formulated mainly by a physician from a Centre for Cognitive Disorders and Dementia. Caregiver training was poorly reported (34.1%). PLwD clinical condition worsened during the pandemic. The mean degree of satisfaction with services dedicated to dementia was “acceptable”. Negative/very negative degree of satisfaction was associated with not living in the North, increased caregiver's age, not having received training, severe degree of disease, having received the diagnosis suspicion from a private doctor, and not having used day care centres or Centres for Cognitive Disorders and Dementia.

Differences in the sociodemographic profile of caregivers and disparity in services across Italy emerged. The establishment of a comprehensive, accessible, and well‐integrated network of services across all stages of the disease progression is needed.

In recent decades, increased life expectancy has led to more people with complex health issues, such as chronic diseases and psychiatric disorders requiring complex care [1]. Amongst these, cognitive impairment and dementia are particularly in need of treatment [2] in both high‐ and low‐income countries [1,3,4,5,6,7].

According to the Dementia Observatory coordinated by the Italian National Institute of Health (Istituto Superiore di Sanità; ISS), it is estimated that there are about 1 100 000 people living with dementia (PLwD) in Italy, and about 3 000 000 caregivers are directly or indirectly involved in their care [8,9]. The latter play a fundamental role throughout the course of the disease, not only for the emotional and psychological support they can offer to the PLwD, but also for the support they can provide in the whole sphere of the PLwD's life, such as medication management, financial aspects, personal care, and the relationship with healthcare personnel [10,11,12]. Caregivers can be formal (e.g., paid professionals or family assistant) or informal (e.g., family members). Caregiving needs vary depending on the patient, but the responsibilities caregivers face can limit their social and work lives, leading them to high levels of stress [13]. Additionally, according to Italian data, approximately two‐thirds of caregivers report feeling lonely, about 50% report tensions between family members [14], more than 50% of caregivers do not attend meeting places, and about one third do not meet their friends [15]. This stress can cause psychological disorders, such as anxiety and depression, making caregivers “hidden patients” [16]. It is known that almost half of caregivers are unemployed [17,18], are more likely to experience sleep disturbances, and are generally more susceptible to developing psychopathology [19,20]. Caring for PLwD is associated with what is referred to as “caregiver burden”, a condition characterised by prolonged stress due to caregiving that can lead to negative effects on the caregiver's physical, psychological, emotional, social, and economic well‐being [21]. From 26.1% to 80.3% of Italian caregivers report experiencing a range of physical and psychological symptoms, such as excessive fatigue and depressed mood [22]. Several factors influence caregiver burden, such as caregiving hours, years of caregiving, gender, severity of dementia, level of education, socioeconomic status, coping strategies, and social isolation [23,24,25,26]. According to an Italian survey, about 90% of PLwD have at least one other chronic condition, thus increasing the experienced socio‐economic burden [15]. Lack of information about the disease and its management can also have a negative impact on caregiver burden. In Italy, about 40% of caregivers report not having received information about the management of the disease, and 80% report not having received help to manage the burden. Moreover, less than one sixth of caregivers receive financial or material support from the local administration, with a general perception of inadequate support from the local and national administration [15]. During the COVID‐19 pandemic, lockdown measures implemented in Italy and other countries increased social isolation, a known risk factor for the onset or worsening of cognitive impairment and Behavioural and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia (BPSD) [27,28,29]. In line with this, evidence reported increased BPSD during lockdown, in particular aggression, anxiety, agitation, and apathy [30,31], and also reported a worsening of psychotic symptoms [32]. Furthermore, lockdown negatively impacted also PLwD's caregivers, increasing their anxiety, depression, and distress [33,34,35,36,37].

A crucial element emerging form the evidence is “living with the patient,” which is associated with increased feelings of failure and somatic complaints, as well as a greater caregiving burden than those who do not live with the person cared for [38]. Caregivers living with the PLwD experience a more significant psychological burden and perceive their role more negatively than those living elsewhere [39,40,41]. Italian research highlights that the caregiver burden varies according to their cultural profile, suggesting the importance of local surveys to plan personalised rehabilitation interventions that also include caregivers [42]. Accordingly, in 2021, the Italian Ministry of Health and the Ministry of the Economy established the Italian Fund for Alzheimer's and Dementias, financed with EUR 5 million annually for the three‐year period 2021–2023. The Fund aimed to provide new strategies in the field of dementia with a public health perspective, promoting the development of projects in Italian Regions and Autonomous Provinces, supported by the ISS [43,44]. Given the importance of understanding the profile and care needs of PLwD and their caregivers, a national survey was conducted to the sociodemographic characteristics of PLwD and their caregivers in Italy. Information regarding diagnoses, service use, pandemic period, and legal aspects related to the condition was collected. Additionally, this work aimed to identify which characteristics were associated with a poorer evaluation of services to highlight a more effective model for the care and support of PLwD and their caregivers. The initiative was carried out alongside a qualitative study involving professionals and caregivers to explore the current state of care for PLwD in our country.

This work can be highly valuable from a public health perspective for the identification of needs and gaps, policy development, promoting equity in accessing care, and enhancing public awareness. By detecting the needs of PLwDs and their caregivers, specific policy actions can be taken to meet individual and societal needs in managing the complex care network surrounding the PLwD. Such actions (e.g., increased personnel and services dedicated to PLwDs and their caregivers, establishment of integrated care pathways for the diagnosis and care of PLwDs) may help reduce the social and individual burden of the disease, improving the management of PLwDs and their quality of life.

From September 2022 to October 2023, we conducted a cross‐sectional national survey on the socio‐economic conditions of family members and caregivers of PLwD through an online or paper‐based questionnaire. This survey was conducted within the activity of project line 6 of the Italian Fund for Alzheimer's and Dementias, funded by the Italian Ministry of Health (GU Serie Generale n.75 del 30‐03‐2022). We developed an ad‐hoc self‐administered questionnaire consisting of the following 10 sections: profile of the family member, presence and profile of a formal caregiver, profile of the PLwD, phase of diagnostic suspicion, phase of diagnosis, service provision, cost of the disease, impact of COVID‐19, the territory context, and ethical aspects and legal figures (Document 1 inSupporting Information). We involved 178 associations of family members and 534 clinical representatives of the Italian Centres for Cognitive Disorders and Dementia (CCDDs) in the dissemination of an informative brochure containing the link to access the online questionnaire. The brochure was also disseminated to all health and social care professionals attending training courses organised by the ISS, during conferences where the Dementia Observatory Group participated, and through the Dementia Observatory website (www.demenze.it).

The Association for families/caregivers of PLwD “Alzheimer Uniti” collaborated with the ISS on this survey and was authorised by the local Ethics Committee to support caregivers in filling out paper questionnaires and to impute their data on a web‐based database.

The study was designed following a quota sampling method [45]. To guarantee that sample results were representative of the population of Italian caregivers, we determined the proportion of caregivers to collect in each region. The latter was calculated based on the percentage of the estimated number of dementia cases in each region on the estimated total number. The estimated number of dementia cases was calculated by applying the dementia prevalence [8] to the population aged 65 and over in each Italian region (Istat,https://demo.istat.it/). With an estimated 1 100 000 PLwD in Italy, the final sample size of 2369 PLwD‐caregiver dyads allowed for estimates with a maximum margin of error of 2%.

The questionnaire was completely anonymous, and during the collection of data on the web‐based platform, no device IP was saved. Questionnaire responses were recorded in the online database in accordance with the privacy policy.

Data quality checks were conducted to ensure the consistency of the information collected. In this work, results on the following sections and their associations are reported: profile of the family member, presence and profile of a formal caregiver, profile of the patient, phase of diagnostic suspicion, phase of diagnosis, service provision, impact of COVID‐19, and the territory context. Data on the cost of the disease, ethical aspects, and legal figures will be explored in a further paper. Descriptive analysis was conducted at the national level and stratified by three Italian macro‐areas (North, Centre, and South/Islands) according to the ISTAT classification (https://demo.istat.it/). This classification drawn up by ISTAT is based on the socio‐economic and statistical inhomogeneity observed amongst the various Italian macro‐areas and is a fundamental element for the analysis of territorial gaps and the planning and allocation of resources from a policy‐making perspective. Categorical variables were described using absolute numbers and percentages; continuous variables were summarised using means, minimum, maximum, median, and interquartile range (IQR). Kruskal–Wallis test was used to compare continuous variables across three geographical areas, and the Chi‐square test or Fisher's exact test for categorical variables. Logistic regression was used to investigate factors independently associated with the outcome. The outcome of the regression analysis was the caregiver's negative or very negative opinion about dementia‐specific services. The multivariable model included all the variables that were significant at the univariable level, with ap‐value < 0.05. Statistical analysis was performed using Stata SE 17.0 (StataCorp, College Station, Texas, USA). Qualitative items were coded using NVivo software.

A total of 2369 caregivers of PLwD completed the survey; the majority resided in Northern Italy (60.1%), followed by South/Islands (22.3%) and Centre (17.6%). Caregivers were predominantly females (73.4%) and care recipients' children (74.1%). Caregivers of central Italy showed a higher mean age (p< 0.001) and more frequently were partners of PLwD (p= 0.007) compared to the other macro‐areas (Table1). The most frequently reported working condition was employed (57.2%), followed by retired (29.3%). A significant difference was observed at the macro‐area level: the North contained the higher frequency of employed individuals and the Centre the higher percentage of retired individuals compared to the other areas (p< 0.001). Nearly half of caregivers cohabited with the PLwD, and this occurred more frequently in the South/Islands (59.6%) and the Centre (59.3%) than in the North (44.2%) (p< 0.001). A similar trend was observed for hours of daily assistance, which averaged 10.1 h and varied from an average of 8.8 h (range = 0–24) in the North to 12.6 h (range = 0–24) in the South/Islands (p< 0.001). The presence of another family member to rely on was prevalent in more than half of respondents and occurred more frequently in the North (63.3%) than in the Centre (54.3%) and the South/Islands (59.8%) (p= 0.008). The presence of a formal caregiver was hardly reported and unevenly distributed in Italy, with a higher frequency in the Centre (54.5%) and a lower frequency in the North (38.3%) and South/Islands (28.7%) (p< 0.001). The involvement of a formal caregiver varied according to the perceived severity of dementia, ranging from 15.5% in mild dementia to 39.4% in moderate dementia and 46.7% in severe dementia. Similar trends were observed considering dementia assessed by MMSE (< 13 43.6%, 14–17 47.9%, 18–22 33.2%).

Characteristics of Italian family caregivers at the national level and by geographical macro‐area, data are expressed asN(%) or mean (min–max).

Note:Missing values: Presence of other family members to rely on (37, 1.6%); hours of daily assistance (77, 3.2%); received training (38, 1.6%). P‐values shown in bold are considered statistically significant (p< 0.05).

Approximately one‐third of caregivers reported having received training, with higher percentages in the North (42.7%) than in the Centre (21.3%) and South/Islands (21.1%) (p< 0.001). No correlation was found between family caregivers' dementia care training and the presence of a formal caregiver (p= 0.228). However, relying on a formal caregiver positively correlated with having or having had contact with associations for families/caregivers of PLwD (p< 0.001).

PLwD were predominantly females (66.8%) with a mean age of 79 years (range = 45–102), mainly living at home (87.6%) (Table2).

Characteristics of PLwD and of the dementia diagnosis at the national level and by geographical macro‐area; data are expressed asN(%) or median (interquartile range—IQR).

Note:Missing values: type of dementia (26, 1.1%), Stage of disease (perceived by caregiver) (28, 1.2%), Stage of disease (MMSE) (788, 33.3%). P‐values shown in bold are considered statistically significant (p< 0.05).

Abbreviations: MCI, mild cognitive impairment; MMSE, mini mental state examination; PLwD, people living with dementia.

Median time from the last MMSE evaluation and the survey filling out was 1 year (IQR 1–2).

The median time between first symptoms and diagnosis was 12 months (IQR = 7–36) and was higher in the Centre than in the North and South/Islands (p= 0.008); a quarter of people received a diagnosis 3 years after first symptoms (Table2). A similar pattern of difference was observed in the median of the years since diagnosis (p< 0.001), which amounted to 4 years at the national level. The prevalent type of dementia was Alzheimer's disease (52.1%); the least frequent was Lewy body dementia (2.2%). A significant difference was observed in the distribution of the dementia types across the geographical macro‐areas (p< 0.001). Stage disease as perceived by caregivers was predominantly moderate (46.6%) or severe (38.8%). Moreover, based on the last MMSE score, available in two‐thirds of participants and performed in median 1 year before the survey filling out time, PLwD were predominantly in a severe stage of the disease (44.5%). Disease stages varied according to geographical distribution (p≤ 0.002) (Table2).

The physician who formulated the diagnostic suspicion was mostly a specialist physician from the national health system (53.9%), followed by a specialist physician consulted privately (28.8%) (TableS1). Similar proportions were observed in northern and central regions, whereas in the south there was a higher reliance on private physicians and a lower use of public health specialists, showing a trend towards significance. The physicians of the CCDD more frequently formulated the definitive diagnosis (49.5%), followed by another specialist from the public health system. Still, more than one‐fifth of PLwD received the diagnosis from a physician privately consulted.

The most frequent professionals who assessed the PLwD were the neurologist (76.4%) and the geriatrician (62.5%), with low involvement of other professionals (e.g., psychiatrist, speech therapist and occupational therapist), and with statistically significant differences amongst the macro‐areas (TableS1). Only over half of PLwD received care at a CCDD, with lower rates in the Central regions (p= 0.009). Only one fifth attended a Day Care Centre (DCC), with significantly lower attendance in the Southern regions (p< 0.001). A difference in the geographical distribution was also observed in the provision of other services for PLwD (e.g., integrated home assistance, palliative care) (TableS1). Moreover, those who have/had contact with associations for families/caregivers of PLwD were more likely to be in care by the services compared to those without contact (general practitioner, CCDD, and DCC:p= 0.001; integrated home assistance:p= 0.002; hospice:p= 0.043). A significant association was also found between being in care at the CCDD and being assessed by a psychologist (p< 0.001). A trend towards significance was found for the association between a lower number of diagnostic tests or investigations and the presence of an integrated care pathway for the diagnosis and care of PLwD in the area of respondents.

Nearly half of caregivers reported that their care recipient had the COVID‐19 infection (51%). More than half (64%) of caregivers reported a worsening of the care recipient's clinical condition during the pandemic, especially if PLwD had contracted COVID‐19 infection (68.5% amongst infected vs. 59.2% amongst non‐infected,p< 0.001) (Figure1). The major critical issues reported during the pandemic were the difficulty in contacting physicians (47%), in caring for PLwD at home (46%), and the closure of services (44%), although these were not reported evenly across the macro‐areas. Other difficulties were reported in making appointments (24%), in performing the swab (24%) and in finding paid caregivers (19%). Finally, more than half of respondents (58%) indicated that there was no remote care opportunity during the pandemic.

Proportion of PLwD who improved, worsened, or remained stable after the pandemic period according to Covid‐19 infection.

A small proportion of participants (22.5%) have attended an Alzheimer Café, and 44.7% have had contact with associations for families/caregivers of PLwD. Less than half of participants knew about dementia prevention, and 38.6% had a dementia‐friendly community in their territory. All these aspects were very poorly represented in the South/Islands, with significant differences compared to the other macro‐areas (TableS2). Moreover, satisfaction with dementia services was lowest in the South/Islands (56.3% negative ratings), followed by the Centre (50.7%), and highest in the North (35.5%) (Figure2).

Degree of satisfaction with services dedicated to dementia in the area.

It was also observed that as diagnostic delay increased, service rating worsened (p= 0.021). However, service rating was not correlated with the number of diagnostic tests or investigations (p= 0.206); the diagnostic delay did not correlate with the number of examinations performed (p= 0.564) either. In contrast, as the number of professionals who assessed the PLwD increased, so did the number of diagnostic tests or investigations (p< 0.001). A positive association emerged between service ratings and awareness of dementia prevention, living in a dementia‐friendly community, and reporting of having an integrated care pathway for the diagnosis and care of PLwD in their area (p< 0.001 for all).

Factors associated with a negative or very negative degree of satisfaction with services dedicated to dementia included living in the Centre or South/Islands, a higher number of hours of assistance, a severe stage of disease, a longer time from diagnosis, the presence of a formal caregiver, and having received a suspected diagnosis from a privately consulted physician (p< 0.05). In contrast, older caregiver age, having received any form of training, having a CCDD or a DCC who cared for the PLwD were associated with a lower probability of negative or very negative judgement (p< 0.01). There was a trend towards significance for the association between a time to diagnosis greater than 12 months from symptom onset and an increased probability of the outcome (Table3).

Variables associated with a negative or very negative degree of satisfaction at univariate and multivariate analysis by logistic regression.

Note:P‐values shown in bold are considered statistically significant (p< 0.05).

Abbreviation: CCDD, centre for cognitive  disorders and dementia.

From the qualitative analysis of caregivers' proposals to improve the care of PLwD in their area, some key themes emerged more frequently (Figure3). These included the need for enhanced home care and home visits (e.g., “real, efficient and continuous home services that delay the patient's placement in the facility as much as possible”), improved information services (e.g., “provide detailed information to family members about local dementia‐ dedicated services and related bureaucracy, tailored to the specific dementia‐they are not all the same and have different needs”), and increased economic support (e.g., “increase financial resources for families”). Additionally, caregivers often reported issues related to support for family members themselves (e.g., “increase health personnel dedicated to caregiver support”) and the need to simplify legislative and bureaucratic processes, which add significant burden to already difficulty family situations (e.g., “simplify bureaucratic processes, which burden family situations that are already difficult”). These themes and selected quotes form caregivers are presented in TableS3.

Key areas where caregivers suggested intervention to enhance the condition.

This national survey conducted within the context of the Italian Fund for Alzheimer's and Dementias aimed to characterise the socio‐demographic profile of PLwD and their caregivers, as well as the challenges and opportunities faced during the COVID‐19 pandemic. Furthermore, the study investigated whether socio‐demographic variables were associated with a negative or very negative degree of satisfaction with dementia services.

Consistent with previous studies reporting that caregivers are predominantly females (percentages ranging from 51.9% and 81.6%) and children of care recipients in 48.9%–71.8% of the cases [14,17,18,22,35,46,47], the majority of respondents in our survey were females and more frequently children of the PLwD. Approximately half of respondents reported cohabiting with the care recipient, occurring more commonly in the South/Islands and in the Centre of Italy. This data suggests cultural traditions and potentially limited access to external care services, emphasising the need to address regional disparities in caregiving support and resources.

More than half of caregivers declared having other family members to rely on, and only a small portion declared having a formal caregiver. Additionally, our analysis found that as dementia progresses, the use of formal caregivers increases. These variables are relevant within the factors influencing caregiver health [48]. Considering that more than half of caregivers were employed and that in Italy the economic charge of the formal caregiver is mostly borne by privates, these results are understandable. The low presence of formal caregivers aligns with previous literature showing that the proportion of households employing a formal caregiver for PLwD ranges from 25.5% to 41.1% [14,22,49], with a greater involvement of formal caregivers in severe dementia [49]. Cultural aspects may also contribute to the limited employment of formal caregivers. Qualitative evidence reported how cultural values and beliefs, including the ethnocultural context of the caregiving role, cultural and spiritual beliefs, and social norms and values, may influence and regulate caregiving obligations [50,51].

The survey revealed limited knowledge about dementia and dementia‐related services. Less than half of respondents had reached out to associations for families/caregivers for PLwD, which are important in Italy for offering psychoeducation, support, social networking opportunities, and cognitive activities for PLwD. These associations also play a crucial role in connecting families with formal care. Therefore, the low contact rate with these associations might partly explain the shortage of formal caregivers. Satisfaction with dementia services was mostly low, and caregivers suggested several areas that could be enhanced in dementia care. The most mentioned were related to home assistance, information services, and financial benefits. This finding is unfortunately not new. A previous survey of Italian caregivers, even before the COVID‐19 pandemic, found a negative perception of caregivers about the services offered by the local administration, with a strong unmet need for more information about the management of dementia and related aspects, as well as the need for more financial and material support [15]. The median time between first symptoms and diagnosis was shorter than the timeframe often reported in the literature, which tends to exceed 2 years [52,53]. However, the range reported was up to 36 months, indicating cases of considerable diagnostic delay. These delays could be due to systemic healthcare issues, such as the lack of specialist services, inadequate staff training, long waiting lists, and the lack of defined diagnostic and therapeutic pathways [52,54,55,56]. Furthermore, considering that the median time from diagnosis to survey completion was 4 years, we cannot exclude that the COVID‐19 pandemic, with its associated healthcare disruptions, negatively affected this factor.

Neurologists and geriatricians are the professionals who most frequently performed the assessments, with limited representation from other professionals, suggesting the absence of an interdisciplinary team and a stable, well‐structured organisational model. Organisational models built around interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity have the potential to identify and address the full range of needs of both PLwD and their caregivers [57]. Within such teams, the presence of all healthcare professionals is essential, as their core competencies allow for a comprehensive care process that integrates both medical and social aspects, ensuring a more holistic approach to address diverse needs [58]. Consequently, this highlights how, in Italy, the multidisciplinary organisational model not only fails to adequately address health needs but also places the entirety of healthcare responsibilities on physicians [59]. The most critical aspect, however, is that changing the organisational model requires a substantial transformation in the foundational training of all healthcare professions [60]. An interdisciplinary approach for accurate diagnosis, monitoring and individualised interventions, is also recommended by the Italian Guideline “Diagnosis and treatment of dementia and Mild Cognitive Impairment” [61].

Moreover, significant disparities in service availability across different regions of Italy emerged, with greater presences of services in the North compared to the Centre and South/Islands. This aligns with previous national surveys reporting that some services, such as CCDD [62] nursing homes [63,64], and Alzheimer's Cafés [62], would seem to be located mainly in the North of Italy. This disparity persists despite differences in the prevalence of dementia across the three Italian macro‐areas. Although Italian estimates indicate a higher prevalence of dementia cases in the North, the ratio of cases to available services still disadvantages the Centre and the South/Islands [65]. These regional disparities clearly indicate inequalities in access to care and raise questions about how regional healthcare systems can be better structured and funded to ensure adequate support for all caregivers and PLwD, regardless of their geographic location. This is further supported by the observed trend towards the significance of the difference in the number of examinations performed according to whether there was an integrated care pathway for the diagnosis and care of PLwD. Specifically, caregivers with an integrated care pathway in their area reported fewer diagnostic examinations. Since the defined integrated care pathway for the diagnosis and care of PLwD is intended to create a clear, efficient, resource‐saving pathway, this result can be interpreted as a success in this regard. A positive correlation was also found between caregivers' judgement on dementia services and the presence of an integrated care pathway or of a dementia‐friendly community, suggesting integrated health and social support systems may promote caregivers' well‐being.

The COVID‐19 lockdown in Italy has caused difficulties in accessing care services. However, challenges such as long waiting times to access public services were already present before the lockdown and may have further increased the burden as caregivers also reported a worsening of PLwD's condition during this period. Although some caregivers reported more telephone conversations with the general practitioner, most caregivers reported no benefits from the pandemic‐related healthcare changes. These findings align with previous literature indicating Italy's unpreparedness to the COVID‐19 pandemic from a socio‐health and care perspective [66]. At the pandemic's onset, Italy lacked the infrastructure to support and promote telemedicine and therefore had to respond reactively as the emergency unfolded [66], confirmed also by a national survey where less than half of CCDDs declared the availability of telemedicine [62].

It is necessary to emphasise how certain characteristics of the caregiver and services were found to be related to worse judgement on dedicated dementia services, such as living in the Centre or South/Islands, providing more hours of care, using formal help for care, prolonged illness and/or severe disease stage of care recipient, as well as having received the suspected diagnosis privately. On the other hand, having received dementia training or having used services such as DCC or CCDD seems to play a protective role. These results could be related to the effect these variables have on caregiver burden.

The survey highlights a significant gap in the availability of care and support services for PLwD, as well as a limited awareness of these services amongst caregivers. The limited knowledge is unlikely to be attributed solely to the National health system or to physicians for not providing comprehensive information. This situation underscores the need for an optimal organisational model that ensures the establishment of a comprehensive network of services, accessible and well‐integrated across all stages of the disease progression. Such a model would alleviate the disproportionate burden on caregivers whilst ensuring that PLwD receive adequate and continuous support. In line with this, according to some caregivers, the most effective model includes a well‐structured network of services for both the diagnosis and management of the disease, even in its advanced stages [14]. This should be complemented by an adequate support system that addresses care needs, with a particular focus on providing assistance in the home environment.

There are some limitations to this study. Quota sampling, being a non‐random method, may result in biassed estimates. Furthermore, since data were mostly collected via an online questionnaire, participating caregivers were more likely to have higher technological skills. These limitations together suggest that quota sampling may have selected a population with greater internet access and digital literacy, excluding persons with lower socio‐economic status, or who, for other reasons, have limited access to caregiver or professional networks, such as migrants [67]. Consequently, the sample may be unrepresentative of the population of PLwD caregivers in Italy, including those with higher socio‐economic opportunities. Moreover, the study might be affected by volunteer bias, as voluntary participation likely attracted caregivers more engaged with the topic or motivated to respond. The use of a non‐validated questionnaire represents a limitation of this study, as it may affect the reliability and validity of the data collected. Whilst efforts were made to ensure clarity and consistency of the items, the findings should be interpreted with caution, and future research should aim to validate the instrument or use already validated tools. Furthermore, caregivers' previous working or caregiving experiences, which might influence their knowledge of the dementia network and care services, were not investigated. The survey also did not differentiate between pre‐ and post‐pandemic data. These analyses could have provided more insights into the impact of the Covid‐19 pandemic on the diagnosis timeline, the pathways needed to reach a diagnosis, the services available, and the caregivers' judgement on these. Additionally, it was not possible to differentiate between professionals who evaluated the patient during the diagnostic process and those who visited the patient throughout the course of the disease, as some questions in the survey were not separated according to pre‐ or post‐diagnostic period. Finally, the qualitative part of the questionnaire included a single open‐ended question constraining the exploration of participants' perspectives and limiting the understanding of the phenomenon.

This study highlights the need for greater awareness of services dedicated to dementia, more effective implementation of integrated care pathways, and improved access to formal caregiving. The findings suggest that a more coordinated and accessible dementia care system could significantly reduce caregiver burden and improve the continuity and quality of care for PLwD in Italy. Further research is needed to address regional heterogeneity and to assess the effectiveness of integrated care pathways in supporting both caregivers and PLwD.

This work has gathered information on the sociodemographic characteristics of PLwD and their caregivers, highlighting the availability and organisation of services dedicated to dementia care, with a focus on the COVID‐19 pandemic period. It underscores the complexity of care for PLwD and their caregivers in Italy. A difference in the sociodemographic profile of caregivers emerged across Italy, along with disparity in accessibility and organisation of services amongst the three macro‐areas. Some of these variables were associated with a higher frequency of negative or very negative evaluations of services by caregivers, potentially influencing the burden they experience. Additionally, the challenges faced by the Italian social and healthcare system in managing PLwD and addressing the difficulties arising from the pandemic emergency were highlighted.

The results point to the need for a comprehensive, transdisciplinary, accessible, and well‐integrated network of services across all stages of the disease progression, aiming to alleviate the caregiver burden and enhance the quality of life and wellbeing of both PLwD and their caregivers.