Quercus, as the most abundant and widely distributed genus within the family Fagaceae, has been extensively studied at nuclear genome and plastome. However, mitogenome studies inQuercusremain scarce. In this study, we assemble and annotate the mitogenome ofQuercus gilvabased on Illumina and Nanopore data. Additionally, we explore the structural features of its mitogenome and provide comprehensive analyses of the phylogeny and evolution of Fagaceae.

TheQ. gilvamitogenome consists of four molecules (three circular molecules and one linear molecule) with 490,015 bp in total length and 45.68% in guanine-cytosine (GC) content. The mitogenome encodes 59 genes, including 37 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 19 transfer RNA genes (tRNAs), and three ribosomal RNA genes (rRNAs). We also examine the repeat sequences, codon usage bias, RNA editing sites, and endosymbiotic gene transfer in the mitogenome. The wide distribution of repeat sequences is a key factor in mitogenome rearrangement. These is widespread gene transfer among the mitogenome, plastome, and nuclear genome ofQ. gilva. Comparative genomic analyses of the 11 Fagaceae mitogenomes reveal significant structural variations in size and gene loss. Synteny analysis further indicates extensive genome rearrangements and inversions within the 11 mitogenomes. However, analyses of nucleotide diversity (Pi) and nonsynonymous and synonymous substitution ratio (Ka/Ks) values reveal a low rate of evolution in the mitogenomes of Fagaceae. Finally, phylogenetic analysis based on 12 conserved mitochondrial PCGs of 40 taxa strongly supports the classification of Fabids.

In this study, the mitogenome ofQ. gilvais newly assembled, providing important genomic resources for the phylogeny, resource conservation and development ofQuercus. At the same time, the study of structural variation among the mitogenomes of Fagaceae species also help to elucidate the formation mechanism of mitogenome structural diversity.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12870-025-07072-x.

Nuclear genome (nDNA), mitochondrial genome (mitogenome, mtDNA), and plastid genome (plastome, cpDNA) are the three independently inherited genomes in higher plants, and they exhibit different structure, function, and molecular evolutionary rate [1–3]. The evolutionary trajectories of these genomes have long fascinated many evolutionary biologists [4–7]. Unlike the biparentally inherited nuclear genome, organelle genomes (mitogenome and plastome) are uniparentally inherited with endosymbiotic origin [8–11]. Over the course of evolution, the gene content of organelle genomes has been significantly reduced, largely due to gene loss or transfer to nuclear genome [12–14]. Recent advances in sequencing technologies have opened new avenues for exploring the evolution of plant organelle genomes.

Normally, plastomes range from 120 kb to 170 kb in size and are highly conserved with stable circular and quadripartite structure that contains the core genes for photosynthesis [15–18]. In contrast, plant mitogenomes, with the core genes for respiration, exhibit extreme variability in both size (ranging from 66 kb to 12 Mb) and structural topology (master circular molecules, subgenomic circular molecules, linear molecules, and branched multigenomic structures), even among closely related species [19–23]. This variability is further complicated by the presence of highly variable intergenic spacer regions (IGS) and conserved coding sequences (CDSs) [12,24,25]. Notably, plant mitogenomes present an intriguing evolutionary paradox: while they have a remarkably low mutation rate, they exhibit a high rate of structural rearrangements, such as gene duplications, inversions, and translocations [2,26,27]. Endosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT) is a frequent phenomenon among the mitogenome, plastome, and nuclear genome in plants [28,29]. Evidence suggests that the gene transfer from plastome to mitogenome occurs in a unidirectional manner, whereas the gene transfer between nuclear genome and mitogenome is bidirectional [30,31].

Due to these complex properties, the assembly and study of mitogenomes face significant challenges. To date, over 13,000 plastomes have been fully assembled, while fewer than 1,000 plant mitogenomes have been completed [6]. To better understand the unique evolutionary features of plant mitogenomes (such as their mutation rates, structural variations, and gene transfer events) and their contributions to plant phylogeny, further studies on a larger number of mitogenomes are essential in the future.

Quercus, with approximately 450 species, is divided into two subgenera and eight Sect. [32]. Due to its high ecological adaptability,Quercushas become a widespread taxon in the Northern Hemisphere [33–35]. Recent developments in high-throughput sequencing have greatly facilitated the assembly ofQuercusgenomes. Numerous studies, focusing on the evolution of nuclear genomes and plastomes (including structure variation, population genomics, introgression, phylogenomics, and so on), have been published in the last decade [36–41]. Compared with the plentiful number of nuclear genomes (16 individuals) and plastomes (120 individuals) available forQuercus, only five mitogenomes, belonging to two sections, have been sequenced (Quercus acutissima,Q. cerris, andQ. variabilisin sectionCerris; andQ. petraeaandQ. roburin sectionQuercus) (Accessed on November 24, 2024) [42,43]. It will be interesting to explore the structural variation, mutation rate, and phylogenetic relationship ofQuercusbased on mitogenomes from different sections.

Quercus gilva, which belongs to subgenusCerrissectionCyclobalanopsis, is an endangered species with very low genetic diversity in the subtropical evergreen broad-leaved forests of East Asia [44,45]. As an important local quality timber species, its population size and number have declined dramatically in recent decades [45–47]. Recently, the nuclear genome and plastome ofQ. gilvahave been reported, providing an opportunity to compare their mutation rate and explore their gene transfer events [48–50].

In this study, we successfully assembled theQ. gilvamitogenome using Illumina short reads and Nanopore long reads, providing the first mitogenome reference forQuercussectionCyclobalanopsis. We examined the structural features of theQ. gilvamitogenome, evaluated endosymbiotic gene transfer events among the plastome, mitogenome, and nuclear genome ofQ. gilva, and explored the phylogeny and evolution ofQ. gilvaand related species within the family Fagaceae. The purpose of this study is to provide valuable genomic resources that will support future research onQuercus, particularly in the areas of species identification, conservation genetics, and evolutionary biology. Furthermore, our findings lay a theoretical foundation for understanding the role of the mitogenomes in the adaptation and speciation ofQuercusspecies, offering new perspectives on their evolutionary trajectories.

Fresh and healthy plant leaves ofQuercus gilvawere sampled from Fujian Province, China (29.94°N, 116.87°E). The voucher specimen was identified by one of the authors (Yi-Gang Song), and deposited in the Chenshan Herbarium (CSH) at Shanghai Chenshan Botanical Garden. High-quality genomic DNA was extracted from fresh leaves using the modified cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) protocol [51]. DNA quality and concentration were tested by 0.75% agarose gel electrophoresis analysis, NanoDrop One spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The genomic DNA was then randomly fragmented using the Covaris ultrasonic disruptor.

Paired-end (PE) sequencing libraries with 350 bp insert fragments were performed using the Nextera DNA Flex Library Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). The products were then subject to sequencing (each end 150 bp PE reads) on the Illumina HiSeq XTen platform. For Oxford Nanopore sequencing, the sequencing libraries were prepared using the Ligation Sequencing Kit SQK-LSK109 (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Cambridge, the UK). The purified library was loaded onto primed R9.4 Spot-On Flow Cells for sequencing using the Oxford Nanopore PromethION sequencer (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Oxford, UK) at Wuhan Benagen Tech Solutions Company Limited, Wuhan, China.

In this study, wede novoassembled and annotated organelle genomes ofQ. gilva. For the plastome, we completely assembled it by employing the “get_organelle_from_reads.py” command of the GetOrganelle v1.7.6.1 software, with the parameter “-F embplant_pt” [52]. Moreover, for the mitogenome, we tested three different assembly strategies: GetOrganelle v1.7.6.1, Unicycler v0.5.1, and GSAT v1.10 [52–54]. A rough mitogenome was initially obtained with the other parameter of “-F embplant_mt” by the GetOrganelle v1.7.6.1 software [52]. Unicycler was also used to perform hybrid assembly [53]. We then further assembled the mitogenome by the GSAT v1.10 software based on the rough mitogenome and Nanopore long reads [54]. After comparing the assembly completeness and structural consistency of the results from all three approaches, we selected the GSAT-assembled mitogenome for downstream analysis due to its higher accuracy and completeness (Fig. S1 and S2A).

Four different assembled graphs, namely OG (organelle graph), MRG (mitochondrial rough graph), MRMG (mitochondrial rough master graph), and MMG (mitochondrial master graph), were obtained through the four steps of graphShort, graphLong, graphSimplification, and graphCorrection respectively. Finally, the final mitogenome was obtained by manually checking and correcting the assembly structure with the Bandage software [55]. Minimap2 was then used to map the raw high-throughput sequencing data, including both Illumina and Nanopore reads, back to the assembled mitogenome to evaluate the coverage distribution [56].

The assembled organelle genomes were annotated using the online annotation tool GeSeq (https://chlorobox.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/geseq.html) [57]. The annotation results were manually reviewed and corrected using the Geneious R9.0.2 software [58]. The plant mitogenomes typically encode 24 core genes (including nine NADH dehydrogenase genes, five ATP synthase genes, four ubiquinol cytochrome c reductase genes, three cytochrome c oxidase genes, one cytochrome c biogenesis gene, one maturase gene, and one transport membrane protein gene) and 17 variable genes (including four large subunit of ribosome genes, eleven small subunit of ribosome genes, and two succinate dehydrogenase genes) [12]. The open reading frames (ORFs) in the mitogenome were annotated using the gene prediction tool ORF Finder (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/orffinder/) [59]. Finally, the genomic structures of the organelle genomes were plotted using the organelle genome drawing program OGDRAW (https://chlorobox.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/OGDraw.html) [60]. The organelle genome sequences and their annotations were submitted to GenBank with accession numbersPQ862789–PQ862792for the mitogenome andPQ876385for the plastome, which are scheduled for release on July 24, 2025.

Based on the sequence length, repeat sequences can be divided into three types, namely simple sequence repeats (SSRs), tandem repeat sequences (TRSs), and dispersed repeat sequences (DRSs). In this study, we analyzed these repeat sequences in the mitogenome. SSRs were detected using the MISA Perl script (http://pgrc.ipk-gatersleben.de/misa/) [61]. The thresholds of repeat units were set to 10, 5, 4, 3, 3, and 3 for the mono-, di-, tri-, tetra-, penta-, and hexanucleotides, respectively. TRSs were predicted using the Tandem Repeats Finder (TRF) web service (https://tandem.bu.edu/trf/trf.advanced.submit.html) with the following parameters: 2, 7, and 7 for matches, mismatches, and indels, respectively, and 50 and 500 for the minimum alignment score and maximum period size, respectively [62]. Finally, DRSs, including forward (F), reverse (R), complementary (C), and palindromic (P) repeat sequences, were analyzed using the REPuter web service (https://bibiserv.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de/reputer) [63]. The hamming distance and minimal repeat size were set as 3 and 30 bp, respectively. The visualization of the repeat sequences was accomplished using the “Circlize” package in R.

The protein-coding genes (PCGs) of the mitogenome were extracted using the Geneious R9.0.2 software [58]. Subsequently, twenty-eight PCG sequences, which had a length exceeding 300 bp and a start codon of ATG, were chosen for codon usage analysis by the CodonW v1.4.2 software [64]. The relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) values were calculated and drawn the stacked bar plot using the “ggplot2” package in R.

The Deepred-Mt software was used to predict potential cytosine (C) to uracil (U) RNA editing sites in the mitogenome based on the convolutional neural network (CNN) model [65]. The threshold of the probability was set to 0.9.

To identify the mitochondrial plastid transferred fragments (MTPTs) and nuclear mitochondrial transferred fragments (NUMTs) ofQ. gilva, we compared the mitogenome with the nuclear genome and plastome using the BLASTn v2.9.0 software [66]. The plastome was assembled from this study. And the nuclear genome was obtained from the previous study of Wang et al., which has been deposited in the National Genomics Data Center (NGDC) (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn) under the accession number GWHDOCW00000000, with a scheduled public release date of June 27, 2025 [48]. The mitogenome was used for building database with makeblastdb, while the nuclear genome and plastome served as query sequences with the criteria of E-value ≤ 1e − 5, identity ≥ 80%, and alignment length ≥ 50 bp. Eventually, the endosymbiotic gene transferred fragments were visualized using the “Circlize” package in R.

We downloaded all publicly available mitogenomes of ten Fagaceae species from the National Center of Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database and reannotated them to reduce potential analytical errors. We performed a gene presence-absence analysis across all species and visualized the results using a heatmap generated with the TBtools-II software [67]. BLASTn was used for pairwise comparison of the mitogenomes of these 11 Fagaceae species [66]. Homologous sequences greater than 500 bp as conserved colinear blocks were then retained for collinearity analysis and plotting using the NGenomeSyn v1.41 software [68]. Not only that, we also downloaded the corresponding plastomes of these ten species. The shared PCGs of the organelle genomes (30 of mitogenomes and 79 of plastomes) across the 11 species were aligned using the MAFFT v7.487 software [69]. These PCGs sequences were then used for nucleotide diversity analysis and Ka/Ks analysis. Nucleotide diversity (Pi) values of each PCG were calculated using the DnaSP v6.12.03 software with step size of 10 bp and window length of 100 bp [70]. Finally, the calculation of the nonsynonymous (Ka) and synonymous (Ks) substitution ratio (Ka/Ks) for each shared PCG was performed for pairwise species comparisons using the KaKs_Calculator v3.0 software [71], employing the MLWL method [72]. A gene was considered to be under positive selection if at least one pairwise comparison yielded a Ka/Ks value greater than 1.

We downloaded the mitogenomes of 38 Fabid taxa from the NCBI database, including seven Fagales species, seven Cucurbitales species, eleven Rosales species, and thirteen Fabales species, and performed phylogenetic analyses with the new assembly mitogenome ofQ. gilva(Table S1). The complete mitogenome ofArabidopsis thaliana(NC_037304) was used to root the tree as an outgroup. We extracted the CDSs of 12 shared PCGs (atp4,atp8,nad2,nad4,nad6,nad7,nad9,rps3,matR,cox3,ccmB, andccmC) from 40 species using the PhyloSuite v1.2.3 software [73]. The CDSs were aligned using the MAFFT v7.450 software with default parameters [69]. The phylogenetic tree was constructed using the maximum-likelihood (ML) method implemented in the IQ-tree v2.1.3 software with 1,000 ultrafast bootstrap replicates [74]. Finally, the phylogenetic tree was visualized and beautified in the FigTree v.1.4.4 software (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/).

Based on Illumina short reads and Nanopore long reads, we successfully assembled the master graphs of the mitogenome with the GSAT software. A total of 615.7, 482.4, and 481.1 kb sequences with 39, 27, and nine contigs and 52, 36, and 12 links were obtained from each step of OG, MRG, and MRMG, respectively (Table S2). The final MMG was 481,113 bp in length, with nine contigs and 12 links (Figure S2A and Table S2). All contigs exhibited high coverage depths, with short-read coverage ranging from 1257.14 X to 3015.83 X and long-read coverage ranging from 400.06 X to 1054.17 X (Table S3). This indicated that all contigs were strongly supported by both short and long reads, further confirming the high quality and accuracy of the mitogenome assembly. Notably, the long-read coverage depths of contig 1 (1054.17 X) and contig 3 (802.43 X) were approximately twice as high as those of the other contigs (Figure S2B and Table S3), suggesting that they likely represent large repeats with two copies.

To evaluate the homologous recombination events between subgenomes mediated by these two large repeat sequences, we systematically analyzed the possible recombination pathways in Bandage by integrating the contig graph structure and sequencing read support. After evaluating all possible pathways in the MMG, it was finally found that the mitogenome showed a complex multi-branched structure through repeat-mediated recombination (Figure S2C). Specifically, molecule 1 consists of contig 8; molecule 2 consists of contig 1 (and its repeat copy), contigs 2, 5, and 6; molecule 3 contains contigs 3, 4, and 7; and molecule 4 includes the duplicated contig 3 and contig 9 (Table1). These rearrangements reflect the dynamic nature of the mitogenome structure, which likely exists as a mixture of alternative conformations in vivo.

The mitogenome consisted of four molecules (molecules 1–4) with 490,015 bp in total length and 45.68% in guanine-cytosine (GC) content. The lengths of circular molecule 1, linear molecule 2, circular molecule 3, and circular molecule 4 were 96,997, 125,848, 133,477, and 133,693 bp, respectively, and the GC contents were 47.01, 45.19, 45.98, and 44.88%, respectively (Figure S2C and Table1).

The mitogenome annotated a total of 37 protein-coding genes (PCGs) (atp9were multi-copy), 19 transfer RNA genes (tRNAs) (trnM-CAUandtrnP-UGGwere multi-copy), and three ribosomal RNA genes (rRNAs) (Fig.1and Table2). Among the 36 unique PCGs, 24 PCGs were identified as core genes, and the other 12 PCGs were classified as variable genes. The 12 variable genes comprised four large subunits of ribosome genes, six small subunits of ribosome genes, and two succinate dehydrogenase gene. Seven genes were cut by introns:rpl2andccmFccontained a single intron,nad4harbored three introns, whilenad1,nad2,nad5, andnad7had four introns. Notably, three PCGs (nad1,nad2, andnad5) were identified as special trans-splicing genes. Detailed information on these genes was provided in Table S4. In addition, a total of 193 open reading frames (ORFs) larger than 300 bp were predicted by the ORF Finder in theQ. gilvamitogenome (Table S5).

The plastome assembled in this study was 160,757 bp in length, with a typical circular tetrad structure consisting of a large single copy (LSC) region (90,217 bp) and a small single copy (SSC) region (18,870 bp), separated by a pair of inverted repeats (IR) regions (25,835 bp). A total of 86 PCGs, 37 tRNAs and eight rRNAs were annotated in the plastome (Figure S3).

The mitogenome contained a large number of repeat sequences, with their quantity and specific distribution shown in Fig.2C. Using the MISA Perl script, a total of 20, 40, 52, and 43 SSRs were identified in the four molecules, respectively (Fig.2A and Table S6). SSRs exhibited diverse types; however, hexanucleotide repeats were not detected in any of the four molecules (Fig.2A). The tetranucleotide repeats were the most abundant, accounting for 65 loci (40.37%), followed by mono- (40, 24.84%), di- (35, 21.74%), tri- (15, 9.32%), and pentanucleotide repeats (6, 3.73%). Most SSRs were composed of two complementary bases, adenine (A) and thymine (T). Additionally, two, five, four, and five TRSs were detected in the four molecules, respectively (Fig.2A and Table S7). The copy number of these TRSs was primarily between two and four, with the size of the basic repeat units ranging from 15 to 45 bp (Table S7). Among DRSs detected by the REPuter, no reverse or complementary repeats in the four molecules, while a total of 69 forward repeats and 50 palindromic repeats were identified respectively (Fig.2A and Table S8). The lengths of DRSs were predominantly between 30 and 60 bp (Fig.2B). Statistical analysis of the distribution of all repeats showed that most were located in the intergenic spacer regions (IGS), with only a small fraction found within the gene regions (Fig.2D).

The codon usage analysis of 28 selected PCGs revealed a universal codon usage preference in the mitogenome. Among the RSCU values calculated for the 64 codons, 30 codons had RSCU values greater than 1 (Table S9). Of these, only three codons (UCC, ACC, and UUG) ended in G/C, while the remaining 27 codons ended in A/U, indicating a strong preference for A/U ending codons (Figure S4 and Table S9). Histidine (His) exhibited the strongest bias, favoring the CAU codon (RSCU = 1.51), followed by Alanine (Ala), which preferred the GCU codon (RSCU = 1.50). Additionally, the most frequently used codons in the mitogenome were UUU (Phe), AUU (Ile), UUC (Phe), and GAA (Glu), each appearing more than 250 times.

Based on the deep representation learning method (Deepred-Mt), we predicted 491 potential C to U RNA editing sites in the 36 PCGs of theQ. gilvamitogenome (Table S10). Among the PCGs,nad4had the highest number of predicted RNA editing sites, followed byccmB, while no RNA editing sites were detected inrpl2(Fig.3A). Of the 491 RNA editing sites, 461 (93.90%) sites resulted in nonsynonymous mutation, while 30 (6.10%) sites were synonymous mutation. The nonsynonymous editing events caused 12 distinct types of amino acid changes. The most frequent mutation was the replacement of serine (Ser) and proline (Pro) with leucine (Leu), occurring 112 and 105 times, respectively (Fig.3B). Furthermore, 227 (46.23%) sites converted hydrophilic amino acids into hydrophobic ones, while 50 (10.18%) reversed this trend, changing hydrophobic amino acids to hydrophilic ones. Notably, three RNA editing sites atccmFc−1315,nad1−308, andrps10−391 introduced stop codons (Arg→Ter) (Table S10).

A total of 11 MTPTs between the mitogenome and plastome ofQ. gilvawere identified by conducting sequence similarity calculations (Fig.4A and Table S11). The total length of the MTPTs was 6,512 bp, representing approximately 1.33% of the mitogenome and 4.05% of the plastome (Table S11). Among them, two MTPTs exceeded 1,000 bp in length, namely MTPT3 (1,322 bp) and MTPT7 (1,149 bp). Five MTPTs were observed to have two copies localized within the IR regions of the plastome, while the remaining MTPTs were located in the LSC region. Annotation results of the MTPTs revealed that these homologous fragments were derived from 14 plastid genes, including six complete genes (trnD-GUC,trnI-CAU,trnV-GAC,trnH-GUG,trnN-GUU,and trnM-CAU) and eight partial genes. Although all PCGs were pseudogenized, the tRNA genes retain functional roles in the mitogenome. Compared with the 11 MTPTs, we also found 1824 NUMTs between the mitogenome and nuclear genome (Fig.4B and Table S12). The matched lengths ranged from 50 to 133,698 bp (Table S12). Notably, extensive sequence transfer was observed on chromosome 5 in the nuclear genome, which encompassed nearly the entire mitogenome (Fig.4B). However, the origin of these fragments remained to be determined. Thus, these findings indicated a widespread gene transfer among the mitogenome, plastome, and nuclear genome ofQ. gilva.

The mitogenomes of eleven Fagaceae species, including five genera (Quercus,Fagus,Castanea,Castanopsis, andLithocarpus), exhibited notable structure variation. Genome sizes ranged from 349,290 bp (Q. petraea) to 592,702 bp (C. carlesii), representing a significant disparity (Table S13). The length ofQ. gilvamitogenome was the longest among the existing mitogenomes ofQuercus. In contrast, GC content varied within a narrow range of 45.5% (C. carlesii) to 46.1% (Q. petraea), indicating low variability in base composition. Additionally, during the evolutionary process, the mitogenomes had also undergone the loss of PCGs. Our results showed that a total of 30 PCGs were shared among these 11 species (Figure S5).Quercus petraeaexhibited the highest number of gene deletions, including two core genes. The number of large and small subunits of ribosome genes varied the most among all mitogenomes. More notably,rps14was unique toFagus sylvaticaand had been lost in all other species.

A synteny analysis was also conducted for these 11 species for deeper comparative insights. The results revealed a significant number of homologous collinear blocks among these Fagaceae species, alongside substantial genome rearrangements and inversions (Fig.5). Notably, the largest collinear blocks were identified betweenQ. petraeaandQ. roburwithin the same section, followed byC. mollissimaandC. henryiwithin the same genus. This suggested that closely related species were more likely to retain larger syntenic blocks.

Pi values were calculated for the PCGs shared by the 11 organelle genomes of Fagaceae, respectively, including 30 PCGs of mitogenomes and 79 PCGs of plastomes (Fig.6A and Figure S6A). On average, the Pi values of chloroplast genes were higher than those of mitochondrial genes. Moreover, the difference of Pi values of chloroplast genes was greater than that of mitochondrial genes. Therpl22andycf1in the plastome andatp1,atp9, andcox2in the mitogenome showed relatively high level of Pi values, reflecting their high sequence diversity within the family Fagaceae.

By calculating the Ka/Ks ratio of common PCGs, we compared the evolutionary rates in the organelle genomes of Fagaceae to assess the selection pressure of each PCG (Fig.6B and Figure S6B). In general, most PCGs had Ka/Ks values of less than 1 in the organelle genomes. However, there were ten chloroplast PCGs (accD,ccmA,infA,matK,nadH,petA,rpl14,rpl22,rpoC2, andycf2) and seven mitochondrial PCGs (atp6,atp9,ccmC,ccmFN,matR,nad1, andrps3) in which at least one pairwise comparison had a Ka/Ks value greater than 1, indicating potential positive selection pressure for these PCGs (Table S14 and Table S15). These PCGs with high Pi and Ka/Ks values can be used as potential markers for phylogenetic studies of Fagaceae.

In order to determine the phylogenetic position ofQ. gilva, the phylogenetic tree was reconstructed after sequence alignment based on 12 conserved mitochondrial PCGs from the selected 40 angiosperm species (Fig.7). The results showed that the bootstrap support (BS) values of most nodes in the phylogenetic tree were greater than 80, which strongly supported the divisions of the four orders of Fabids. The phylogenetic tree was consistent with the angiosperm phylogeny group IV (APG IV) and plastid phylogenomic angiosperm (PPA II) classification system. In theQuercusgenus, theQ. gilvaof sectionCyclobalanopsisin this study differentiated first at the base of the phylogenetic tree.

In this study, we successfully assembled the mitogenome ofQ. gilvaby integrating short-read and long-read sequencing data, providing valuable information for mitogenome research withinQuercusand Fagaceae. Compared to other published mitogenomes from closely related species within the family, the size, GC content and gene content of the mitogenome ofQ. gilvawere in the medium range, indicating a high level of assembly completeness and quality [42,43,75–79]. The mitogenome ofQ. gilvahad a branched structure, which was similar to that of the mitogenome ofQ. acutissima[43]. The widespread distribution of repeats in this mitogenome was likely to contribute to genome rearrangement, which was a key factor in the existence of mitogenome isoforms [80–83]. Dispersed repeat sequences were predominantly composed of forward and palindromic repeats, a pattern that was also observed in the mitogenomes ofSaposhnikovia divaricate(Apiaceae) andCalophyllum soulattri(Calophyllaceae) [84,85]. Statistical analysis revealed that most of these repeats were located in the IGS, which were generally considered hotspots for genome rearrangement. The presence of repeats within IGS likely enhanced their recombination potential, further contributing to the dynamic evolution and plasticity of mitogenomes [86].

RNA editing was widespread in the mitogenomes of higher plants, where it regulated gene expression by altering transcriptional sequences and played a crucial role in the mitogenomes [87–89]. The most common form of RNA editing was a deamination reaction that converted C to U at a specific site [90]. In this study, we predicted a total of 491 potential RNA editing sites in 36 PCGs in theQ. gilvamitogenome, all of which exhibited the conversion of C to U. These RNA editing sites were unevenly distributed among different genes, withnad4exhibiting the highest number of editing sites, followed byccmB. This distribution pattern was consistent with previous findings inQ. acutissima[43]. Furthermore, the RNA editing sites were mainly located at the second codon position, which was also observed in other plant mitogenomes [91,92]. These RNA editing sites provided valuable insights into the regulation of mitochondrial gene expression and function in plants.

Endosymbiotic gene transfer in plant cells had been recognized as a significant evolutionary mechanism, facilitating the movement of genetic material between organelle genomes and nuclear genome [6]. Three main types of EGT events were commonly observed: between mitochondrion and nucleus (NUMT), between chloroplast and nucleus (NUPT), and between mitochondrion and chloroplast (MTPT) [9]. We identified 11 MTPTs in theQ. gilvamitogenome, which included six complete chloroplast genes. MTPTs had also been reported in other angiosperms, such asIpomoea batatas(Convolvulaceae),Cannabis sativa(Cannabaceae), andPaeonia lactiflora(Paeoniaceae) [93–95]. Notably, most of the identified MTPTs were tRNA genes, which were commonly transferred between organelle genomes in angiosperms [96]. In addition to MTPTs, we also identified 1824 NUMTs in theQ. gilva, further emphasizing the widespread nature of gene transfer. Notably, extensive sequence transfer was observed on chromosome 5, which encompassed nearly the entire mitogenome.

These EGT events had profound implications for the evolution of angiosperms [94]. On the one hand, by integrating genetic fragments from one genome into another, EGT events increased genomic complexity and genetic diversity [97]. On the other hand, some transferred genes were retained and subsequently functionalized, acquiring new biological roles in the recipient genome and enhancing the plant’s adaptability to environmental changes [98]. Although the successful establishment of functional genes in the nuclear genome was relatively rare, a large number of non-functional DNA transfer events appeared to be widespread, suggesting that such gene transfers accumulated over evolutionary timescales through neutral processes [99]. Therefore, the combination of functional genomics and expression-based validation will be essential to further elucidate the specific roles of EGT events in plant adaptive evolution.

The mitogenomes of plants exhibited complex structures and remarkable diversity, which had significantly hindered the progress of mitogenome research [19,100,101]. This trend was also evident in Fagaceae, where the number of published plastomes was nearly 20 times greater than that of mitogenomes. The mitogenome size in Fagaceae ranged from 349,290 bp to 592,702 bp, highlighting the substantial size variation not only within the same family but also within the same genus [102,103]. The number of genes in the mitogenomes was also highly diverse [21,85]. However, changes in mitogenome size did not correlate with the gene number, as the genome size was primarily influenced by the accumulation of non-coding regions [104]. The number of large and small subunits of ribosome genes varied most among all mitogenomes. In addition, three rRNA genes were consistently present:rrn5,rrn18(rrnS), andrrn26(rrnL), which were essential for mitochondrial protein synthesis. These findings strengthened the understanding of mitogenome diversity in Fagaceae.

Many studies had traditionally presented plant mitogenomes as having a single circular structure [92,105,106]. However, with the advancements in sequencing technologies and assembly methods, increasing evidence had shown that mitogenomes exhibited structural polymorphism [22,107]. These structures included branching linear structures [108,109], polycyclic structures [110,111], and linear structures [112]. The mitogenome ofQ. gilvaassembled in this study also displayed a branching linear structure, consisting of three circular molecules and one linear molecule. This assembly structure was similar to that of the mitogenome ofQ. acutissima[43]. However, the mitogenomes ofF. sylvaticaandLithocarpus litseifoliusin Fagaceae were simplified circular structure [76,78]. And the mitogenomes ofCastanea mollissima,Castanopsis carlesii, andC. henryipossessed complex multi-branched structures [75,79]. These diverse structures were crucial for understanding the evolution of mitogenome architecture in Fagaceae, though the coexistence of multiple molecular structures needed further investigation.

A comprehensive genome-wide collinearity analysis of 11 Fagaceae species was performed. The results revealed the complex structural evolution of Fagaceae. The significant number of homologous syntenic blocks highlighted the conserved nature of mitogenomes, while the observed genome rearrangements and inversions underscored the dynamic evolutionary processes of genome structure. Notably, the largest syntenic blocks were identified betweenQ. petraeaandQ. roburwithin the same section, as well as betweenC. mollissimaandC. henryiwithin the same genus. These findings strongly suggested that closely related species were more likely to retain larger syntenic regions. Similar patterns had also been observed in the mitogenomes of other plant species [113,114].

We analyzed the Pi values and Ka/Ks ratios of shared PCGs in the mitogenomes and plastomes of Fagaceae, providing valuable insights into the evolution of different species [115]. The results from both analyses indicated that the evolutionary rate of plastid genes was higher than that of mitochondrial genes, highlighting the relatively lower evolutionary rate of mitogenome [2,6]. Genes exhibiting higher Pi and Ka/Ks values (Ka/Ks > 1) were likely involved in adaptive evolutionary processes within these Fagaceae species. Moreover, these genes could serve as potential molecular markers for phylogenetic studies and species identification within Fagaceae. In the mitogenome,atp9was a gene co-screened by the two analyses. The ATP9 protein played a crucial role in proton transport ATPase activity and proton transfer [116]. The evolution of this gene may influence the growth and development of Fagaceae plants.

The mitogenomes of plants exhibited a relatively slow evolutionary rate, making them valuable tools for phylogenetic studies [25]. Our phylogenetic analysis grouped the selected 40 species into distinct taxa corresponding to their respective families and orders. Furthermore, the phylogenetic tree also revealed concordance with both the APG IV and PPA II classification systems [117,118], demonstrating the reliability of using mitogenomes for constructing phylogenetic relationships. However, within theQuercusclade,Quercus gilvafrom sectionCyclobalanopsisdifferentiated first at the base, a finding that contrasted with results derived from nuclear genome (RAD-seq) and plastome [38,50,119]. The different results may be due to the lack of data on the one hand, and may be due to the serious hybridization ofQuercuson the other hand [120]. As the dominant species in the subtropical evergreen broad-leaved forests of East Asia (EBLFs), the early divergence of sectionCyclobalanopsismay also reflect ancient lineages associated with early ecological events, which provides a new evolutionary context for our mitochondrial genomics findings [121]. Therefore, in order to further explore the phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary biology of this genus, we need to sequence and analyze the mitogenomes of more species ofQuercus.

We want to thank Wuhan Benagen Technology Co., Ltd. for their help on sequencing.

Y.G. S. conceived and conceptualized the study; Y. L. analyzed the mitogenome and wrote the manuscript; S.S. Z. and Y.G. S. collected the sample; G. K. and Y.G. S. reviewed and revised the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant number 31901217), the Special Fund for Scientific Research of Shanghai Landscaping and City Appearance Administrative Bureau (grant numbers G192422, G242414, and G242416), and the Science and Technology Development Center, National Forestry and Grassland Administration (grant number KJZXSA202214).