Chondrosarcomas are rare malignancies arising from the bone, primarily from the mobile spine. Multimodal treatment is the standard of care, with surgery as a cornerstone for local control since incomplete resection is the main driving factor for progression and disease-related mortality.

Here, the authors present the case of a patient who underwent an initial subtotal resection and adjuvant proton beam radiation therapy. Subsequent salvage surgery with aggressive resection was planned in an interdisciplinary setting, resulting in complete resection without recurrence. Despite incomplete resection initially, this case represents an example for reconsidering salvage surgery in an interdisciplinary setting and center of expertise even for cases with residual tumor burden.

By highlighting the current literature and setting this clinical case in this context, the authors present a case with a 10-year long-term follow-up, showing that surgical salvage therapy is a possible treatment path with predictable surgery-related morbidity in patients with spinal chondrosarcomas.

We present the case of a 40-year-old male who was admitted in January 2011 with right-sided cervicobrachialgia, minimal restriction in arm elevation, and dysesthesia and numbness in his thumb and index and middle fingers. He reported no preexisting conditions, familial diseases, or systemic symptoms. An initial radiograph revealed a lesion at C5–6 with erosion of the spinosus process. Subsequent MRI and CT scans showed a tumorous lesion lateral to the spinosus process of C6 and C7 with intraforaminal and intraspinal spread.

Without any prior biopsy or adjuvant therapy, a subtotal resection was performed at another hospital externally in February 2011 via a dorsal approach with resection of the spinosus process of C7, laminectomy of C6, and subtotal resection of the intraspinal mass. Histopathological examination revealed a grade 2 chondrosarcoma with moderate differentiation and a low proliferation rate. Subsequent adjuvant proton-beam radiation therapy with12C heavy ions was implemented until May 2011 with a total dose of 69 Gy administered. After an initial boost of 15 Gy, percutaneous radiation therapy was administered with a total dosage of 54 Gy (2-Gy fractions, 5 sessions per week).

This adjuvant treatment resulted in minimal shrinkage of the residual lesion. One year after the initial diagnosis and 8 months after radiation therapy, imaging studies revealed a progressive cystic lesion in concordance with the recurrence of initial symptoms (Fig. 1). An interdisciplinary team consisting of oncologists, neurosurgeons, and spine surgeons proposed a radical resection with en bloc resection of C5 as well as C6, rhizotomies of the nerve roots of C5 and C6, resection of the right vertebral artery, and dural replacement. In accordance with the patient’s desire and the multidisciplinary treatment proposal, a complete resection with the rhizotomies was planned, despite the expected neurological deficits. Preoperative angiography showed no significant risk of ischemia following the planned unilateral resection of the vertebral artery. In March 2012, the three-stage surgery consisted of initial dorsal resection with dorsal release, followed by ventral release with vertebral body replacement and subsequent dorsal stabilization at the end.

Sagittal (A) and axial (B) T2-weighted and sagittal (C) and axial (D) contrast-enhanced MR images showing the progressive lesion after initial incomplete resection.

The first stage was performed via a dorsal approach in the Concorde position with the patient’s head secured in a Mayfield clamp with intraoperative neuromonitoring for wide-margin resection of the previous surgical route. Prior to microsurgical decompression and dorsal tumor release via an open-door laminoplasty, posterior stabilization with screw placement at C3 and C4 as well as C7 and T1 (Synapse, DePuy Synthes) was achieved. Dural replacement after resection of the infiltrated parts was performed and tailored with autologous fascia. Then, the vertebral artery was released on the right side with partial vertebrectomy, and an osteotomy of the left pedicle with rhizotomy of the right C6 nerve root was performed. The mobilized soft tissue was secured by placement on a temporary rod before dorsal wound closure via EpiGuard. During the beginning of ventral release via a standard Smith-Robinson approach from the right side, worsening of the motor evoked potential (MEP) and somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) signals led to a second look at the dorsal approach with hematoma evacuation due to displaced drainage and subsequent abortion of further surgical manipulation in this session. The following day, ventral release was continued with rhizotomy of the C5 nerve root on the right side and en bloc resection of the C5 and C6 vertebrae with dural repair ventrally with autologous fascia. The MEP and SEP signals remained stable throughout the procedure. The en bloc resection of C5 and C6 via the dorsal approach was achieved in the same session. During the last surgical stage in the following days, the vertebral body replacement of C5 and C6 (XPand, Globus Medical) was established and secured with ventral plating from C3 to T1 (Codman plate, DePuy Synthes) for fusion. Histopathological examination confirmed the initial diagnosis of chondrosacroma as low-grade (grade 1–2), with tumor-free margins of resection (R0) status (Figs. 2–4).

Postoperative sagittal T2-weighted (A), sagittal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (B), and axial T2-weighted (C) MR images.

Postoperative upright lateral (left) and anteroposterior (right) radiographs.

Postoperative sagittal CT scans demonstrating the correct implant position.

During the hospital stay, revision surgery and placement of a secondary external ventricular drain were necessary due to a recurrent CSF fistula. Following rehabilitation, the patient showed only minor improvement in clinical status with almost complete plegia of the right arm and mild paresis of the proximal left arm. No further adjuvant treatment was applied. Since then, the patient has been under close clinical observation and imaging follow-up. Clinically, paresis of the biceps and triceps muscles remained apparent but was mild. The patient’s dysesthesia resolved completely, and the hypesthesia persisted with mild intensity in the C5 and partly C6 dermatomes. Subsequent MRI and radiography examinations revealed no recurrence of lesions or dislocation of the implants (Fig. 5). In 2014, a dehiscence of the scar superficially to the cross connector failed to heal under conservative therapy, requiring surgical revision with a musculocutaneous flap and further spondylodesis of C3–7 with partial implant removal. Histology remained without evidence for recurrence or residuals. The healing proceeded without any anomalies. Since then, the patient has been able to clinically compensate for any deficits, returned to work, and receives regular monitoring. In 2024, a newly discovered prostate cancer was diagnosed, with no evidence of recurrence of the cervical chondrosarcoma.

The most recent lateral (A) and anteroposterior (B) radiographs obtained in 2022 and sagittal T2-weighted MR image obtained in 2024 (C).

The necessary informed consent was obtained in this study.

Chondrosarcomas are rare primary bone tumors, accounting for less than 10% of malignant spine tumors, with metastatic lesions being far more common.1Chondrosarcomas are known for being relatively radioresistant and chemoresistant; therefore, the standard of care is en bloc resection to achieve the best outcome and highest survival rate since incomplete resection is the main reason for recurrence and disease-associated death.6,7Incomplete resection has significant clinical challenges, largely due to the tumor’s inherent biological behavior.8Studies have indicated a 5-year survival rate of around 50%–60% for patients with spinal chondrosarcoma treated with adjuvant proton therapy after resection.9Amendola et al. reported that outcomes were significantly better for patients in whom clear surgical margins were achieved through en bloc resection.10Surgical strategies aiming for complete resection require careful preoperative planning, including whole spine MRI, CT, and angiography for involved vascular structures and biopsy. In case of diagnostic uncertainty, multiple biopsies have been proposed to advocate for maximal radical treatment options afterward.11Recent studies on treatment paths for primary spine tumors demonstrate the real-life situation showing a first approach in a nonspecialized center, resulting in a worse prognosis with higher rates of positive margin resections in comparison with tailored surgical treatment in high-volume centers, in concordance with results for primary malignant bone tumors in other locations.12,13With R1 resection (microscopic residual tumor), recurrence is inevitable. Depending on the extend of resection and the histological grade, adjuvant radiation therapy is recommended. Adjuvant radiation therapy is even considered for R0 resections but with a low level of evidence.2For high-grade lesions, focal radiation therapy greater than 60 Gy seems increasingly important to achieve local control.5However, radiation therapy alone has limited efficacy in controlling chondrosarcoma after incomplete resection.8The surgical management of locally recurrent chondrosarcoma in the cervical spine, especially following incomplete initial resection and adjuvant proton therapy, is highly complex.

Treatment options for recurrence are limited, and surgical strategies remain highly demanding. To date, most case series have presented follow-ups of 2–5 years, still posing the question of long-term survival for patients who underwent radical surgical strategies. In our case, there have been no signs of recurrence more than 10 years after salvage surgery and more than 13 years after the initial diagnosis. Counterbalancing the surgical challenges with aiming for complete resection, even in a setting of initial incomplete lesionectomy, should be considered in every patient.

Dr. Hansen-Algenstaedt reported royalties from Stryker and Globus Medical, and personal fees from SpineArt outside the submitted work.