Damage to the olfactory nerve, caused by aging, trauma, or neurological disorders, can lead to smell loss, negatively impacting quality of life, taste perception, safety, and emotional well-being. Currently, olfactory training, which involves exposure to aromatic odorants, is the most widely used treatment. While this method provides some benefit, it does not offer a fundamental cure. Developing an approach that directly stimulates the olfactory nerves to restore neural activity is critical for effectively addressing smell loss. This study investigates the effects of radiofrequency (RF) stimulation on the olfactory nerves in healthy individuals to evaluate its potential as a treatment for olfactory dysfunction. An RF antenna was positioned, and the specific absorption rate was verified using 3D modeling. The sensitivity of odor threshold tests with n-butanol and specific odors was assessed in a total of 28 healthy subjects, confirming olfactory nerve stimulation through electrobulbogram measurements. The average odor threshold for n-butanol in 23 subjects was 9.73 ± 2.45. RF stimulation on the olfactory nerve for 5 min at 10–20 W improved the odor threshold score to 15.88 ± 0.25, indicating enhanced sensitivity lasting up to one week. Electrical signals from olfactory nerves significantly increased after RF stimulation compared to pre-stimulation levels, consistent with results for natural odors like grapes and bananas. Unlike chemical-based treatments, RF stimulation avoids discomfort or dissipation of effects and provides sustained nerve activation. These findings demonstrate the potential of RF technology for olfactory training and as a novel treatment for olfactory dysfunction, as well as applications in maintaining odor sensitivity for professionals.

In the brain, olfactory sensory neurons (olfactory receptor cells) are located in the olfactory epithelium. Olfactory signals are transmitted to the brain through the olfactory nerve, passing through the cribriform plate of the skull. As these neurons are deeply embedded within the skull, it is challenging to directly stimulate them using external electrical stimulation. General stimulation methods, such as transcranial direct current and alternating current stimulation (tDCS and tACS, respectively), which involve electrodes placed on the skin surface, face significant challenges in terms of skull penetration to effectively reach deeper brain structures, such as the olfactory nerve. The skull and surrounding tissues act as barriers that diffuse and weaken electrical currents, making it difficult for these noninvasive techniques to directly stimulate areas deep within the brain, including the olfactory system. Radiofrequency (RF) technology has played a pivotal role in advancements in wireless communication and medical technologies because of its ability to penetrate various materials, including human tissues and bones, owing to its long wavelength and radiation properties.18–20In medical applications, RF waves can be used in non-contact techniques to penetrate the body, as observed in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines, where RFs are critical for imaging soft tissues. Previous studies have explored the potential of RFs to stimulate specific neurons for therapeutic or diagnostic purpose.21–29This is based on the principle that RF waves, when absorbed by biological tissues, cause molecules, particularly those with specific polarities, to vibrate. This vibration can generate thermal effects or other forms of energy transfer, potentially modulating neural activity.30–34This opens new possibilities for noninvasive brain stimulation techniques that can penetrate deeper brain regions, such as the olfactory nerve, more effectively than traditional methods, such as tDCS or tACS.10,11,30,35–38This RF property is promising for future advancements in neuromodulation and offers new avenues for therapeutic interventions targeting deeper brain structures. In this study, the effects of RF stimulation on olfactory neurons and its impact on odor sensitivity in humans were investigated. Remarkably, RF stimulation of the olfactory nerve for 5 min at powers ranging between 10 and 20 W resulted in a near-perfect odor threshold test score of 15.88 ± 0.25, indicating lowest concentration detection, compared to the 9.73 ± 2.45 score without RF stimulation. This enhanced odor sensitivity was sustained for up to one week after a single treatment session. Based on these findings, it can be concluded that RF stimulation has great potential for olfactory dysfunction treatment and management.

(a) Radio frequency (RF) waves can penetrate the human body, unlike other electromagnetic waves such as infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, and x rays. (b) Schematic illustration showing how RF stimulation modulates olfactory nerve activity. In the normal state, odorants activate the olfactory bulb through natural signaling pathways. Under RF entrainment, external RF stimulation penetrates the frontal bone and either directly activates olfactory nerves or enhances synaptic transmission, thereby improving olfactory threshold sensitivity.

Figure 2presents the validation of the safety of RF stimulation applied to the olfactory nerve. As shown inFig. 2(a), a parameterized human 3D model demonstrates that 2.45-GHz RF stimulation effectively targets the olfactory nerves from a distance of 10 cm between the forehead and the vertically aligned patch antenna. At this distance, the gain reached 0.4 in the region around the nasal cavity, where the olfactory nerves are located (red dotted line), with a maximum gain of 0.8. The verifications of the antenna are presented insupplementary materialFig. 1.Figure 2(b)shows the specific absorption rate (SAR) simulation results for safety validation. Additionally, we observed that the skin temperature at the stimulated position remained stable for over 5 min at 15 W, indicating no significant overheating risk or thermal effects from the electromagnetic field [Fig. 2(c)].

Validation of the safety RF stimulation to the olfactory nerve. (a) Simulated 3D radiation pattern of the antenna on a 3D head model located between the eyebrows. (b) SAR simulation results at different power levels. (c) Changes in skin temperature over time during RF stimulation. 15 W power was used, with n = 5.

As shown inFigs. 3(a)and3(b), the total power in the 30–100-Hz spectrogram frequency range in the olfactory nerves after RF stimulation is considerably higher compared to the resting state prior to stimulation. The spectrograms reveal that a faint, short vertical line observed in the resting state transformed into a long vertical line with higher power during stimulation, indicating that RF stimulation enhanced the olfactory nerve activation across the 30–100-Hz frequency range. This increase is also in the quantified power spectral density (PSD) [Fig. 3(b)].Figure 3(c)presents the S-parameter measurement results, demonstrating that the antenna operates normally even in the presence of a head.

Validation of the feasibility of olfactory nerve activation by RF stimulation. (a) 2-s time-frequency spectrogram (b) and power spectral density (PSD) of the olfactory response before and during stimulation. The PSD significantly increased across all frequency bands during RF stimulation (p < 0.0001). (c) Measured reflection coefficients of patch antenna with (red) and without (blue) the real head and linear scale electric field distribution of the patch antenna used in this study at 2.45 GHz.

The odor threshold is the minimum concentration of a substance detectable by the human sense of smell. This value can vary significantly according to the sensitivity of each individual. The odor threshold is determined through experimental testing with a group of individuals to determine the lowest concentration at which the majority can reliably detect an odor. As shown inFig. 4(a), the average odor (n-butanol) threshold of the 23 subjects for the odors diluted in 16 stages is 9.73 ± 2.45. Surprisingly, RF stimulation of the olfactory nerves for 5 min at powers ranging between 10 and 20 W resulted in a perfect odor threshold test score of 15.88 ± 0.25, indicating lowest concentration detection. When the stimulation duration was reduced to 1 min, subjects scored approximately 12.30 ± 2.55 on the odor threshold test, while durations of 5 min or longer resulted in a perfect score of 15.83 ± 0.31 [Fig. 4(b)]. Furthermore, we investigated the enhanced odor threshold duration following stimulation. Interestingly, the improvement in olfactory function resulting from stimulation was sustained for up to one week after a single treatment session [Fig. 4(c)]. The results of the randomized sham-controlled experiment for placebo effect validation are presented insupplementary materialFig. 3. Therefore, these results suggest that RF stimulation effectively enhances the sensitivity of the olfactory nerves and that this effect can be sustained over the long term.

Optimization of the RF stimulation method for olfactory threshold improvement. (a) Changes in olfactory threshold ability for a single VOC (n-butanol) according to stimulation power. The baseline score is a mean of 9.73 ± 2.45 points, and all t-test values contrasted to the baseline exhibit a p value of <0.0001, except for those at 5 W (p = 0.0002, n = 23). There was no significant difference only between 15 and 20 W. The stimulation time was fixed at 5 min. (b) Changes in olfactory threshold ability for a single VOC (n-butanol) according to stimulation time. The baseline score is a mean of 9.95 ± 2.23 points, and all t-test values contrasted to the baseline exhibit a p value of <0.0001, except for those for 1 min (p = 0.0023, n = 23). There was no significant difference only between 5 and 10 min. The stimulation power was fixed at 15 W. (c) Enhanced olfactory threshold duration after stimulation. The t-test values consistently exhibit p values of <0.0001, except from day 7 (p = 0.0053, n = 5), after which the p-value increased, and day 10, after which the significant difference disappeared.

Furthermore, we assessed the electrical responses of olfactory neurons to n-butanol after RF stimulation. To visualize the electrical changes in olfactory responses, spectrograms from all trials were recorded before and after stimulation [Fig. 5(a)]. The power spectrograms following RF stimulation show higher power intensity across the frequency range, indicating a stronger odor response. The electrical response intensity during the 1 s after RF stimulation is significantly greater across all frequency bands, based on 20 odor reaction trials.Figure 5(b)shows statistically significant areas when comparing the electrical response differences before and after RF stimulation. Considering the odor response time to olfactory neurons within 0.1–0.15 s,39our findings support that RF stimulation enhances olfactory neuron sensitivity, enabling a higher sensitivity response to odors.

Verification of the olfactory threshold improvement ability through RF stimulation. (a) 1-s time–frequency spectrogram and mean power spectral density of the response to n-butanol before and after stimulation. The response to n-butanol after stimulation was, on average, 29.45% higher than before stimulation (p = 0.0005, n = 23). (b) Spectrogram in which the t-test results contrasting the pre- and post-stimulation response power exhibit a t-value of 2.0 or higher.

As odors consist of complex mixtures of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), we further investigated the effect of RF stimulation on specific VOCs, such as grape, banana, and apple odors.Figure 6shows the olfactory threshold changes in response to the grape, banana, and apple odors before and after RF stimulation. All subjects exhibited improved sensitivity to the tested odors after RF stimulation. Altogether, these findings suggest that RF-stimulated olfactory neurons contribute to increased sensitivity to odorants in humans. Additional details of participant, skin temperature measurement, odor threshold test, RF stimulation, olfactory bulb (OB) response recording, and data analysis are described in thesupplementary material. Consequently, odor sensitivity to grape, banana, and apple odors significantly increased in the RF-stimulated group compared to baseline levels. Overall, these findings suggest that RF-stimulated olfactory neurons enhance sensitivity to odorants in humans.

Verification of the olfactory threshold improvement ability through RF stimulation using three types of natural composite VOCs. Changes in subjects' olfactory perception according to odor type. The t-test results exhibit the whole p-values of <0.0001 with n = 23.

In conclusion, we pioneered the development of a noninvasive method for olfactory nerve stimulation using RF. These nerves are deeply embedded within the skull and are challenging to stimulate directly using external electrical stimulation. In clinical applications, noninvasive stimulation could potentially offer new treatment options for conditions involving olfactory dysfunction, such as anosmia (loss of smell), or even broader neurological conditions that affect sensory processing. This could also be explored for its potential use in neurorehabilitation.

Decreased odor sensitivity is a primary indicator of olfactory dysfunction, often resulting from diminished olfactory neuronal function due to aging, trauma, degenerative diseases, or infections.40Enhancing odor sensitivity has been challenging because it necessitates a direct improvement in olfactory cell function. Currently, chemical therapy using aromas derived from herbs is employed in clinics for olfactory training, in which individuals sniff these odors to enhance their olfactory function. Compared to chemical stimulation, RF stimulation allows for precise control over olfactory nerve stimulation, providing targeted therapy for specific neural pathways. Furthermore, this stimulation provides direct real-time responses from the nerves, allowing for immediate assessment and adjustment of the treatment effectiveness. In particular, RF stimulation is noninvasive and can be safely applied through the skin to target nerves without the need for surgical procedures. Unlike aromatic scents, which can cause allergic reactions or discomfort in some patients,41–43RF stimulation minimizes these risks by delivering physical stimulation without the use of chemicals. Aromatic scents can evaporate or diminish over time; however, RF stimulation provides consistent and sustained stimulation. These advantages make electrical stimulation a potentially more effective and reliable method for the treatment of olfactory disorders.

RF stimulation resulted in a near-perfect score in the odor threshold test, indicating lowest concentration detection. This effect is attributed to the enhanced olfactory neuron sensitivity to RF stimulation. In fact, it is well known that RF can penetrate the human body and transfer some of its energy to biological tissues, ultimately increasing neuronal excitability and synaptic transmission.34Figures 3(a)and5(a)support the finding of increased olfactory sensory neuron sensitivity to RF stimulation. In general, olfactory dysfunction is evaluated based on three main functions: odor threshold (sensitivity), discrimination (the ability to differentiate between various smells), and identification (the ability to recognize and name specific odors). Because healthy individuals typically exhibit normal odor discrimination and identification, the present study focused solely on changes in odor threshold following RF stimulation. Furthermore, as only a single stimulation session was applied, the effects of long-term or repeated RF stimulation were not examined in this study. To address these limitations and explore the full therapeutic potential of RF stimulation, future studies will need to investigate both the short- and long-term effects of repeated stimulation in individuals with olfactory dysfunction, such as post-viral anosmia or neurodegenerative conditions. This will be particularly important for evaluating whether repeated RF exposure induces neural habituation, desensitization, or, conversely, promotes beneficial plasticity and recovery of olfactory function. Given that many electroceutical interventions operate through mechanisms of neuroplastic modulation, assessing these long-term outcomes will be essential for clinical translation. Importantly, increasing the generalizability of RF stimulation by including diverse patient populations will help establish its broader therapeutic applicability. Beyond its use in treating olfactory disorders, this non-contact RF stimulation platform could also be leveraged to enhance olfactory sensitivity in professionals working in odor-critical fields, such as perfumers, sommeliers, and coffee tasters. In summary, this study demonstrates that non-contact RF stimulation can directly activate the olfactory nerve and improve odor detection thresholds in healthy individuals. By establishing the feasibility and efficacy of this approach, our findings lay the groundwork for future clinical applications aimed at restoring or enhancing olfactory function.

We conducted a single-blinded, sham-controlled, single-center clinical trial. A total of 28 healthy nonsmoking Korean subjects (21 males and 7 females) participated in this study [age range: 22–37 years; average age: 26.32 years; standard deviation (SD): 3.30 years]. All participants had normal olfactory function and no history of neurological disorders, respiratory diseases, or any other serious illnesses that could have affected the experimental results. The participants were instructed to refrain from consuming beverages other than food and water for 2 h before the experiment and not to use any fragrant products on the day of the experiment. A detailed explanation of the experimental procedure was provided to each participant who signed a written consent form prior to the experiment. This study was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Hanyang University (HYUIRB-202409-001).

In a sealed room at room temperature, a participant with normal body temperature was fitted with a head strap attached to an antenna and subjected to RF stimulation at a power of 15 W for 5 min. The forehead skin temperature was measured using a thermal imaging camera starting prior to the stimulation until 5 min afterward. The extent of heat generated by the electromagnetic waves was determined based on the average forehead skin temperature.

The odor threshold test was conducted using the Korean version of the Sniffin' Sticks Test-II (KVSS-II, Kwangwoo MeDix Inc., South Korea). The experiment consisted of 16 pens prepared by diluting n-butanol to a maximum concentration of 4% in a 1:2 ratio. The VOCs shown inFig. 6were prepared at the same concentration; however, instead of n-butanol, three types of natural fruit flavors (EM906/A, EM-907, and EM-16B173, esfood, South Korea) were used. The examiner wore gloves and the subject wore a sleep mask and a head strap with the antenna attached before starting the experiment. First, the subjects were familiarized with the smell of the first pen, which had the highest concentration. Approximately 3 min later, the test begins with the 16th pen, which had the lowest concentration. Each subject was asked to identify a pen containing butanol by sniffing three pens selected at random. If the subject failed to choose a pen containing butanol and selected a pen containing only the solvent, the test proceeded to a pen with two steps higher in the concentration scale. If the subject correctly identified the pen containing butanol twice in a row, the test was continued with a pen one-step lower in the concentration scale. This process continued until seven transition points were reached and the average score from the last four transition points was recorded as the olfactory threshold score. Both during the baseline measurements and the RF stimulation measurements, participants were blinded to whether the stimulator was on, ensuring they maintained a blinded condition.

For RF stimulation, a 5 × 5 cm2PCB patch antenna was used each time, and a head strap that could secure the antenna was made using a 3D printer. The antenna was placed 10 cm away from the participant's forehead. The RF signal was continuous without pulses at 2.45 GHz. In the POWER experiment, power levels of 5, 10, 15, and 20 W were used, while all other experiments were conducted at a fixed power of 15 W. During the Treatment Time experiment, stimulation was given for 1, 5, and 10 min, with all other experiments using a fixed stimulation time of 5 min. In all RF stimulation sessions, participants were blinded to the power and stimulation time. Additionally, the order of stimulation time and power levels was randomized.

To record the olfactory nerve (OB) response to stimulation, four active electrodes were attached around the participants' eyebrows according to previously reported methods.39,44–47During OB response data recording, the participants sat in a comfortable chair with their eyes closed and were instructed not to move their heads or bodies. The OB response signals were recorded in a sealed room with purified air and odor elimination using an electroencephalogram (EEG) acquisition system (actiCHamp 32ch, Brain Vision, USA) while the participants smelled or received RF stimulation. Reference and ground electrodes were placed behind the right and left ears, respectively. The EEG signals were sampled at 100 000 Hz. This sampling rate is the highest rate provided by the software, and it was chosen to minimize signal distortion and preserve oscillation signal that could be induced by RF stimulation. A bandpass filter with cutoff frequencies of 0.531 and 100 Hz, along with a 60-Hz notch filter, was applied.

All OB potential data obtained in this study were quantified and visualized using Python and MNE. The data sampled at 100 000 Hz were resampled at 200 Hz, and the olfactory response to n-butanol was limited to 1 s. The data limited to 1 s were visualized as a spectrogram representing a range of 25–105 Hz, and the average power spectral density was calculated. For comparison between no RF treatment and after RF treatment cases in terms of OB response, only sections with at-value greater than 1.5 were represented in thet-test results. All results are shown as means ± SD. The unpaired two-tailed Student'st-test was used to determine statistical differences between two means. Statistical significance was accepted atpvalues of*< 0.05,**< 0.01, and***< 0.001.

See thesupplementary materialfor additional figures.

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grants (RS-2023-00302751 and RS-2025-00560524) and by the Commercialization Promotion Agency for R&D Outcomes (COMPA) Grant (RS-2025-02311678), which are funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (MIST) of the Korean government.

Junsoo Bok and Eun-Seong Kim contributed equally to this work.

Junsoo Bok:Conceptualization (equal); Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Methodology (equal); Writing – original draft (equal).Eun-Seong Kim:Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Methodology (equal).Juchan Ha:Investigation (equal); Methodology (equal); Validation (equal).Dong-Min Lee:Investigation (equal); Methodology (equal).Bum Ju Ahn:Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal).Sang Won Lee:Methodology (equal); Writing – review & editing (equal).Seok Hyun Cho:Methodology (equal); Writing – review & editing (equal).Nam Young Kim:Project administration (equal); Resources (equal); Writing – review & editing (equal).Yongwoo Jang:Conceptualization (equal); Funding acquisition (equal); Project administration (equal); Resources (equal); Supervision (equal); Writing – review & editing (equal).