A longitudinal design was chosen to capture the changes in nurses’ thoughts about themselves as professionals and their clinical work during COVID-19 after the World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a global pandemic on March 11, 2020 (Cucinotta and Vanelli, Acta Biomed 91(1):157–60, 2020 [1]). The research team wondered how a large American suburban medical center staff was dealing with this virus and if there were changing patterns in the experiences and thoughts of clinical nurses as the virus evolved in 2020–2021. We applied the 18th Century philosophy of Immanuel Kant writings on moral thinking to examine the nurses’ thoughts of continuing their clinical work during this time. Using a classic Western philosopher seemed relevant given the worldwide nature of the pandemic which affected everyone, not just health care workers. Interview questions from the literature and research team experiences were developed; an additional file provides details of the interview schedule in English (See Additional file1for the interview schedule). Forty-one RNs agreed to participate; each nurse agreed to three interviews over three phases. The first phase occurred from April through November 2020 with 41 RNs participating. Thirty-five RNs from the original 41 returned for a second interview between November 2020 through April 2021. In the final phase the same 35 RNs took part in a final interview between April 2021 and July 2021. We asked the same questions to all nurses during each phase. Similar quotations were grouped into 42 codes, then like codes were collected into five themes: Exposure risk, Professional Self-Image, Communication, Community Reaction and Finding an Emotional Balance. These themes provided a context for describing the ethos of nurses working with pandemic patients.

These nurses put the needs of the greater community before their personal desires. They came to work every day because they believed that they had essential knowledge and skills to help in the pandemic. Despite the realization that many of their patients would die, the nurses adapted their skills within strict isolation protocols. Their greatest stress was infecting their families, a misfortune that did not happen. Effective leadership and the camaraderie that developed among the nurses and other staff sustained them during this time. Interview quotations seemed to mirror interviews conducted by one team researcher on military nurses who served in Vietnam (1962–1975). Comparing these citations suggests that the personal danger, inability to save people and an overwhelming number of patients that taxed resources were similar to veteran and civilian nurses.

The 35 clinical nurses in this study worked through the initial fifteen months of COVID-19 pandemic in America. Kant’s idea of duty for the greater good over personal needs provided an explanation and rationale why the 35 clinical nurses remained in clinical work. Reviewing the transcripts indicated that there seemed to be parallels between nurses’ clinical experiences in the Vietnam War and the COVID-19. Their experience indicated that planning for future disasters is imprecise. Knowledge gleaned from this study suggests that a combination of external factors and personal assets should provide the support for nurses and other health care workers in future plagues.

This study was registered retrospectively on ClinicalTrials.govNCT06012539on August 23, 2023.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12912-025-03628-2.

In early 2020 as COVID-19 admissions and deaths skyrocketed, the Center for Disease Control (CDC) published an article advising American hospital leaders to prepare for a virus that would strain bed capacity, supplies and personnel [2]. The World Health Organization (WHO) warned countries that viral transmission knowledge would continue to evolve but mortality and morbidity could be reduced with early diagnosis and quality care [3]. China, Thailand, Japan, and Korea were the first nations to report cases [4]. The CDC reported the first confirmed American case on January 18th 2020 [4].

The study site was a 700 + bed non-profit, tertiary suburban medical center in Northern New Jersey, USA, where 1600 registered nurses worked. Medical center administrators prepared an internal playbook on treatments and isolation policies that were communicated to staff on all units [5]. These administrators regularly reported census, mortality and morbidity rates to State leaders. The figures from the first eight weeks of the pandemic at the medical center during March-April 2020 illustrated the widespread seriousness of the virus: 879 COVID-19 admissions with 232 deaths and 647 patients surviving [6].

On March 5th 2020, physicians at the study site admitted the first adult with a COVID-19 diagnosis. Four weeks later the hospital had 287 patients with COVID-19 and 95 deaths [6]. Clinical nurses had to follow untested protocols to help them care for very sick patients. We began the study interviews in April 2020 with the goal of obtaining nurses real-time thoughts and behaviors at the onset of the pandemic; at a later time as treatments and vaccines were being developed and final interviews a year later as the virus became entrenched in daily life. The two aims of the study were to examine nurses’ thoughts about caring for patients with COVID-19 over 15 months and to explore why most of these professionals remained at their positions while other nurses left, often citing COVID-19 as a reason [7,8]. This new knowledge might support both clinical nurses and nurse managers when faced with future unsafe or challenging times (e.g. pandemics, disasters).

A longitudinal design was chosen with the aim of capturing the changes in nurses’ thoughts about themselves as professionals and their clinical work as the COVID-19 pandemic shattered everyday living (emn, mok, rs, cj, ws). Across the study phases, we incorporated questions about the nurses’ coping strategies and the impact of those strategies on their decisions to remain at work.

Two team members conducted all interviews (rs, mok). The first interviews occurred from June through November 2020 and focused on the nurses’ ability to provide care during the March-April surge. The second interviews occurred from December 2020 through April 2021. We reviewed their comments from the first interview and added questions about the new COVID-19 vaccines and the impact on their work and lives. The third interviews, which took place from April 2021 until August 2021, focused on their thoughts about COVID-19 becoming part of their daily routine. We also talked about what they learned about working in a disaster, and advice they would share with other nurses about working during the pandemic.

Atlantic Health System Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved how the sample was obtained and protected. The team aimed for a diverse group of nurses who would present a range of responses to our questions. Participants were registered nurses who provided direct care to adult patients with COVID-19 for at least 12 h between March 23-April 23, 2020. After IRB approval, the team obtained a list of nurses who provided this direct care and then randomized the names based on the usual clinical area worked. This list was confidential and kept on a secure website. Nurses on the list were approached in the order of randomization. The team contacted eighty-five nurses (mok). Forty-four did not respond to multiple calls or emails from team members (rs, mok, ws). The sample was reviewed for demographic variables: gender, years of experience, age, day shift/night shift, clinical area worked and race/ethnic background. The sample was complete when there were consenting nurses representing each demographic variable. Names were not linked to transcripts, rather numbers were used. We did obtain a diverse sample of 41 nurses (See Table1). Participants agreed to take part in three interviews which would take place over a year. However, six RNs did not participate in Phases Two and Three. The six who did not participate either left to work at another facility (n= 1), stated they were too busy (n= 1) or never responded to at least three attempts at contact (n= 4). Thirty-five nurses remained in the study and completed the three interviews.

Atlantic Health System Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved the study’s written consent form and research protocol (IRB clinical trial number 1605198). This study was registered retrospectively with clinicaltrial.gov (NCT06012539) on August 23, 2023. We obtained informed written consent from all participants prior to starting the interviews.

We assumed every nurse in the study would experience some level of distress recounting prior pandemic events while still caring for patients with COVID-19. During the consent process, investigators emphasized that the interviews could be ended at any time, an option no one requested. Written consent for an interview, recording, and consent to publish were obtained from all participants and stored in a secure website prior to the individual’s first interview (mok, rs, ws). At the end of each interview, the interviewer gave each nurse a list of names and phone numbers of hospital, national and veterans mental health resources. At subsequent interviews we asked about any resources they used and how effective each nurse felt this support was.

Two team members (rs, mok) conducted all the interviews for consistency. These repeated conversations over fifteen months helped build rapport with the participants. Other measures used to improve study credibility included a triangulation of sources, peer review, prolonged time in the field and member checking. We triangulated each nurse’s three interviews and field notes to enhance accuracy. For peer review, our team met every Friday afternoon via Teams software to review codes, issues and progress. At the start of Phases Two and Three, the interviewers and nurses reviewed the previous conversations for agreement, corrections and amplifications.

The interviews took place in a hospital private office where nurses could sit six feet apart to avoid wearing masks during the conversation. One nurse participant chose to remain masked during a Phase One interview; the other nurses and the interviewers remained maskless. After each interview, the room was sanitized. The average interview was 45 min with a range from 30 to 90 min. We audio recorded all the interviews and stored them on a secure website. A professional transcriptionist transcribed all recordings.

We used ATLAS.ti v9 software to code the transcripts [9]. No artificial intelligence was used; coding was done by the researchers (emn, mok, rs, cj, ws). An additional file shows codes and themes in more detail [see Additional file2]. One team member, who did not interview (emn), read and recoded eight transcripts from each study phase to check the reliability of the initial coding, a process called intercoder agreement (ICA), twenty-four transcripts in total. She used the percentage of agreement of applied codes between herself and another interviewer to determine an ICA. The results were: Phase One overall agreement was 90% for 38 codes with a range of 86–94%; Phase Two overall agreement was 87% for 41 codes with a range of 82–94%; Phase Three overall agreement was 92% for 42 codes and a range of 90–97%. The combined ICA for all phases was 87%. Experts in these methods recommend an agreement of at least 80% for credibility [10].

All interviews have been edited for concision and clarity by the authors.

The medical center’s morbidity and mortality figures from the first eight weeks of the pandemic in March-April 2020 illustrated the catastrophe, highlighted by the life-threatening nature of the virus: 879 COVID-19 admissions with 232 deaths and 647 patients surviving [6]. Study participants spoke of the changes that occurred as the hospital census and mortality rates rose. Emergency department (ED) staff practiced putting on protective gear (PPE) and moving infectious patients. Facility teams erected barriers to create a segregated bed annex in the Medical Intensive Care Unit (MICU) with its own medication dispensing cabinet. Nurse leaders created a COVID-19 resource book to be distributed to every unit. Pharmacists reviewed drug protocols, and an engineering team evaluated a nearby decommissioned hospital about a mile away as a location for hospice patients.

Starting March 11th,2020, no visitors were allowed into the hospital buildings [11]. Two weeks later, the Governor directed all hospital directors in the state to close surgical units and restrict surgeries only to urgent non-elective cases like brain aneurysms [12]. Hospital administrators designated critical care units and medical units for patients with the virus. Nurses were reassigned to COVID-19 units to reinforce staffing [11].

In March 2020, the staff began to use a new argot with words like “Donner,” a team member who checked that Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) was put on correctly, and a “Doffer,” a team member who checked that PPE was removed in the correct order [11]. Nursing leaders posted daily staff assignments in text messages, emails, phone calls or on a list of names posted at the entrance to a parking garage. Workers drilled holes through hallway walls into patient rooms. Nurses could then administer intravenous medications, hydration, and nutrition through these holes to the bedside without entering the room. Hospital carpenters cut openings and inserted glass into patient room doors [11]. Outside of each room a sticky mat was placed to capture particles on shoes.

The fear of catching the virus and bringing it home was ever-present. Participant #34 recalled a ventilator’s contaminated effluent spilling while turning a patient. He kept checking himself for symptoms. After ten days, he told himself he was ‘good’ but shaken as he returned to work.

A year after the pandemic began, the American Nurses Association released news that more than 500 nurses had died from the virus;Beckers Hospital Reviewjournal reported that this first year, 32 per cent of all known healthcare worker deaths from COVID-19 were nurses [13,14]. Five of the 41 nurses in this study contracted COVID-19 during the data collection phase. They quarantined at home. All returned to the hospital and continued to care for viral patients, saying that experiencing the symptoms made them more understanding of patient’s fears.

Are you going to be taking direct care of patients or were you going to be assisting? It felt like you got thrown to the wolves. I didn’t know if I was ready to deal with something like that professionally.

Every nurse said the pandemic changed the way they practiced. They realized that it took 30 min to don their PPE. A hospital-wide practice limited time in isolation rooms, care was clustered, a change from pre-pandemic times when each nurse determined how much time they would need. Now, they could not get to know their patients. They had baths, feeding and other tasks to do in less than an hour. These constraints were difficult for staff who were used to touching, talking to patients and getting their work finished. They had to become more efficient.

Good moments happened, especially when patients went home. As discharged patients climbed into wheelchairs, unit staff lined the hallways and clapped. When they neared the hospital entrance, the hospital speakers played the Beatles’ song, “Here Comes the Sun©” [15]. One nurse said the music also sent a message “We are making progress. We are winning a ‘war’.” (Participant #38).

Once the iPads®with visual software arrived, families could see their relatives. The devices delivered relief to families who could then see and speak with patients, but they also brought heartbreak especially when families cried and said their final goodbyes.

“You get a small glimpse that they once had a life and a family,” Participant #10.

I did not realize that my caring for patients with COVID-19 was so hard on my family. My daughter wrote a paper about COVID-19 and me working. One evening we were sitting outside talking about things. I wanted to talk about what would happen if I got COVID-19, if I got sick, or worse. My children said, we “don’t want to hear it.” For them, speaking about it made it real.

The outpouring of local community support made the staff realize people appreciated what the staff was doing. Strangers delivered restaurant meals, pizza, Girl Scout cookies®, and homemade meals. On St. Patricks’ Day 2020, revelers drove parade cars and fire trucks while bagpipers marched around the traffic circle at the front of the hospital. Staff stood at the windows and waved.

Thank you all in emergency for saving my wife’s life. I love you all.

I went to get baskets for my kids. A woman at the counter said that this virus was all a farce; like a Democrat hoax or something. I lost myself. I screamed at the woman. I told her that I had watched several people die that week. How could she ever say such a thing? She turned around and yelled back, ‘Thank you for your service.’ I was so mad and shouted back, ‘How dare you say this.’ I just wanted to leave. When I got to the counter to pay for the baskets, the young man at the register said, ‘Thank you for saying something, because I have to deal with that all day and my mom doesn’t want me to work here.’ I replied to him, ‘Yeah, I get it. If I were your mom, I wouldn’t want you to work here either.’ He was like, 16.

The demands of working began to take a toll. Nurses talked about finding some activity, like a thirty-minute workout, which made them feel better. If they didn’t take time for themselves, they felt they were just sleeping and working.

Strong friendships developed among the staff; a camaraderie shaped by a virus and daily sorrow.

One day, a novice nurse watched her first patient die and felt she needed to get away. Her preceptor took over the postmortem care which allowed this novice to regroup and return to work.

I went home and sobbed; but you know, I went back to work the next day.

We conducted second interviews with 35 RNs from the original 41. These interviews began during a surge of 380 COVID-19 admissions and 59 deaths from mid-November to mid-December 2020. This phase ended four months later, in April 2021, when the four-week census was 54 admissions and five deaths [6]. The fluctuating virus rates, and the introduction of vaccines led to the decision to place two COVID-19 patients in the same semi-private hospital room. On May 26, 2020, the Governor re-opened the operating rooms for all surgeries [16].

But the reality of caring for COVID-19 patients seemed relentless.

They recalled the fear they felt six months ago. Now, protocols based on experience and research gave them confidence.

But their overall sense of satisfaction with their clinical work declined.

The staff continued their daily “huddle” meetings and noticed a difference from the early pandemic gatherings. Now they looked at problems like a team. Physicians, nurses, assistants, clerks were part of the solution. The nurses appreciated clear communication with their leadership.

It’s a lot not knowing where you’re going to be when you come into work. I’m texting other nurses ‘Where am I going? I hope I find a familiar face to help.

You had families watching 24 h. We made some rules–phone or Zoom from noon to 8 PM. Sometimes the families didn’t realize how very sick the patient was.

People who don’t believe that it’s real, I want to say, ‘Come to the hospital. Go into a COVID-19 room, take care of that patient without a mask on and tell me that you feel comfortable. Or go wrap the body of a patient who died from COVID-19, without anything on, and tell me how you feel.

Six months into the pandemic, they were physically and emotionally exhausted but all 35 nurses who remained in the study continued their bedside care. Their fears for themselves or their family getting sick diminished as knowledge about the virus and vaccines increased. They also felt they had the skills now to better care for patients. This combination made them feel more secure and confident in going to work every day.

Subjects would use the word “compartmentalize” to describe how they remained emotionally steady. “Anything non-work related, I deal with outside of work, and work related, I keep at work.” (Participant #9).

Some nurses stopped working overtime so they could have two consecutive days off and get a good night’s sleep. Continuing to meditate helped as did taking walks to lower their stress. A few found comfort in praying; others registered for graduate school. Their co-worker’s friendships remained their most effective ballast for support and balance. In the fall 2020, a group of nurses decided to support one another by building a garden. At the beginning of the pandemic, a decommissioned hospital on the medical center grounds became the hospice for COVID-19 patients. Nurses from closed units helped staff the new building. As COVID-19 mortality rates decreased, the hospice building was no longer needed. Nurses, who were delighted with this progress, also felt a sense of sadness. A staff nurse spoke with the hospice director and social worker and asked if they could honor all 152 patients who had been in the hospice facility, 94% of whom died [17]. The care they had given felt unfinished. They wanted one last gesture of care, so they built a memory garden. Nursing leaders provided a budget; the hospital engineers bought flowers, the nursing director and social worker purchased gloves and spades and invited the staff to create a garden on the traffic island at the entrance to the hospice facility. One plant for each patient. About fifty staff participated on two Saturdays. Wearing their scrubs, they dug holes and planted pink, white, yellow, orange, and blue pansies; posed for a group photo, listened to brief speeches, then put their arms around one another and cried. They named the traffic island, The Garden of Souls.

In the final phase, which ran from April through August 2021, we conducted interviews with the same 35 RNs who participated in the first and second phases. During this phase, the COVID-19 census fluctuated from a low of 16 patients and two deaths from mid-May through mid-June to a high of 125 patients with 19 deaths in mid-August during the Delta COVID-19 surge, per internal tracking and communications. Once nurses were no longer needed to care for COVID-19 patients, they returned to the O.R. and other specialty units and found their patients often let their diabetic or blood pressure care lapse. Still, returning to familiar units and patients was a comfort.

After months of caring for COVID-19 patients they felt confident in their ability to work safely, “It’s part of the day to day. It’s a norm,” said Participant #17.

The virus changed the nurses’ routines. Rather than going into rooms to administer a medication and returning to bathe a patient, they clustered their care to work more efficiently to complete both tasks together. The novice nurses felt comfortable having those difficult talks with families.

I’m not going to cherish this time, but I’m proud of the work we did.

As vaccination rates among the staff and the public increased, the visitation rules loosened to allow two visitors per patient from 12:00–8 P.M. This change made most families less anxious. Other families wanted permission for more than two visitors; others did not want to wear masks because they were vaccinated. With those families, nurses now had to explain the restrictions to people who didn’t want to cooperate.

Nurses began to spend time with their families. They felt more comfortable visiting their parents, letting their grandchildren swim in their backyard pools, planning a vacation.

Their thoughts about the community response remained mixed. The food deliveries, shoe donations and other gifts continued to help morale. Still, the subjects recognized that at this point in the pandemic, little could be done to change people’s minds about masks and vaccinations.

No matter what you tell them, they’re going to believe what they believe Participant #38.

Participant #41 was more frustrated at some of the public reaction.

When you watch others die, gasping for breath, wearing a mask is nothing.

I changed my attitude and now I take a lot better care of myself. If I’m having a stressful day, I leave it at work.

Others returned to their favorite past times: running, taking photographs, writing in journals, praying the rosary, and reading. Some went to private or group therapy while others participated in the wellness programs at the hospital.

I think we need to understand how to move on and not hold anger or resentment towards the world about COVID.

I would do it again as I would not want my colleagues to do it alone.

I don’t think I’ve ever been as close to people as I was in Vietnam…I couldn’t have made it through that year without them [23] (p48).

The importance of camaraderie was also reported by nurse veterans during other military conflicts [24]. Ambrose et al. studied 22 individuals in the USA and found that a sense of duty and cohesion with team members resulted in greater resilience to workplace stress [25]. These researchers found that the connection among healthcare staff went beyond pre-pandemic interactions. Phillips and colleagues studied 38 ED physicians and nurses in Oregon USA who participated in focus groups and spoke about communication and teamwork [26]. Their responses indicated that group meetings resulted in proactivity and openness.

At the medical center in this study, each weekday around 10 AM and 7PM, and noon on weekends, staff and managers from every hospital unit gathered for a meeting called a “huddle.” Updated information was shared by managers with staff on each unit at 7 pm information huddles. They discussed safety concerns and changes in policies and procedures. Physicians and managers reported what they learned at other meetings. “I always felt that I knew what was going on,” said a nurse (Participant #29) who could also check her assignment and patient records during those meetings.

Kant wondered why people had the capacity to look beyond a natural inclination to protect themselves [36]. Duty was the intention behind an individual’s decision to continue to work by focusing on something more than themselves. These nurses went to work even when they knew many patients would die no matter what they did. They felt they had to participate in the communal challenge of keeping COVID-19 under as much control as possible.

I don’t want to say I was forced to take care of adult COVID patients. But when all was happening, I looked at the bigger picture, and I thought, okay, they’re in need. Of course, I’m also going to help my peers in the ICU. I would do that today if this were to all start again.

Limitations to the study reflect restraints found in other longitudinal studies: the generalizability of the findings. A global pandemic such as COVID-19 where hundreds of thousands of nurses worked will likely result in multiple experiences and conclusions. A comparison of the six participants who did not complete all three interviews to those who did complete the study warrants additional research. An exploration of such variables as age, years of experience, race, ethnicity, shift, and specialty area may provide additional insight to retention.

At the conclusion of this study, these nurses were still caring for COVID-19 patients. Their sense of COVID-19 as a time-limited crisis was over; these patients would be part of their daily assignments. As nurses who cared for hundreds of viral patients, they experienced humanity at its best and worst: anger, sadness, loss, as well as endurance and kindness. Reflecting on their lives from that time, the thinking behind their decision to work reflects Kant’s ideas of duty.

Planning for future disasters is imprecise. Experts can develop organizational, and community support learned during the COVID-19 pandemic to assist nurses and other health care staff. Leadership support, including but not limited to decreasing exposure risk, provision of appropriate clinical education, facilitation frequent communication, and fostering community and emotional support was identified as an important factor to nurses in this study. Support by managers, plus the nurse’s personal belief in the greater good over personal needs and desires could be foundational. While the nurses speculated about why they made the decisions they did, the knowledge that this combination of external and personal assets should provide support for nurses and other health care workers to endure.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The authors thank Rene Arcilla, Professor of Philosophy at New York University, University for his insightful guidance.