Psychiatric inpatient aggression is a concern as it poses a threat to safety of both patients and staff. While psychosocial and behavioral approaches are often put forward, the role of biological factors remains underexplored in a clinical context such as psychiatric hospitals. The dual‐hormone hypothesis (DHH) posits that low levels of cortisol combined with high levels of testosterone promote status‐seeking behaviors with some differences between sexes. This has yet to be studied among psychiatric inpatients. To explore the joint association of the DHH (cortisol and testosterone) and sex with psychiatric inpatient aggression. The sample included 375 psychiatric inpatients (206 women) from the Signature Biobank in Canada. Following their admission in a psychiatric hospital, participants provided hair and saliva for cortisol and testosterone analysis, respectively. Aggressive behaviors from the clinical files were reviewed from admission to discharge. Men with high salivary testosterone combined with low hair cortisol had higher odds of displaying aggression compared to men with high salivary testosterone and high hair cortisol. Men with low salivary testosterone and low hair cortisol had lower odds to perpetrate aggression compared to men with low salivary testosterone and high hair cortisol levels. The cortisol and testosterone interaction was not significant in women. Findings are consistent with the DHH for men. Given that the context hospitalization may trigger status‐seeking behaviors, actions could be taken such as identifying specific hormonal profiles at the time of admission to identify patients at risk of aggression, allowing for tailored care protocols.

Aggressive behaviors (i.e., physical, verbal and sexual) perpetrated by psychiatric inpatients are harmful to both healthcare workers and patients (Lanctôt and Guay2014; Lantta et al.2016; Weltens et al.2021). These behaviors have multiple adverse effects such as increased risk of mental health problems among staff members, decreased quality of care, and an impaired ward climate (Lanctôt and Guay2014; Lantta et al.2016). According to a systematic review, 23% of patients show such behaviors (Weltens et al.2021). Knowing that not all patients display aggressive behaviors, it is imperative to identify factors that predict such behaviors to prevent them.

A model proposed by Cutcliffe et al. (2013) suggests that aggression in psychiatric settings arises from an interplay of various factors related to the physical environment of the ward, patient characteristics, care team characteristics and the mental health system organization and policies. Each domain encompasses numerous sub‐factors, such as institutional climate, staff qualification, level of privacy in the setting, patient's impulsivity, and patient's hormonal levels (Weltens et al.2021; Cutcliffe et al.2013; Das et al.2018; Steinert and Whittington2013). While psychosocial and behavioral approaches are often put forward, the role of biological factors remains underexplored in a clinical context such as psychiatric hospitals. Understanding the hormonal mechanisms underlying aggression could provide more information to better target individuals who are more at‐risk and provide them with optimal care and conditions to reduce the risk of aggressive behaviors during hospitalization.

In this regard, early studies on aggressive behaviors have explored the role of testosterone, a hormone released by the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐gonadal (HPG) axis (Geniole et al.2020). Studies have reported a correlation between elevated testosterone concentrations and aggressive behaviors in competitive contexts especially in men (Geniole et al.2020; Archer2006; Carré et al.2011). However, heterogeneity in results has led researchers to explore other biopsychological variables that could affect this relationship, including stress hormones (Knight et al.2020).

The dual hormone hypothesis (DHH) suggests that status‐seeking behaviors such as aggression, competitiveness and dominance are predicted by the interaction between testosterone and cortisol, which is the product of a hormonal cascade regulated by the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal (HPA) axis in response to a stressful situation (Mehta and Josephs2010; Mehta and Prasad2015; Carré and Archer2018; Dallman2005). Higher basal testosterone concentrations would be positively related to aggressive behaviors only when basal cortisol concentrations are low (Mehta and Prasad2015). Higher levels of testosterone favor competitiveness and dominance while lower levels of cortisol are associated with reduced stress and increased approach tendencies, thereby leading to less inhibition and increasing the likelihood of aggressive behaviors (Knight et al.2020; Mehta and Josephs2010).

The link between cortisol, testosterone, and aggression has been tested in various populations (Popma et al.2007; Grotzinger et al.2018; Das et al.2018; Daffern et al.2007; Watanabe and Yamamoto2015; Deuter et al.2021; Dabbs1990; Mazur and Booth2014; Denson et al.2013). For example, in delinquent adolescents, higher basal testosterone levels have been associated with rule breaking and aggression display, only when cortisol levels were low while these associations were not found when cortisol levels were high (Das et al.2018; Daffern et al.2007). However, the DHH has not been extensively studied among the psychiatric population. While some authors found associations between hormones (i.e., sex or stress hormones) and aggressive behaviors in a psychiatric population, only one study investigated the joint relationship between those two hormones and aggression (Das et al.2018; Loomans et al.2015; Geoffrion et al.2022). Loomans et al. (2015) found that male psychiatric patients with antisocial personality or psychopathy had a significantly higher testosterone to cortisol ratio compared to men in the community (Loomans et al.2015). Therefore, considering these emerging results, examining the interplay of stress and sex hormones in a psychiatric population will add important knowledge about aggressive behaviors in this population.

Recently, studies on the DHH and its association with aggression or individual characteristics closely associated with aggression began testing sex differences. Many studies confirmed the DHH in both men and women, but some found different patterns (Mehta and Prasad2015). For instance, Armstrong et al. (2021) found that low levels of cortisol and testosterone in women were associated with elevated reactive aggression (i.e., aggression in response to a perceived threat), but no association was found in men (Armstrong et al.2021). For their part, Welker at al. (2014) found that high levels of cortisol and testosterone were associated with elevated psychopathic traits in men, but not in women (Welker et al.2014). These mitigated findings could be explained by biological differences between men and women. Moreover, given that immunoassay kits might be less sensitive to detect lower levels of testosterone (Clark et al.2019), such as those observed among women, it could also contribute to the mixed findings reported by men and women. Regardless of the underlying reasons for these mixed findings, they underscore the importance of conducting studies that examine the relationship between hormones and aggression separately for each sex.

To better understand the biological mechanisms involving stress and sex hormones (i.e., cortisol and testosterone) that may underlie the emergence of aggressive behaviors in hospitalized psychiatric patients, we sought to explore the joint association of these hormones by sex with aggression in a psychiatric sample. In line with the DHH, we hypothesize that high levels of testosterone combined with low levels of cortisol will be associated with aggression during the hospitalization in men and women.

This study uses data from the Signature Biobank, which were analyzed in a previous manuscript that aimed at characterizing profiles of psychiatric patients upon admission to the ER (Geoffrion et al.2022). Therefore, this is a secondary analysis. The data were obtained using weighted sampling by sex to randomly select 402 participants. All participants with valid hormone measures were kept in the final sample which included 375 patients. The Signature Biobank (https://www.banquesignature.ca) includes biopsychosocial data collected by trained research nurses among psychiatric patients recruited in the psychiatric emergency service of theInstitut de Santé Mentale de Montréal(IUSMM) between November 2012 and May 2019. IUSMM is a specialized psychiatric institution in Quebec, Canada. To be included in the sample, patients had to (1) be able to give consent, and (2) receive approval of their attending psychiatrist. Patients with a diagnosis of an intellectual or a cognitive disability were excluded from the study. The enrollment rate was about 65% for a total of 1926 participants.

Sociodemographic data, ICD‐10 psychiatric diagnosis established by the attending psychiatrist, antidepressant and antipsychotic medications intake at the admission, and the season at the time of the admission were extracted from participants' files.

Biological samples (saliva and hair) were collected by the Signature bank technician who has more than 20 years experience. They were analyzed by the Signature Laboratory (for more information, see Supporting InformationS1). Samples of 2 mL of passive drool were collected whenever possible, while swabs were used when patients had a dry mouth. All samples were collected in the morning following the admission. It was then analyzed using a high‐sensitivity enzyme immunoassay kit ELISA kits (Salimetrics assay #1‐2402, CA, USA) to extract testosterone levels. Reliability analyses were performed with intra‐assay and inter‐assay calculations for the testosterone level results. The intra‐assay coefficient of variation was 3.80% (range: 0–0.56), with only three duplicates exceeding a coefficient of variation of 0.20. The mean inter‐assay coefficient of variation was 10.8% for the low control and 9.0% for the high control. For hair cortisol, 3 cm of hair was cut from the posterior vertex position close to the scalp. Wash and steroid extraction procedures were performed according to a validated protocol (Kirschbaum et al.2009). Hair cortisol and salivary testosterone concentration levels were log transformed before the analysis to overcome the skewness of their distribution.

All medical record chart notes, from the patients’ admission to discharge, were systematically reviewed to identify instances of aggression. Due to variations in hospitalization length, which provided different amounts of time for individuals to display aggression, the number of episodes was not taken into account; the variable was dichotomized as either “present” (1) or “absent” (0). As 90% of the sample were hospitalized for 35 days or less, we only considered the initial 35 days following admission. For a more detailed description of the aggression measure, see Supporting InformationS1.

All analyses were performed using R version 4.3.1. A power analysis was first conducted using GPower to compute the sample size needed to detect an effect corresponding to an odds ratio of 2 with an 80% power. The analysis yielded a sample size of 141. Since our effect is in interaction with sex, we needed twice the sample size (280). Thus, our sample size of 375 participants was sufficient to perform our analyses. All participants were divided in two groups; those who displayed aggressive behaviors and those who did not. Both groups were compared based on levels of hormones, sex, primary psychiatric diagnosis, medication intake (antidepressants and antipsychotics), length of hospitalization, and seasonal patterns. Because very few participants (N= 4) fell in the other diagnostic category (i.e., eating disorder and pervasive developmental disorder) they were combined with the personality disorder group to run the analysis.t‐Tests were performed for continuous variables while Chi‐square tests were used for categorical variables. A logistic regression model was conducted to test for the main effect and interaction of sex and hormones (entered as continuous variables) on the odds of being in the group of participants who displayed aggressive behaviors or the other. Variables that yielded significant results int‐tests and Chi‐square analyses were entered in the logistic regression model as confounders (i.e., medication, diagnosis, and relationship status). When statistically significant, the interaction was decomposed as illustrated by Aiken et al. (1991) using probing on the values of 1 standard deviation above and below the mean value (Aiken et al.1991). The interaction tests if the association between the risk of aggression and salivary testosterone varies according to the level of hair cortisol. Since the two hormones were standardized, the probing values were −1 and +1 for, respectively, the low (mean − 1 standard deviation) and high (mean + 1 standard deviation) values of the hormones.

Sample socio‐demographic characteristics can be found in Table1. In the first 35 days after admission, 95 (25.3%) participants displayed aggression with a mean of 2.5 episodes (standard deviation [SD] = 2). Women comprised 55% (N= 206) of the entire sample. The proportion of men and women in the group of patients who did not display aggression was significantly different from the group that did display aggression (p= 0.021). There were fewer women in proportion than men in the group of patients who displayed aggression (women:N= 42, 44.2%, men:N= 53, 55.8%) and inversely in the group of patients who did not display aggression (women:N= 164, 58.6%, men:N= 116, 41.4%). The two groups also differed on diagnoses (p= 0.003), relationship status (p= 0.003), and antidepressant medication (p< 0.001). There was a larger proportion of participants diagnosed with psychotic disorder (35.4%) than other diagnoses (except for substance use disorder, however, because there are only 8 participants in total who have this diagnosis, the difference is not significant) in the group of participants who displayed aggression. There was also a larger proportion of participants with anxiety disorder (90%) than other diagnoses in the group who did not display aggression. There were significantly fewer participants who were in a relationship (13.7%) and more who were not (86.3%) in the group who displayed aggression compared with the one who did not (respectively, 29.7% and 70.3%). There were more participants who took antidepressants (45.2%) in the group who did not display aggression compared with the one who did not (23.2%). See Supporting InformationS1for a detailed description of the aggression risk for each day after the admission.

Comparative statistics of participants who displayed at least one act of aggression to those who did not.

Notes:***p< 0.001, **p< 0.010, *p< 0.050,p‐values in italic compare the proportion of aggression in each diagnosis/season to the overall proportion in each diagnosis/season.

Abbreviations: Cat. = categorical variable; Cont. = continuous variable; mL = milliliter; pg = picogram; SD = standard deviation.

Results of the logistic regression are reported in Table2. Participants diagnosed with anxiety disorder had significantly lower odds (six times less likely) of being in the group that displayed aggression compared to those who did not (odds ratio [OR] = 0.17, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.03–0.95). The interaction between sex [men], salivary testosterone, and hair cortisol was statistically significant (OR = 0.44, 95% CI = 0.23–0.80). The post hoc interaction analysis (Figure1) revealed that men with high levels of salivary testosterone (M + 1 SD) coupled with low levels of hair cortisol (M − 1 SD) had higher proportion to be in the group of participants who displayed aggression compared to men with high levels of salivary testosterone coupled with high levels of hair cortisol (estimate [E] = 0.27, standard error [SE] = 0.10,p= 0.009). Men with low levels of salivary testosterone coupled with low levels of hair cortisol had lower odds to be in the group of participants who displayed aggression compared to men with low levels of salivary testosterone coupled with high levels of hair cortisol (E= −0.16, SE = 0.082,p= 0.047). No interaction between testosterone and cortisol was found among women.

Logistic regression model of direct and moderated effects of hormones and sex on aggression.

Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval;p(>|t|) =p‐value of absolute student‐tstatistic; ref. = reference category; SE = standard error;t= student‐tstatistic.

To our knowledge, this study is the first to explore the associations between hormonal profile (i.e., cortisol × testosterone) and sex of psychiatric patients and the risk of displaying aggressive behaviors during the hospitalization. Our results confirm our hypothesis which is in line with the DHH; men with high levels of salivary testosterone and low levels of hair cortisol were more likely to display aggression compared to men exhibiting high levels of both hormones. Status‐seeking behaviors have previously been linked to the DHH in other populations in restrictive environments, including incarcerated individuals and adolescents with delinquent behaviors (Popma et al.2007; Loomans et al.2015; Dabbs et al.1991; Dabbs1993; Vitiello and Stoff1997; Horn et al.2014). Overt aggression, such as yelling, has been associated with the DHH in male adolescents with delinquent behaviors (Popma et al.2007). Similarly, our results seem to corroborate this previous finding, since the most common (75%) form of aggression in the present study was verbal aggression.

A possible explanation of these results is that a psychiatric ward may enhance status‐seeking behaviors like dominance, and that aggression may serve a specific function given the environment (Daffern et al.2007; Watanabe and Yamamoto2015). Previous findings showed that most aggressive behaviors were preceded by frustration, and that this frustration appeared to be acted out as a means of tension release (Watanabe and Yamamoto2015). Therefore, while higher levels of salivary testosterone favor status‐seeking behaviors, such as demonstration of dominance, lower levels of hair cortisol favor approach tendencies, making tension release behavior more probable (Mehta and Josephs2010).

Another explanatory hypothesis could be that our salivary testosterone measure was more sensitive to social context than a basal measure, since we only have one time‐point following a situation that might be perceived as stressful (hospitalization). Some studies have shown that testosterone levels can spike following an acute stressor or a stressful task (Deuter et al.2021; Geniole et al.2011). Thus, our result could potentially reflect a more context‐dependent (punctual) reactivity response of testosterone rather than a more stable, trait‐like response that could be generalized to other contexts (Grotzinger et al.2018). Importantly, increasing evidence is finding similar results with more dynamic hormonal responses (Knight et al.2020; Mehta and Josephs2010).

Men with low levels of salivary testosterone and high levels of hair cortisol were more likely to display aggression compared to men with low levels of both hormones. Although data cannot confirm this, this result may be explained by the type of aggression, such as hyperarousal‐driven aggression (Haller et al.2005). Hyperarousal‐driven aggression is characterized by sudden outbursts and is linked to a prolonged and exaggerated acute response to perceived stress (Haller et al.2005; Trifu et al.2020). Given that some aspects of the psychiatric hospital context can be perceived as threatening by patients (i.e., unwanted physical contacts, feeling of injustice), it is possible that men in our sample with high cortisol levels tend to react strongly to acute threats and exhibit enhanced cortisol levels in general. Hence, for some patients, psychiatric hospitals can be a threatening environment that triggers hyperarousal (Whittington and Richter2006), especially in individuals whose hormonal profiles already exhibit heightened stress or fragility before hospitalization as measured in hair. This could include individuals with a high testosterone/low cortisol profile before admission, who are more prone to exhibit aggressive behaviors given the lesser inhibition. This could also include individuals with low testosterone/high cortisol profile who exhibit low aggression tendencies prior hospitalization but have experienced prolonged stress in the previous 3 months that enhanced the likelihood of aggressive behavior. Our results highlight that aggression behaviors seem more associated with hormones having unequal concentration distribution (low salivary testosterone/high hair cortisol and high salivary testosterone/low hair cortisol) than when both hormones have higher or lower levels (no associations found). This could point towards a greater vulnerability and impact of unequal hormonal concentration on aggressive behaviors in a psychiatric population (Trifu et al.2020).

As such, our results suggest that the presence of stressors in the months leading up to psychiatric admission (as measured through hair cortisol) may play a role in the emergence of aggression in psychiatric settings in combination with testosterone levels at admission. Specifically, the accumulation of stressors can, on one hand, stimulate cortisol production and, on the other hand, disrupt the nervous system, significantly reducing cortisol levels (Khoury et al.2019; Yehuda and Seckl2011). Thus, the presence of these stressors in patients with either low or high testosterone levels may indicate an increased risk of exhibiting aggressive behaviors. Consequently, this adds to the importance of assessing whether these individuals experienced particularly challenging times before their admission. The level of stressors experienced before hospitalization may have had a disinhibiting effect on individuals with high testosterone levels, potentially more prone to aggression. Conversely, it may have acted as a catalyst for individuals with low testosterone levels, possibly rendering them more reactive to the irritants of the hospital environment.

Results on women differed from the ones found in men, which is consistent with the mixed literature on sex differences (Mehta and Prasad2015; Armstrong et al.2021; Welker et al.2014). This could be explained by the difference in status‐seeking behaviors displayed in women and men. Aggression is one of several behaviors (e.g., assertive confidence, competitiveness, having authority over a group of subordinates) that individuals exhibit to acquire a higher position in the hierarchy of a group (Geniole et al.2020; Knight et al.2020). These behaviors may be more descriptive of those exhibited by men than women. Knight and collaborators (2020) suggest that social expectations for women are not the same as men, therefore, status‐seeking behaviors in women may be more related to affiliation than competitiveness (Knight et al.2020). Another potential explanation for null results in women would be that the psychiatric environment might not trigger similar responses in men and in women. Internalizing behaviors are more prevalent in women than in men and inversely, externalizing behaviors are more prevalent in men than in women (Rescorla et al.2012). The restrictive environment of a psychiatric ward might prompt more externalizing behaviors such as aggression in men and internalizing behaviors in women. However, this assumption cannot be confirmed as internalizing behaviors were not studied as an outcome in this research. Finally, researchers are now exploring more the role of other sex hormones (i.e., estradiol) in dominance and competitiveness in women. Hence, the inclusion of other hormones could help better understand status‐seeking behaviors in women (Casto and Prasad2017).

This study has some limitations. First, the aggression measure has limitations due to its dichotomous nature, which prevents us from examining the relationship between hormones and the type (e.g., verbal, physical, against property) or frequency of aggression. We aggregated types of aggression because most incidents were verbal (83%). This lack of variance in aggression types made it impossible to analyze less common types. Additionally, the measure does not distinguish between reactive and proactive aggression. Moreover, the aggression variable was derived from reviewing reported aggressive episodes in participants’ medical records. Since it is based on staff perceptions, there is a possibility that the incidence of aggression may have been underreported. Second, only one measure was collected for each participant making it impossible to determine whether we captured basal or a more context sensitive testosterone measure (as a stress response to the recent hospitalization). Third, the immunoassay kit may have biased results for women with very low levels of salivary testosterone, which could have potentially hidden some weaker effects (Welker et al.2016). However, a manuscript currently submitted found that the correlation between salivary testosterone levels measured by ELISA and LC‐MS was moderate and more robust compared to the correlations observed for estradiol and progesterone levels (Brouillard et al.2025). Fourth, no inter or intra‐immunoassay analyses were performed, therefore, we do not have an indicator of its reliability. Fifth, measures of testosterone and cortisol were different; testosterone levels quantified through saliva portrayed more of a context‐sensitive response, while cortisol levels measured through hair represented a cumulative secretion. In the same line, most studies in the reported literature have shown results using salivary samples. A few studies comparing both types of sample seem to find similar results and other studies showed moderate correlations between hair and salivary samples (Knight et al.2020; Grotzinger et al.2018; Stern et al.2022). Further studies need to be done to better understand the differences. Sixth, the data used for this study were not specifically collected for this purpose. By using the Biobank, the research team was constrained to select from the limited variables available to address the research question.

Despite its limitations, this exploratory study suggests that to better understand the role of testosterone (sex hormones) in the biological theorization of aggression, we need to consider its combination with cortisol (stress hormones). Thus, biological studies must take into account the interactions between the various hormones. On a clinical level, identifying specific hormonal profiles at hospital admission could help to identify psychiatric patients at risk of aggression and care protocols accordingly. For example, some psychiatric treatments (such as antipsychotics) have hormonal side‐effects that may enhance dual‐hormones interaction that could influence aggression.

The findings of this study contribute to the existing biological model of aggression that posits aggression in psychiatric settings arises from a range of individual, environmental, and contextual factors (Weltens et al.2021; Cutcliffe et al.2013). The novelty of this research lies in its identification of the combined role of cortisol and testosterone as one of the factors that contribute to the onset of aggressive behaviors in men psychiatric patients. These results lay the groundwork for further studies investigating this link, gradually elucidating the complex factors that contribute to aggression.