The All of Us Research Program (AoURP) is a prominent precision medicine research initiative committed to diverse participation. The program harnesses digital outreach as a key strategy for recruiting and retaining underrepresented populations, using language that sometimes invokes notions of solidarity. This targeted recruitment of underrepresented groups and potential use of solidaristic language raise concerns about how participation will manifest tangible benefits for these populations and whether institutions assume responsibility for addressing past and present research harms.

This study examines how the AoURP conceptualizes “diversity” in its social media outreach and how this implementation aligns with the program’s stated goals. Specifically, we perform a mixed methods analysis to descriptively capture (1) which underrepresented populations are targeted by the AoURP’s social media and (2) how solidaristic messaging is used, if at all, in these calls for participation.

AoURP social media posts (n=380) from a 6-month period in 2020‐2021 were coded to identify visual depictions and explicit mentions of any “underrepresented in biomedical research” (UBR) categories officially targeted by the program. To then characterize UBR-specific appeals, we performed a thematic analysis of UBR-targeted posts, using a coding scheme that identified unsolidaristic language (ie, appeals to individual benefits) and solidaristic language (ie, appeals to benefitting others, attaining shared goals, and addressing injustices).

Among the 10 UBR categories officially recognized by the AoURP, “Race and Ethnicity” (187/380, 49% of posts) and “Age” (71/380, 19%) were the most frequently emphasized, while each of the other remaining categories was rarely invoked (<4/380, 1%). The thematic analysis further identified calls to participate that spanned receiving genetic results (ie, individual benefits), uncovering family and community disease predispositions (ie, benefitting others), improving the future of health (ie, achieving shared goals), and addressing data and health disparities (ie, resolving injustices).

In addition to highlighting UBR categories that are more and less emphasized in the AoURP’s social media outreach, we also find that the program’s messaging indeed resembles a solidaristic appeal to participate. Drawing upon the existing literature on solidarity, we leverage conceptualizations of solidarity as a shared practice grounded in mutuality and bidirectionality to question the AoURP’s appeals when institutions fail to fully reciprocate this solidarity. Specifically, we raise concerns about (1) unclear links between participation and addressing health disparities, (2) incomplete acknowledgment of institutions’ role in data disparities, and (3) the use of empowerment rhetoric that diverts the onus for correcting these disparities onto participants. Finally, we consider the implications of these issues for future outreach efforts.

The All of Us Research Program (AoURP) is a notable case study for exploring the conceptualization of “diversity” in precision medicine research. The program is one of the largest biomedical research initiatives in US history, aimed at accelerating precision medicine by longitudinally collecting varied data types over a 10-year period from a cohort of 1 million or more Americans [1,2] that is intended to “broadly reflect the diversity of the US” [3]. As of February 2024, the AoURP has already enrolled more than 700,000 people [4]. This core commitment to “setting the stage for more diverse participation in precision medicine” stems from the recognition that “not all groups have benefited equally from research” [5]. In 2020, the program delineated criteria for “underrepresented in biomedical research” (UBR) [5], which it has since used to measure its success in recruiting a diverse cohort [6].

Digital outreach functions as a major component of the AoURP’s efforts to enroll underrepresented participants. For instance, as of May 2025, the AoURP’s 4 main social media accounts across X (formerly Twitter at the time of data collection and thus referred to as such throughout this study), Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube garner a collective audience of more than 200,000 followers. Moreover, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the program’s inability to rely on in-person engagement and achieve enrollment targets motivated it to ramp up its social media outreach campaigns [6]. The AoURP reports that “these campaigns experimented with varying value propositions for research participation, including the return of personal health-related information and altruism,” which the AoURP credits with a steady increase in enrollment activities [6]. However, despite the reliance of programs such as the AoURP on social media for recruitment, Gelinas et al [7] and Hokke et al [8] have pointed out the general dearth of regulatory guidance on such outreach.

Leveraging the AoURP’s social media presence as a rich locus for exploring how the program conceptualizes and implements “diversity,” this study aims to begin addressing this gap with a mixed methods analysis by (1) gauging which populations are being appealed to and (2) exploring what kind of language the AoURP uses to justify these calls for participation. Interestingly, before analyzing the social media dataset, we observed elsewhere in the AoURP’s digital outreach, such as on its official website [1], that the AoURP calls for participants to join and share health information and samples to “help improve the health of your communities and future generations,” thereby using collectivist language that invokes notions of solidarity. Moreover, other scholars such as Neuhaus [9] have similarly drawn upon the framework of solidarity to understand the appeal to participate in such research programs. Thus, we explored the AoURP’s calls to participate in our social media dataset with a specific interest in solidaristic language.

Prainsack and Buyx [10] were the first to take a systematic approach to compiling, formulating, and clarifying the concept of solidarity. In essence, Prainsack and Buyx conceptualized solidarity as “shared practices reflecting a collective commitment to carry ‘costs’ (financial, social, emotional, or otherwise) to assist others.” These acts are often preceded by the recognition of sameness with another person or group. Furthermore, Prainsack and Buyx emphasize that solidarity, unlike empathy and similar concepts, is “understood here as a practice and not merely as an inner sentiment.” This property makes solidarity a particularly suitable framework for understanding the explicit calls to action characteristic of the AoURP’s outreach (eg, “#JoinAllofUs”).

Other scholars have since put forth alternative models of solidarity. Arguing that sameness-based models of solidarity may exclude those seen as different, O’Neill [11] has devised a second notion of “conjoint solidarity” that is more inclusive of diverse health care stakeholders. Specifically, O’Neill envisions solidarity as based around a shared goal (eg, “the shared goal of improved health care outcomes”) rather than similarity. Finally, Dawson and Jennings [12] have conceived a third notion of solidarity that instead centers around injustices. This reconfigured practice of solidarity is best captured by the fundamental idea of “standing up beside,” where solidarity requires a public action that is a positive identification with another and is oriented toward improving or correcting past or present disadvantage.

These frameworks understand solidarity as a practice built around mutuality and bidirectionality that can be shared with and expected from organizations [11,12]. Notably, other scholars have recently pointed out and clarified the unmet obligations of the AoURP to its participants. For instance, Jabloner and Walker [13] argue that “one cannot simply assume that more diverse datasets will automatically lead to better health care for the underserved” and that initiatives such as the AoURP must make explicit how research participation will translate into tangible benefits for the underrepresented, or risk solely benefiting those in power without meaningfully advancing health equity. Additionally, Tsosie et al [14] have further elucidated the historical and ongoing research exploitation of underrepresented populations, raising questions about the extent to which institutions claim accountability for this harm. In light of these arguments, we conducted a mixed methods analysis of whether and how the AoURP upholds its solidaristic obligations to its participants by first identifying (1) who the AoURP’s social media campaign appeals to and (2) what is embedded in its call to participate.

We first accessed and captured screenshots of all posts across the AoURP’s 4 main social media accounts (“@AllofUsResearch” on Twitter, “All of Us Research” on Facebook, “@allofusresearch” on Instagram, and “All of Us Research Program” on YouTube) that were published between September 10, 2020, and March 10, 2021. Data collection was bounded at these dates to capture a sizable sample as the AoURP ramped up its social media campaign during the COVID-19 pandemic [5]. In total, we captured 449 posts: 265 from Twitter, 140 from Facebook, 40 from Instagram, and 4 from YouTube.

Because of our intent to analyze the AoURP’s outreach, we chose to focus our sample on posts that included original content created by the program. We therefore excluded 69 posts that were reposts from other non-AoURP social media accounts and lacked any additional commentary (eg, an added caption) from the main AoURP account. After removing posts based on this exclusion criterion, our final dataset consisted of 380 posts: 199 from Twitter, 137 from Facebook, 40 from Instagram, and 4 from YouTube (Figure 1).

The captions of all posts were transcribed. For posts in Spanish (which was the only language other than English used by the AoURP), if the post platform did not have its own autotranslate feature (eg, as offered by Facebook), we translated each post via Google Translate and added this translation to the caption transcription. Previous work has argued that Google Translate is a useful tool for reducing language bias and is sufficiently accurate in translating Spanish to English for research contexts [15]. Regardless, each translation was manually inspected for accuracy by 1 author (DJZ), who can proficiently read Spanish.

Based on our examination of the dataset, we also chose to expand UBR codes beyond the categories used by the AoURP. We added a “nonspecific” code to capture any appeals that explicitly target UBR populations without referencing any 1 category in particular (eg, by mentioning “groups that are underrepresented in biomedical research”). Under the “Race and Ethnicity” code, we also included a supplemental “Other” subcode for posts explicitly invoking a non-White racial or ethnic identity (eg, “Native American”) that lies outside of the 5 demographics specified by the AoURP (ie, “Asian,” “Black, African or African American,” “Hispanic, Spanish, or Latino,” “Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander,” and “Middle Eastern or North African”). Finally, we added an “Ambiguous” subcode for posts where assigning a “Race and Ethnicity” subcode proved difficult (see the section “Limitations” for a discussion on the challenges of visually assigning racial and ethnic identities). We intentionally supplemented our visual annotation strategy with a text-based approach, in which UBR categories needed to be explicitly invoked, to further improve our methodology’s rigor. The final codebook that guided our analysis is shown inTable 1.

Codes and subcodes with quotation marks came verbatim from the All of Us Research Program [5,16], whereas codes and subcodes in italics came from the authors. Only “Race and Ethnicity” and “Age” have subcodes listed because these were the only codes with related subcodes assigned to any posts.

After identifying UBR-targeted posts, we sought to characterize how exactly the AoURP was calling these underrepresented populations to participate. Using guidelines set forth by Braun and Clarke [19], we performed a thematic analysis of such appeals involving the following stages: familiarization with the data, generating initial codes, searching for themes, reviewing themes, defining and naming themes, and producing the report. Given our specific interest in solidarity [10-12], we methodologically implemented this focus while developing our coding scheme by looking for instances where related concepts were invoked. This led us to code language that was seemingly either unsolidaristic (ie, appeals to individual benefits) or solidaristic (ie, appeals to benefitting others [10], achieving shared goals [11], and resolving injustices [12]). Overall, DJZ led the initial analysis, and through iterative discussions of codes and data with other authors (JKS and SS-JL), we refined the themes presented in the “Results” section.

In our dataset, we observed a striking emphasis on posts targeting “Race and Ethnicity” UBR populations (187/380, 49% of all posts), followed by “Age” (71/380, 19%) and “Nonspecific” invocations of underrepresented populations (19/380, 5%) (Table 2).

Codes and subcodes with quotation marks came verbatim from the All of Us Research Program [5,16], whereas codes and subcodes in italics came from the authors. Only “Race and Ethnicity” and “Age” have subcodes listed because these were the only codes with related subcodes assigned to any posts.

The “Race and Ethnicity” code could be assigned only once to a particular post, even if multiple subcodes within “Race and Ethnicity” were assigned to that same post. The same was true for the “Age” code.

Within “Race and Ethnicity,” the most commonly applied subcodes were “Black, African or African American” (113/380, 30% of all posts); “Hispanic, Spanish, or Latino” (73/380, 19%); and “Asian” (30/380, 8%). After data collection, we observed that the time period of our dataset (see the “Methods” section) included Black History Month and Hispanic Heritage Month but did not include Asian American and Pacific Islander Heritage Month. To assess the impact of these heritage months on our dataset, we excluded all heritage month posts (n=131) and found that this did not substantially change the relative distribution of appeals across these “Race and Ethnicity” subcodes: “Black, African or African American” (66/249, 27% of all remaining posts); “Hispanic, Spanish, or Latino” (44/249, 18%); and “Asian” (23/249, 9%).

Despite this difference in emphasis, the AoURP deems all of its 10 identified UBR categories pivotal for the program’s enrollment goals and that research must account for a broader range of demographics [5]. The AoURP’s apparent prioritization of the “Race and Ethnicity” category may reflect disproportionately greater decreases in enrollment during the pandemic from “Black/African American” and “Hispanic/Latino/Spanish” populations [6]. However, we did not observe any parallel social media outreach efforts to explicitly engage underrepresented income and educational attainment groups, which also experienced disproportionate enrollment decreases during the pandemic [6].

In posts categorized as targeting the underrepresented (209/380, 55% of all posts), we identified calls to participate that spanned diverse appeals to individual benefits, serving one’s family and community, achieving shared goals, and resolving injustices.

One of the most exciting parts of participating in our program is the option to receive your #DNA results! We’ve begun to analyze participant DNA for info+give participants their results, if they choose to receive them.

Did you know some people feel sick when they have milk and other dairy foods? Lactose intolerance is a #DNA trait. We’re analyzing and returning genetic ancestry and trait results to some of our participants.

We have already started sending #genetic results to All of Us participants who donated their blood or saliva samples to science. Participants can choose to receive information about their #ancestors and genetic traits.

Q: Does COVID-19 only affect people from a certain racial or ethnic group? A: Regardless of your race or ethnicity, COVID-19 can affect anyone. It’s been more significantly impacting the Black, Latinx, and Native American populations.

Hear [narrator] discuss family health history+how gathering more data can help improve #healthresearch in Black American communities … [narrator:] I definitely think that there’s health conditions particularly as an African American female, that my family history has predisposed me to. These are personal experiences that I’ve seen and experienced growing up, whether it’s relatives now that are suffering from various chronic conditions, and if our African American ancestors and our families knew more of the information, to help them lead a healthier lifestyle, [it] really would help us live longer healthier lives. #JoinAllofUs.

[Narrator] talks about how our genes and environment may impact our health. … [narrator:] I interpret for patients in the medical center. I also do CPS (Child Protective Services) cases, schools, community services. I do work with a lot of immigrants. Mostly Central America and Mexico. People are developing diabetes, obesity, allergies. There is a whole range of diseases. A lot of it has to do not only with the environment but also eating healthy. It’s very expensive in the States.

Heart disease is the leading cause of death for Hispanics/Latinos in the US #JoinAllofUs.

As we bring awareness to Sickle Cell Disease, #DYK it occurs amongst 1 out of every 365 Black or African-American births? ... #SickleCellAwarenessMonth.

All of Us is committed to helping improve health research by including people from all backgrounds. You can sign up to help drive research forward at JoinAllofUs.org.

As an All of Us Research Program participant, you are already helping in more ways than you know. You are part of a group of 350,000+ participants from all 50 states. With participation from so many people, we have the power to help researchers answer important health questions.

Hear [narrator] share his experience with #COVID19 and why he thinks researchers can help end health disparities. … [narrator:] I sit back and I think to myself, so these same communities that we’re reaching out to and asking to participate in this research program because they have been historically left out and marginalized are taking the brunt of this crisis.

In general, such mentions of health disparities (n=6) are relatively scarce in the dataset, and when they do occur, they most often reference COVID-19–related disparities (n=3). Notably, due to a large overlap between our entire dataset and COVID-19–invoking posts, it was difficult to perform a direct analysis of the latter that is fundamentally distinct from what we have already presented. That said, outside of COVID-19, the other most commonly referenced diseases in our dataset (Table 3), namely, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and sickle cell disease, are all known to have long-standing health disparities, even if these disparities are not always explicitly mentioned in posts [21-23].

#JoinAllofUs and help scientists understand risk factors and discover how to address health disparities in your community.

The COVID-19 pandemic, which has claimed more than 500,000 lives in the United States, has again exposed long-standing differences in health care, access, and outcomes. These realities are stark reminders about why we must always strive to do more to ensure everyone is represented in research.

The biggest benefit of the All of Us Research Program is that, for once, a group of researchers have actually specifically sought out the underrepresented groups in society to make sure we’re represented in research.

We recognize that many individuals and communities have been mistreated and abused by or left out of research. These transgressions have contributed to the ongoing health disparities and inequities that continue to harm so many in this country.

And since that call has been placed out there, that people are interested in African Americans and learning about disease process, disease progression, I think a part of that response as an African American is to stand up and say that I’m willing to participate. I signed up for the All of Us Research Program because I represent a group that has historically been underrepresented in research and I want to be counted. And I want to be the face that says to others who look like me, Please participate and be counted.

You have the power to help drive research with our new research plans and program activities.

[AoURP CEO:] By learning from the past, we all have the power and responsibility to help change the future of health in our communities. If you join @AllofUsResearch, you may help #researchers find new ways for all of us to stay healthy.

While some of these aforementioned appeals are more individualistic and seemingly less solidaristic (ie, receiving genetic results), the remaining appeals align closely with existing models of solidarity and suggest that the AoURP’s outreach can indeed be understood as a solidaristic call to participate.

Moreover, aligned with O’Neill’s [11] conceptualization of “conjoint solidarity” that revolves around a shared goal rather than perceived similarity with others, one of the most prevalent appeals in our dataset is the notion that prospective participants can work together to improve the health of future generations. As envisioned by O’Neill, this repeated messaging is often framed by the AoURP in an identity-agnostic manner that appears inclusive to all prospective participants.

Finally, in agreement with Dawson and Jennings’ [12] model of solidarity as the idea of “standing up beside” (ie, a “public action” oriented toward addressing injustice), the act of participating in the AoURP can indeed be understood to be “public” as individuals who enroll in the program may share their participation with others. As an especially visible example, video testimonials narrated by AoURP participant ambassadors, that is, participants designated to act as representatives for the research program, are present throughout the dataset. As we describe, in one such testimonial, an AoURP participant ambassador pronounces her identity as an African American, frames her participation as a response to this population’s historical underrepresentation in research, and further implores other African Americans to similarly join. Here, the ambassador explicitly invokes the solidaristic call to “stand up” beside the African American community, positively identifying with them and participating in direct action perceived to help resolve past injustice.

While the AoURP uses solidaristic language to call for participation, we posit that the program’s social media outreach may not realize the full definition of solidarity as a practice built around mutuality and bidirectionality that can be shared with and expected from biomedical institutions [11,12]. In particular, we raise the following critical issues and consequences for future outreach efforts.

Our data demonstrate that the AoURP social media campaign harnesses health disparities as an impetus for participation, often without explaining how data equity will resolve such disparities in the first place. Jabloner and Walker [13] argue that the flawed notion that “benefit for underserved populations will flow directly from more diverse datasets and associated biomechanistic research tailored to ‘minority populations’” must be urgently revised, or risk a form of “predatory inclusion” that solely benefits those in power without progressing toward health equity [24]. Indeed, acts of solidarity (ie, participation in the AoURP) may be directed toward resolving past or present injustice [12], but we posit that a failure to clearly show how the act of participation will reduce health disparities risks making an unfulfilled promise to participants and, therefore, may fall short of realizing the full definition of mutualistic and bidirectional solidarity as described by O’Neill [11] and Dawson and Jennings [12].

Along a similar vein, the AoURP does not consistently articulate the full historical role and culpability of research institutions in creating the very data disparities the program aims to directly address. In our dataset, underrepresentation is often depicted simply and almost straightforwardly as the existing reality or sometimes framed as a sole consequence of researchers being less attentive or committed to inclusion. This passive narrative—that the underrepresented have been simply overlooked—fails to acknowledge a history of research institutions actively excluding some populations and subjecting them to harm and exploitation. The AoURP does not directly acknowledge this history in our dataset outside of a handful of social media posts that externally link to a statement on the UNITE initiative. As among the most infamous case studies, the infliction of research harms upon African Americans in the Tuskegee Syphilis Study was an institutional betrayal of trust that has become culturally embedded and still drives suspicion from prospective research participants [25]. Along a similar vein, Tsosie et al [14] critique a vicious cycle of past and present research exploitation of Indigenous populations, who disengage from research due to the harm it often imposes, yet are told that they will miss out on the benefits of precision health if they do not engage, with no attention paid to preventing future harm or addressing underlying health inequities. Failing to acknowledge these histories may amount to another instance of not reciprocating UBR participants’ solidaristic acts of participation. Therefore, thinking about frameworks of solidarity in this context helps reveal the gap between the enrollment practices we analyze and calls to participate in precision medicine research initiatives such as the AoURP, and whether and how they generate knowledge that will materially address health disparities.

Indeed, the duty of ameliorating ongoing disparities ironically seems to fall less on research institutions and more on the underrepresented populations themselves. As we describe, in one video testimonial example from our dataset, an African American participant implores other African Americans to capitalize on the opportunity of finally being seen. Here, the rhetoric of empowerment, where participation is framed as a reclamation of power (“stand up,” “be counted”), suggests that individual assumption of responsibility can manifest real change. Such language features prominently throughout the data, often reinforcing the notion that individuals have the power to drive research. However, McLaughlin [26] points out that such empowerment rhetoric has historically diverted focus from the “external world of political, economic or structural change” to the “inner world” of individuals as the unit from which both problem and solution emerge. Indeed, it should not be overlooked how the AoURP’s emphasis on the power of individual participation to correct injustices in data diversity and representation (a claim that many would argue is itself dubious) obscures institutional responsibility for similarly enacting change, which, again, may amount to an incomplete realization of the reciprocal nature of solidarity [11,12].

The AoURP presents a valuable case study for understanding the complexities of participant recruitment in the context of massive biomedical research initiatives. The program must balance the competing demands of efficiently enrolling large numbers of participants while also emphasizing the recruitment of those who are underrepresented. This tension leads to a fine line of promotional messaging that must attract hundreds of thousands of participants, especially those from targeted groups, while refraining from overpromising. Even though theAll of UsInstitutional Review Board may not be the only possible source of guardrails against imbalanced messaging, it is responsible for reviewing and approving numerous participant-facing materials [27]. As such, theAll of UsInstitutional Review Board likely remains the primary governance structure through which this messaging should be regulated. Moving forward, it remains critical to convey the purpose of these biodata repositories to lay audiences in a manner that is accessible [28] and yet avoids making implied promises that lack tangible paths to being achieved.

Indeed, rather than solely modifying its messaging and risking rhetorical overreach, programs such as the AoURP can consider implementing services and arrangements that provide tangible benefits for underrepresented participants. For example, Jabloner and Walker [13] propose various solutions that range from data donors receiving health care in exchange for participation to benefit-sharing, where donors receive financial benefits from the revenue generated by their data. The recent success of a benefit-sharing agreement between Variant Bio and Indigenous peoples exemplifies that such solutions may be a practical step that enables the AoURP to achieve its engagement goals while upholding the full obligations of its solidaristic call to participate [29].

This work was supported by the National Human Genome Research Institute (award 1R01HG010330).