Insulin resistance (IR) is fundamental to the development of type 2 diabetes and usually precedes the disease by several years. Therefore, a better understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of IR may help better manage and prevent the metabolic syndrome. We used an integrated approach of anthropometric and biochemical measures in conjunction with serum lipidomics for metabolic phenotyping of multiethnic male participants with varied insulin sensitivity. By detailed characterization of the serum lipidomic profiles in the fasting state as well as temporal changes during the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp procedure (HIEC), we identified a systemic metabolic response to the HIEC represented by the marked changes in the acylcarnitine, nonesterified fatty acid, lysophospholipid, sphingosine-1-phosphate, and phosphatidylserine lipid classes. We demonstrate that a shared lipidomic signature between IR and liver fat shows gradual increase with increasing liver fat percentage. In summary, by stratifying the study participants according to the insulin sensitivity indices derived from the HIEC procedures, we identified a circulating lipidomic signature of IR and metabolic plasticity with a potential for prediction and management of metabolic health before the development of type 2 diabetes and other metabolic diseases.

The underlying molecular pathogenesis of the Asian phenotype of insulin resistance remains to be understood.

We carried out metabolic phenotyping of study participants without diabetes according to insulin sensitivity indices derived from hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp procedures.

We identified lipidomic signatures of insulin resistance and metabolic plasticity.

These lipidomic signatures have the potential to help in risk stratification of insulin resistance and metabolic dysfunction for early intervention.

Insulin resistance (IR) is fundamental to the development of type 2 diabetes and usually precedes the disease by several years (1). Although obesity is a well-known risk factor for IR, it is not the sole determinant. Furthermore, BMI fails to fully explain the variance of IR in the general population. People of Asian ethnicities experience high rates of type 2 diabetes compared with people in other regions of the world despite relatively low BMI (1). The insulin sensitivity index (ISI), steady state insulin response, and waist-to-hip ratio are significantly different among various ethnic groups, including Caucasian, Asian American, African American, and Mexican American people. Within Asia, different ethnic groups have varying degrees of IR. Previous studies have shown that people from South Asia exhibit the greatest IR, Chinese the least, and the Malay population is intermediate (2,3). This interethnic difference in IR was only prominent among lean individuals (4).

Although different ethnic groups have different levels of obesity, the differences in IR persist even after accounting for body weight (3). There are several factors that can contribute to IR in people without obesity, including genetics, sedentary lifestyle, unhealthy diet, and hormonal imbalances (5–8). A diet high in refined carbohydrates, added sugars, and saturated or trans fats can contribute to IR, even in individuals without obesity (4). However, the long-term consequences of IR, such as an increased risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease, can still occur. By understanding the molecular pathogenesis of IR and deployment of timely intervention strategies for early course correction, the natural progression to prediabetes, type 2 diabetes, and metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic disease can be prevented.

IR is almost universally associated with hypertriglyceridemia and reduction in HDL cholesterol (HDL-C) levels as well as increased intrahepatic triglyceride (TG) accumulation (9,10). However, these standard lipid measures alone do not explain the complex pathogenesis of IR. With advances in high-throughput mass spectrometry–based lipidomics methods, studies on the diverse and dynamic nature of the circulating lipid species in relation to anthropometric and cardiometabolic risk factors have gained momentum (11–13). Furthermore, lipidomics has proven to be an effective approach in the identification of circulating biomarkers predictive of the disease pathogenesis (14). In this study, we aimed to identify the dynamic changes in serum lipidome during the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp (HIEC) procedure in association with IR and liver fat in individuals without diabetes for better molecular characterization of the dyslipidemia of the Asian phenotype of IR.

A total of 1,175 serum samples from 235 adult men, comprising 86 Chinese (36.5%), 73 Malay (31.06%), and 76 South Asian (32.3%) participants from the Singapore Adults Metabolism Study (15) were used for the lipidomics study. Ethics approval was obtained from the National Healthcare Group Domain Specific Review Board (approval 2009/00022) in Singapore. All participants provided informed consent. Anthropometric and clinical characteristics of the study participants are provided inSupplementary Table 1.

Insulin sensitivity was assessed after a 10-h overnight fast using the HIEC as described previously (16). Briefly, with a fixed infusion of insulin above basal concentration, the steady-state glucose infusion rate (after >2 h of stabilization) was required to maintain a fixed plasma glucose level of 90 mg/dL. Under such conditions, hepatic glucose production is completely suppressed; hence, the glucose infusion rate is the insulin-mediated glucose clearance rate. The average value of the glucose infusion rate during the final 30 min of the insulin infusion (the M value), together with the steady-state insulin concentration (I) during this period, was used to calculate the; that is, ISI = M/I.

BMI was calculated using the participant’s weight (in kilograms) divided by the square of his height (in meters). Waist circumference was measured at the midpoint between the lower costal margin and iliac crest during mid respiration. Body composition was measured using a Hologic Discovery Wi DEXA scanner (Hologic, Bedford, MA). Blood was sampled for lipids, liver function, thyroid-stimulating hormone, sodium, and lactate dehydrogenase after a 10-h overnight fast. These biochemical analyses were conducted at the National University Hospital Referral Laboratory (Singapore), which is accredited by the College of American Pathologists. Serum total cholesterol, HDL-C, LDL cholesterol, and TG values were measured using the automated Advia 2400 analyzer (Bayer Diagnostics, Tarrytown, NY).

Liver fat content was measure by1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy using a 3 Tesla magnetic resonance scanner (Tim Trio; Siemens). The liver fat was determined from the concentration of methyl and methylene groups of lipids and the unsuppressed water signal. The fat concentration value was corrected for T2losses and verified by region-of-interest analysis with Dixon imaging (17).

Lipid extraction was carried out according to a stratified randomization template and 390 samples (study samples as well as quality control [QC] samples) were extracted in one batch, with a total of five batches for the current study. Lipid extraction was carried out using butanol and methanol (extraction solvent) in a ratio of 1:1 (v/v) containing class-specific internal standards as described previously (11). The internal standard description and the concentration added to each sample are provided inSupplementary Table 2. Briefly, 100 μL of extraction solvent was added to each sample, vortexed for 10 s, followed by water bath sonication for 60 min with temperature maintained at 18–22°C. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000gfor 10 min. The supernatant (total lipid extract) was collected in mass spectrometry–compatible vials and stored at −80°C for liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

High-coverage quantitative lipidomics was conducted by electrospray ionization-MS/MS using a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent 6495 QQQ mass spectrometer) interfaced with a1290 Infinity II UHPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Lipids were separated on a ZORBAX rapid resolution, high-definition ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography C18column (2.1 × 100 mm, 1.8 µm; Agilent Technologies) using a gradient of mobile phase B (10 mmol/L ammonium formate in isopropanol/acetonitrile/water [90/10/1 v/v/v]) and mobile phase A (10 mmol/L ammonium formate in water/acetonitrile/isopropanol [50/30/20 v/v/v]). The gradient started with a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min at 10% B and increasing to 45% B over 2.7 min, then to 53% over 0.1 min, to 65% over 6.2 min, to 89% over 0.1 min, to 92% over 1.9 min, and finally to 100% over 0.1 min. The solvent was then held at 100% B for 0.8 min (total time = 11.9 min). Equilibration followed by decreasing mobile phase B from 100 to 10% over 0.1 min and was held for an additional 0.9 min. Mobile phase B was held at 10% for a further 0.9 min at 0.4 mL/min for a total run time of 15 min. QC samples were analyzed along with the study samples to monitor sample extraction efficiency as well as LC-MS/MS performance and were subsequently used to do the batch corrections. Peak integration was carried out with MassHunter Quantitative software (Agilent Technologies) to select the area of each individual lipid species. Peak areas of lipid species were normalized to their class-specific internal standard for quantification. Batch QCs were used to correct signal drifts across the batches based on LOESS regression method (locally polynomial regression fitting, span = 1.75). Lipid species then were dropped if quality control coefficient of variation were >20%. A total of 672 lipid species representing 39 lipid classes passed the QC and were used for the statistical analysis.

The study participants were divided into tertiles of low (n= 79), medium (n= 78), and high (n= 78) ISI (Supplementary Table 1). To identify the temporal trends in lipidome during the HIEC procedure, soft clustering was conducting based on fuzzy c-means algorithm implemented in the R packageMfuzz(18). The optimized number of clusters was estimated by calculating minimum centroid distance. Mixed linear models adjusted for the confounding factors including age, ethnicity, sex, and BMI were used to study the association of lipids with the ISI and time duration of the HIEC procedures. From these association studies, the lipid species with the adjustedPvalue (Padj) cutoff (Padj< 0.05) were considered statistically significant. The regression coefficient (β) was converted to percent change (% change) in lipid concentration per unit BMI (% change = (10β– 1) × 100). Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis was used to assess the ability of traditional lipid indices and the lipidomic panel in predicting the HIEC-derived insulin sensitivity. All statistical analyses were implemented in R studio.

The data supporting the findings and figures in this study are provided in theSupplementary Material. Other data are not publicly available because of ethical restrictions but can be obtained from the authors upon reasonable request and subject to appropriate approvals, including from the Singapore Adult Metabolism cohort’s committee.

The ISI was stratified into tertiles for subsequent analysis (Supplementary Table 1). Circulating insulin levels at baseline and steady-state HIEC were higher among Asian Indian men compared with Chinese and Malay men (Supplementary Fig. 1A). Ethnicity-based differences were also observed in the low, medium, and high groups of ISI (Supplementary Fig. 1B).

Serum lipidomics was conducted on a total of 1,175 samples representing five time points for 235 study participants. After QC checking of the data, a total of 672 lipid species representing 39 lipid classes were used for further analysis. A scatter plot showing the distribution of individual lipidomic profiles along with analytical quality control samples and NIST SRM 1950 (Standard Reference Material 1950, Metabolites in Frozen Human Plasma) is presented inSupplementary Fig. 2.

Based on the temporal trends (change in concentration) during the HIEC procedure, the lipid species could be categorized into 10 clusters (Fig. 1A). The number and type of lipid species from their respective lipid classes are presented inFig. 1BandSupplementary Table 3. In addition, representation of clustering analysis of lipidomic profiles showing trajectories and membership metrics derived from the analysis using fuzzy c-means algorithm is provided inSupplementary Fig. 3. The most significant change was observed in the lipids from cluster 1 that continued to decrease throughout the procedure. These lipid species represented the acylcarnitine, nonesterified fatty acids [NEFAs], sphingosine, sphingosine-1-phosphate, lysophosphatidylserine, and phosphatidylserine lipid classes. All these lipid species decreased significantly from the baseline concentrations. Similar trends were observed in lipids from cluster 6, which also decreased throughout the procedure; however, after a significant decrease initially (up to 30 min), the changes were less pronounced in later stages and during the steady state (90–120 min). Cluster 6 primarily consisted of lipids from lysophospholipid classes including lysophosphatidylethanolamine, alkenyllysophosphatidylethanolamine, lysophosphatidylinositol, ceramide, and short-chain TGs (TG 48:0 to TG 50:3).

Temporal changes in serum lipidome during HIEC derived from Mfuzz clustering.A: Clustering of lipids according to the changes in concentration from baseline through the clamp procedure into the steady state.B: Heat map representation of the percentage of lipid class enrichment in each cluster. The intensity of the color represents the number of lipid species within each class. Max, maximum; min, minimum. HexCer, hexosylceramide; Hex3Cer, trihexosylceramide; GM3, GM3-ganglioside; PE(O), alkylphosphatidylethanolamine; Hex2Cer, dihexosylceramide; SM, sphingomyelin; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PC(O), alkylphosphatidylcholine; PC(P), alkenylphosphatidylcholine; CE, cholesterylester; PE(P), alkenylphosphatidylethanolamine; DG, diglyceride; PI, phosphatidylinositol; Cer, ceramide; LPC, lysophosphatidylcholine; TG(O), alkyl-diacylglycerol; LPC(P), alkenyllysophosphatidylcholine; LPC(O), alkyllysophospahtidylcholine; LPE, lysophosphatidylethanolamine; LPE(P), alkenyllysophosphatidylethanolamine; LPI, lysophosphatidylinositol; LPS, lysophosphatidylserine; Sph, sphingosine; S1P, sphingosine-1-phosphate; PS, phosphatidylserine; CAR, acylcarnitine; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; PG, phosphatidylglycerol.

One of the major trends was observed in lipids from clusters 2, 3, 7, and 8. These lipids decreased sharply from the baseline concentrations, with a rebound at the steady state with different magnitudes. For example, lipids in cluster 2 almost reached fasting levels during the steady state. These four clusters were represented by cholesteryl esters, phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylinositol, phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), sphingomyelin, ceramides, ether-linked phospholipids (primarily alkylphosphatidylcholine and alkylphosphatidylethanolamine), and GM3-gangliosides. The trends found in clusters 9 and 10 were closer to the trends of clusters 1 and 6: the lipids decreased significantly compared with the baseline; however, there was a subtle increase during the steady state. Cluster 9 mainly consisted of lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) lipids, whereas cluster 10 was enriched in PE-plasmalogens. Distinct from all other clusters, the lipids in clusters 4 and 5 were present at lower concentrations in the fasting state and increased during the procedure; the difference was more pronounced in lipids in cluster 5. These two clusters mainly consisted of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) containing (FA-22:6) TG species.

Acylcarnitines, NEFAs, sphingosine, and sphingosine-1-phosphate were present at higher concentrations in low- and medium-ISI groups compared with the study participants with high ISI at baseline, whereas lysophospholipids and phosphatidylserine concentrations were higher in the high-ISI group. The differences in the serum concentrations of acylcarnitines were subtle between ISI groups, and these lipid species decreased in response to the HIEC, with a noticeable overlap within the ISI groups in the steady state. Similarly, although present at lower concentrations in the high-ISI group, sphingosine-1-phosphate decreased and overlapped between the ISI groups at the steady state. Phosphatidylserine concentrations were not different among the groups at baseline but decreased during the HIEC. NEFAs were present at different baseline concentrations and decreased during the HIEC, but there was no overlap toward the end of the procedure. Lysophospholipids were present in higher concentrations in the high-ISI group except for LPC 16:1 and LPC 20:3. Lysophosphatidylethanolamines were unique in their response by decreasing compared with the baseline but then increasing in concentration again from 90 min onward in the low-ISI group and were present at a higher concentration in the steady state compared with high-ISI group. This increase in concentration at 90 min was observed in the response of many PEs and PE-plasmalogens; however, several of these lipids (specifically those containing polyunsaturated fatty acids [PUFAs]) again decreased from 90 to 120 min in the low-ISI group but not in the medium- and high-ISI groups.

Lipid species that were present at differential concentrations at the baseline in the three ISI groups and changed during the procedure without any noticeable overlap between the ISI groups at any time during the clamp or in the steady state are represented inFig. 2. These lipids primarily belonged to TG, diglyceride, cholesteryl ester, NEFAs, LPC, alkyl- LPC, alkenylphosphatidylcholine (PC-plasmalogens), and trihexosylceramide classes. Concentrations of NEFAs, diglyceride, TGs, and cholesteryl esters were higher in the low- and medium-ISI groups compared with the high-ISI group. Lysophospholipids, ether-linked phospholipids, and trihexosylceramides were present at lower concentrations in the low- and medium-ISI groups compared with the high-ISI group. All the aforementioned lipids were significantly associated with ISI and changed during the HIEC after correcting for multiple hypotheses (Padj< 0.05).

Association of lipids with the ISI conducted by the implementation of mixed linear models. Representative line plots show temporal changes in lipid species that were significantly associated (false discovery rate <0.05) with ISI. Individual colors represent ISI tertiles: red indicates low, blue is medium, and green indicates high ISI. CE, cholesteryl ester; DG, diglyceride.

The complete list of the lipid species with class information and their corresponding response to the HIEC are provided inSupplementary Table 4. The highlightedPvalues show the association of lipid species with ISI, ethnicity, and temporal changes during the HIEC. The changes in concentration (magnitude) and directionality represented by the estimates are further represented by red and blue bars in each cell inSupplementary Table 4.

From association studies, we identified several baseline lipids as associated with the ISI as well as with liver fat content. Several lipids from the TG, diglyceride, cholesteryl ester, ceramide, dihexosylceramide, phosphatidylcholine, and PE lipid classes were negatively associated with the ISI. Most of the lysophospholipids, including LPC, alkyl LPC, alkenyl LPC, lysophosphatidylethanolamine, and lysophosphatidylserine, were positively associated with the ISI. Similarly, phosphatidylinositols, sulfatides, and trihexosylceramides were positively associated with ISI (Fig. 3AandSupplementary Table 5). Lipid species from several lipid classes showed a mixed trend in their association with liver fat; however, TGs, diglycerides, ceramides, dihydroceramides, and deoxyceramides were positively associated with liver fat (Fig. 3BandSupplementary Table 5).

Association of lipids with the ISI and liver fat conducted by using linear regression models adjusted for the confounding factors. Forest plots represent the association of lipids with ISI (A) and liver fat percentage (B).C: Changes in the shared lipids between the ISI and liver fat percentage with change in liver fat. GM1, GM1-ganglioside; Cer1P, ceramide-1-phosphate; PA, phosphatidic acid; FC, free cholesterol.

From these two analyses, we identified a shared lipidomic signature of ISI and liver fat that showed gradual increase with increasing liver fat (Fig. 3C). This serum lipidomic signature was enriched in TGs and diglycerides along with a few ceramides and phosphatidylcholines. We also conducted association studies of lipidomic profiles with HOMA-IR, HOMA of β-cell function (HOMA-B), fasting plasma glucose, and fasting insulin levels (Supplementary Figs. 4and5). We observed that these risk factors had shared lipidomic signatures represented by an overall increase in TGs, diglycerides, and ceramides, whereas acylcarnitines, NEFAs, and lysophospholipids were decreased. However, the magnitude of the percent change in lipid concentration per unit change was higher in the HIEC-derived ISI compared with other measures of insulin sensitivity. The details of all these association studies of the lipidomic profiles and various metabolic risk factors are provided inSupplementary Table 5.

The shared lipidomic signature (n= 30 lipids) of ISI and liver fat, as described in the previous section, was used for the prediction of clamp-derived ISI. At the same time, traditional lipid indices, including VAI, LAP, TyG-index, TyG-BMI, and TyG-WC were used for prediction of the ISI. Similarly, we used HOMA-IR, calculated from fasting insulin and fasting plasma glucose levels for the prediction of clamp-derived ISI. Of the lipid indices, TyG-WC performed the best, followed by the LAP index. HOMA-IR performed better than the traditional lipid indices (Fig. 4A). The lipidomic panel performed slightly better than other indices (area under the curve = 0.86) (Fig. 4B).

Prediction of the measured ISI by concurrent use of several traditional lipid indices and a lipidomic panel.A: Color-coded receiver operating characteristic (ROC) indicating sensitivity and specificity of each measure for the prediction of ISI.B: Area under the curve (AUC) of each ROC. “Lipids” refers to the serum lipidomic panel.

By using the gold standard HIEC for the determination of insulin sensitivity status, we performed lipidomic phenotyping of individuals without diabetes at baseline (fasting) as well as during the HIEC. The changes in serum lipidomic profiles displayed during the HIEC are a cumulative outcome of several overlapping and distinct biological processes, ranging from fatty acid (FA) and lipid metabolism to insulin signaling events. The marked changes were observed mainly in the NEFA, acylcarnitine, sphingosine-1-phosphate, lysophospholipid, and phosphatidylserine lipid classes. Hyperinsulinemia resulted in a decrease in NEFAs and acylcarnitines, reflecting a switch from FA oxidation to the utilization of glucose as the main source of energy production. Several other lipids with marked change in concentrations, including lysophospholipids and sphingosine-1-phosphate, are involved in insulin signaling. Although the role of FA oxidation and TG metabolism have been studied in relation to IR, the differential response of the diverse lipids to the HIEC procedure highlights the complex interactions between lipid metabolism and insulin sensitivity. For example, almost all the circulating lipids were present at higher concentrations in the fasting state compared with the concentrations measured during the HIEC procedure; however, several DHA-containing TG lipids were present at lower concentrations in the fasting state and increased during the HIEC, with final concentrations in the steady state well above those at the baseline. DHA- and eicosapentaenoic acid–containing FA supplementation improves insulin sensitivity and other metabolic health indicators. Therefore, synthesis and delivery of structured TGs with DHA atsn2positions that result in better bioavailability have garnered special interest (25).

From the stratified analysis, the significant lipid species showed temporal trends, but these were present at differential concentrations in the three ISI groups. Lipid species from the TG, diglyceride, cholesteryl ester, and NEFA classes were present at higher concentrations in the low-ISI group starting from the baseline. Similarly, lysophospholipids, ether lipids including PC-plasmalogens, and trihexosylceramides were present at lower concentrations in the low-ISI group compared with the medium- and high-ISI groups. These observations highlight the metabolic inflexibility in the low-ISI group. Serum levels of plasmalogens and other ether lipids have been reported to be lower in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease compared with healthy individuals (26). Similarly, from population-scale lipidomics studies, ether lipids, along with several classes of glycosphingolipids, have been shown to be present at lower levels in metabolic diseases (27). These data suggest the utility of using serum lipidomics in diagnosis and stratification of metabolic diseases.

IR influences hepatic FA metabolism and intrahepatic fat content directly by stimulating TG synthesis or indirectly by increasing the availability of circulating substrates for lipogenesis (28). Increased hepatic insulin exposure potentiates hepatic de novo lipogenesis (DNL), an important contributing factor to the increased TG synthesis and subsequent hepatic steatosis. DNL leads to increase in VLDL production and particle size; these, in turn, are released into circulation and manifest as hypertriglyceridemia. To provide insights into the interplay between IR and liver fat accumulation, we carried out detailed association studies of serum lipidomics with ISI and liver fat. We observed an increase in the concentrations of TGs, diglycerides, and ceramides with decreasing ISI and increasing liver fat percentage. One of the characteristic features of the lipid signature of IR was the presence of TGs that contained FAs such as FA14:0, FA14:1, FA16:0, FA16:1, FA18:0, and FA18:1, these FAs represent a signature of hepatic DNL. Fasting hepatic DNL is higher in individuals with IR and fatty liver compared with healthy individuals (29). Furthermore, plasma TG concentrations have been shown to be proportional to the amount of hepatic DNL. Under fasting conditions in healthy study participants, DNL in the liver has been found to contribute <5% to VLDL-TG content. However, the DNL is substantially increased in IR and hepatic steatosis in the fasted state and may not show further changes in the postprandial state (30).

Another significant observation was a decrease in LPCs with IR and increasing liver fat. Similarly, several ether-linked lysophospholipids decreased with increasing liver fat percentage. Lysophospholipids including ether-linked lysophospholipids are involved in insulin secretion. Similarly, LPC activates adipocyte glucose uptake (31) and mediates the effects of FA-induced IR (32). Animal studies have further demonstrated the potential of LPC to active PPAR signaling to prevent skeletal muscle lipotoxicity (33). Although the focus has been mostly on the PUFA-containing LPCs, our observations highlight the role of atypical LPCs (odd- or branched chain) and ether-linked LPCs in the development of IR and hepatic steatosis. Diet is an important source of odd-chain and branched-chain FAs (34). These findings have potential to guide interventional strategies targeting dysregulated lysophospholipid metabolism and signaling pathways.

Although the HIEC is the gold standard for insulin sensitivity measurement, it requires expertise and specialized metabolic centers; therefore, better prediction of IR from fasting blood samples is useful in resource-limited settings or in case of population-scale studies, in which such procedures are not feasible. We tested several traditional lipid indices along with HOMA-IR in prediction of HIEC-derived ISI. The shared serum lipidomic signature between IR and liver fat identified in this study performed modestly better than other measures in the prediction of ISI. Of the traditional lipid indices, TyG-WC performed the best, followed by LAP index in the our study population. HOMA-IR performed better than the lipid indices; however, the lipidomic panel performed slightly better than other indices. Similarly, the addition of the lipidomic panel improved the performance of HOMA-IR. These observations highlight the potential of using fasting lipidomic profiles for establishing IR status, in addition to the traditional measures.

There are several strengths of this study, including the use of gold standard HIEC to measure insulin sensitivity. Similarly, we used high-coverage lipidomic phenotyping during the HIEC to understand the effect of insulin on circulating lipid metabolism at different levels of insulin sensitivity. There are a few limitations of this study. Only men were recruited for this study, to avoid the confounding effects of the menstrual cycle on insulin sensitivity measurement. Although we calculated HOMA-B, we did not have specific measurements of β-cell function in this study.

In summary, we identified dynamic changes in the serum lipidome in response to the HIEC procedure. We identified lipidomic signatures of IR and liver fat revealing a complex interaction of dyslipidemia and hepatic steatosis. These findings will help in stratifications and intervention of dyslipidemia associated with IR for early course correction to prevent the development of type 2 diabetes and metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic disease.

This article contains supplementary material online athttps://doi.org/10.2337/figshare.29376056.

Acknowledgments.The authors are grateful to all the study participants.

The Singapore Lipidomics Incubator (SLING) is supported by grants from the National University of Singapore via the Life Sciences Institute, the National Research Foundation (NRFI2015-05 and NRFSBP-P4) and A*STAR IAF-ICP I1901E0040.