Stunting, also known as growth retardation, is a prominent health challenge for Mayan children, stemming from the complex interaction of malnutrition, inflammation, limited healthcare access, poverty, and food insecurity. Diet plays a key role in early childhood growth. A monotonous diet may lack essential nutrients, potentially affecting growth and developmental trajectories. Our objective was to explore the dietary patterns of Guatemalan Mayan children, comparing stunted children to those with typical growth.

We conducted a cross-sectional study involving 155 Mayan children aged 2 to 5 years in Guatemala. Dietary intake was assessed using three 24-hour recalls. A questionnaire assessed WASH (water, sanitation, and hygiene) service availability and household food insecurity via the Household Food Insecurity Access Scale (HFIAS). Additionally, we measured weight, height, age, body composition, and recent common childhood communicable diseases (CCCD). The dietary data was analyzed based on two approaches: The nutrient approach yields the prevalence of inadequacy, and A-posteriori approach using K-means cluster analysis informed about the dietary pattern of the sample, including types of foods, and their energy contribution to the diet.

Stunting affected 53.5% of the children, and nearly half of the children (49.7%) had experienced one or more recent CCCD. The majority resided in food-insecure households (81.9%), with more than half located in rural areas (61.6%). They had a low intake of omega-3, omega-6 fatty calcium and choline. We found two distinct dietary patterns: the grain-based diet, represented by high intakes of cereal-based drinks and corn-based meals. The second was a dairy, poultry, and corn dietary pattern; distinguished by higher consumption of dairy products and poultry.

Significantly more children living in severely food insecure households consumed a grain-based dietary pattern. The stunted children on the grain-based diet consumed more calories from grain-based drinks than any other food group. Beyond dietary monotony and poor nutritional quality, additional factors likely contribute to the high stunting rate, requiring further investigation.

Under favourable conditions children follow a linear growth curve guided by their genetic potential [1]. However, actual growth can be hindered by several risk factors, including poor diet, recurrent illnesses, and a food-insecure environment [2,3]. Stunting occurs when children do not reach their genetic growth potential, primarily due to impaired bone growth [4]. This form of chronic malnutrition is associated with delayed development, reduced neurocognitive abilities, and an increased risk of nutrition-related chronic diseases in adulthood [5,6]. Stunting is characterized by multiple signs and symptoms [7]; in population-based studies, it is identified using anthropometric indicators, specifically a height-for-age Z score of less than − 2 standard deviations from the median, based on the WHO Child Growth Standards [8].

The Guatemalan Mayan population, comprising 21 distinct communities, represents approximately 51% of the country’s total population. Predominantly residing in the western highlands, they are known for their rich cultural heritage, which includes their gastronomy, unique ingredients, traditional recipes, and diverse languages [9]. Despite having a growth potential similar to other Latino populations [10], the Guatemalan Mayans are among the shortest in stature worldwide [11]. Malnutrition is an important health issue among Mayan children, largely due to political violence, poverty, restricted access to healthcare, and food insecurity [12,13].

Diet is a key risk factor for stunted growth. Consuming a variety of foods, prepared in a safe environment, and eating frequent meals over time play crucial roles in early childhood growth, particularly through the intake of essential nutrients. Adequate calcium intake during childhood is essential for optimal skeletal development [14], while insufficient levels of serum vitamin D also influence growth [15]. Choline, a precursor to DNA methylation and acetylcholine, is vital for skeletal development. Evidence from a clinical trial in Malawi suggests that low choline levels may impede children’s linear growth by limiting phosphatidylcholine synthesis [16,17]. Additionally, studies from the 1950 s observed that Mayans with lower protein intake were more likely to be stunted compared to those with higher protein intake [18]. Research in the Guatemalan western highlands found that schoolchildren’s diets were deficient in α-linolenic acid, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), likely due to low consumption of fatty fish and seafood. DHA intake is particularly important as it may protect cognitive function in environments prone to malnutrition [19]. This is especially important because DHA intake may protect cognitive function in adverse environments conducive to malnutrition [20]. Overall, the diet of Mayan Guatemalans is highly homogeneous with low intakes of nutrient-rich foods, primarily due to economic and market access restrictions [21,22]. However, when these restrictions are absent, the Guatemalan gastronomic profile includes a diverse array of nutrient-rich foods such as fruits, vegetables, seeds, and dairy [23,24].

Available evidence suggests that a diverse diet that includes fruits, vegetables, dairy and protein may benefit overall health and support growth [25,26]. However, enhancing dietary diversity among Mayan children alone will not fully resolve their malnutrition and growth challenges. A comprehensive approach should also include agricultural diversification [22], improved sanitation and household environments, food security interventions [27], nutrition education, and women’s empowerment initiatives [22].

Hence, our objective was to document the dietary patterns of Mayan children aged 2 to 5 years residing in Chichicastenango, Guatemala, and to determine and compare the dietary patterns of stunted children to those with typical growth.

In a cross-sectional study, we included 155 Indigenous Mayan children aged 2 to 5 years living in Chichicastenango, Quiché, Guatemala, an area predominantly inhabited by the Mayan-K’iche population. Situated at 2,070 m above sea level and covering an area of 400 km², Chichicastenango comprises 86 urban and rural cantons, with a population of 141,567 as of 2018. The region experiences temperatures ranging from 9.7 to 21.8 °C and has a humidity level of 75% [28]. Agriculture and commerce are the primary sources of income, and the poverty rate is notably high at 83%. Data collection took place in ten health facilities and involved the use of questionnaires, 24-hour dietary recalls, and anthropometric and bioimpedance measurements.

Participants were recruited from February 2020 to 2021, from 29 cantons, of which 15 were urban, contributing to 39% of the sample (n= 61), while the remaining 14 cantons were rural, making up 61% of the sample (n= 94).

We recruited participants by posting announcements at the healthcare centres. Additionally, we presented the study to the healthcare workers, community leaders, and Indigenous Elders who assisted in advertising the study. Participants’ mothers provided written informed consent. Eligible children were aged 2 to 5 years old, did not have growth-related health conditions, and were consuming a typical family diet.

We calculated a minimum sample size of 129 participants with a 95.0% confidence level, based on Quiche having 16,513 children aged 2–5 years, with a stunting prevalence of 68.7% [29,30]. Considering the initial 42 dropouts due to COVID-19 biosafety concerns, we decided to recruit 20% additional participants and replace the dropouts to ensure we still met the minimum sample size of 129 participants. Despite two exclusions, we maintained the required sample size.

The analysis included 155 children with complete records (53.5% boys,n= 83; 46.6% girls,n= 72), with 57% aged 2–3 years (n= 89) and 43% aged 4–5 years (n= 66). Analysis was grouped by age, sex, and stunting status.

A trained nutritionist used the multiple-pass technique to complete three 24-hour recalls with each child capturing day-to-day variations in dietary intake [31]. Interviews, conducted both in-person and by phone, were unannounced and randomly scheduled on non-consecutive days at least two weeks apart. We ensured that interviews were conducted on different days of the week (Monday through Sunday) to account for variability in participants’ schedules [32]. After each interview, participants were asked about supplement use, particularly focusing on micronutrient powder supplements provided by the Ministry of Health. Verbal information from the recalls was recorded on paper-based forms, with a K’iche language interpreter assisting the interviewer with two participants. Quality checks were conducted by the project’s lead dietitian (MMV).

Around 27% of participants provided their first recall before the implementation of COVID-19 public health safety measures. However, all of the second and third recalls were gathered when public health safety measures were in effect. To support the safety of participants and our team and to reduce anxiety associated with the potential COVID exposure, subsequent interviews were conducted via phone. The interviewer actively sought recipes and documented foods in the local language. The thesaurus for K’iche foods [24] was used to convert food names into Spanish and then into English.

For consistency, one dietitian in training coded (RM) and entered all 24-hour recalls, and the lead dietitian (MMV) reviewed the data for errors. Dietary information was coded for nutritional content based on food type, serving size and method, and preparation. The average of the three dietary intakes was used for analysis. Nutrient analysis was performed using “The Food Processor Nutrition and Fitness Software version SQL 11” by Esha Research, Salem, USA [33], with the USDA Food Data Central [34] database for coding foods and obtaining nutrient values. After obtaining the nutrient analysis report, data was transferred to SPSS 27 [35] for analysis.

We evaluated prevalence of nutrient inadequacy using the Estimated Average Requirements (EAR) and Adequate Intake (AI) recommendations of the American National Academies of Sciences (NAS) [36]. The decision to adopt these nutrient requirements was based on the rigor of the NAS standards. Additionally, the Guatemalan population shares similarities with Mexican and US Latino populations covered by the NAS standards.

Daily food intakes were categorized into the Bureau of Nutritional Sciences (BNS) Food Group Codes and Descriptions developed by Health Canada [37]. However, we could only utilize 32 of the BNS Food Group descriptions due to the limited diversity in the population’s diet. Some food groups were renamed to reflect dietary patterns and ethnic dishes based on the population’s food intake, with names derived from frequently consumed foods. For instance, cereal and grain drinks (atole) were initially part of the cereals and grains food group.

The food group descriptions were: bread, rolls, crackers and biscuits; cereals and grains; confectionary; cookies and biscuits; dairy products; egg dishes; fish and shellfish; fruits, raw, cooked, frozen and canned; Guatemalan dishes; legume (recipes); meat dishes (excluding frozen dinners); miscellaneous; non-alcoholic beverages (soft and fruit drinks; etc.); nuts, seeds and peanut butter; other breads with fibre; other breakfast cereals; other fats & spreads; pasta, rice, cereal grains and flour; pizza, sandwich, hamburger and hot dog dishes; pork, fresh and ham; potatoes, fried; potatoes, raw and cooked; poultry dishes; sausages (fresh and cured); savoury snacks; soups (recipes); sugars, syrups and preserves; sweet baked goods; tea, coffee, water; vegetables (excluding potatoes); white bread; wholegrain and high-fibre breakfast cereals.

We measured height with a SECA 213 portable stadiometer to the nearest 0.1 cm. Weight was measured using a SECA 876 Flat scale with the mother and child function for mobile use to the nearest 0.1 kg. For cultural reasons, participants could not remove their outfits; therefore, we calculated a tare weight by asking 20 persons to provide unworn clothes to be weighed and we used the average. We calculated a participant’s age using their date of birth on their health card. Using the WHO standards and Anthro 3.2.2 [38], we calculated height-for-age (HAZ) z scores for children to determine stunting [39]. We assessed resistance, reactance, and phase angle using bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) (RJL Systems Quantum Legacy Bioelectrical Impedance Analyzer). The Quantum Legacy is a phase-sensitive 4-electrode medical BIA device that measures at 50 kHz with 0.1 ohms resolution. We used equations to determine the whole-body parameters such as fat body mass, lean body mass, and total body water [40].

To assess food security, we used the Household Food Insecurity Access Scale (HFIAS) [41]. We asked about common childhood communicable diseases (CCCD) in the previous 15 days using standardized questions from National Child and Maternal Health surveys [30]. We also used the standardized questions from the Guatemalan income survey to ask about access to WASH services (water, sanitation, and hygiene) [28].

Nutrients were divided into groups:'nutrients of public health concern’ and ‘growth beneficial nutrients’. This nutrient organization is unique to this project and was developed based on suggestions from community members who collaborated with us. The nutrients in both groups were selected based on their role as indicators of a healthy eating pattern [42], and their association with a reduced risk of chronic conditions and diseases in adulthood, such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, metabolic syndrome, and osteoporosis [43]. Guatemala has limited and outdated information on the micronutrient status of its population, historically prioritizing iron, zinc, vitamin B12, folates, and vitamin A. However, the nutrition transition [44] has also necessitated being cautious about other nutrients, such as sodium, potassium, added sugars, vitamin C, and polyunsaturated fatty acids like omega-3 and omega-6 [19,45]. The growth-beneficial micronutrients were selected and organized based on evidence from other countries where stunting prevalence is not an issue. These nutrients were chosen for their support of normal growth and cognitive development. The nutrients of public health concern included vitamin A (mcg/d), vitamin C (mg/d), dietary folate equivalents (DFE) (mcg/d), iron (mg/d), potassium (mg/d), sodium (mg/d), zinc (mg/d), total fiber (g/d), added sugar (g/d), omega-3 (g/d), and omega-6 (g/d) [46–48]. The growth beneficial nutrients included vitamin D from food (mcg/d), vitamin D from food and supplement (mcg/d), calcium (mg/d) [49], magnesium (mg/d) [50], phosphorus (mg/d), and choline (mg/d) [51]. The participants were divided into two age groups based on the Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) recommendation groupings, children 2–3 and 4–5 years old. We expressed intakes using median and range, mean and standard deviation, and the percentage below recommended intake with a 95% confidence interval.

We used the k-means cluster analysis to describe the children’s dietary patterns. Cluster analysis isa posterioriapproach used to identify and group dietary habits into patterns (clusters) [52]. Cluster analysis is a data-driven method to create groups of individuals sharing similar dietary habits. It separates subjects into mutually exclusive groups (clusters) based on similarities between their diets [53]. We used the BNS food groups as a clustering method and separated the participants’ dietary intake into two clusters. Each food pattern was characterized by the average daily caloric intake of its constituent food groups, compared to the overall mean intake. Cluster names were assigned based on commonly consumed pre-determined food groups within each cluster, as suggested by Sauvageot et al. [53]. The ANOVA test for the cluster centers showed the consumption of 11 of the 32 food groups was significantly different between the two clusters (p< 0.05). These groups are listed in Table3. We also compared the group Calorie intake between the selected two clusters to understand which cluster consumes more of each food group than the other.

Since the data was from an Indigenous community, most foods were traditional and repetitive, like tortillas and atole. Therefore, based on the most frequent consumed foods in each group, we renamed the 11 food groups to describe the food pattern differences between clusters. For each of these variables, we ran a student’s t-test to identify differences. We present the intake of each food group by Kilocalories for non-stunted and stunted children using a radar plot as a visual representation of their dietary patterns [54].

The University of Saskatchewan, Universidad de San Carlos, and Guatemalan Mayan-K’iche’ organization JUN RUQ’ WUQ’UB AJPU’ have collaborated since 2017 to improve health and wellbeing in their communities. This project, developed with local academics, community elders, traditional healers and community Ministry of Health workers, received ethics approval from University of Saskatchewan Behavioural Research Ethics Board (BIO 1258) and the Guatemalan Health and Social Services National Health Ethics Committee (42-2019). Regular meetings with elders and healers guided data collection, integrated within the Ministry of Health’s activities. COVID-19 led to a three-month data collection suspension in March 2020, before biosafety protocols were implemented prior to resuming data collection. Despite challenges, including 42 withdrawals, data collection extended from the planned three months to 11 months due to the pandemic’s impact.

The demographic profile of the study population is outlined in Table1. Stunting, observed in 53.5% of the sampled children, affected both sexes, with 50% of girls and 56.6% of boys being stunted. Notably, there were no instances of overweight or wasting among the children surveyed. The average z-score for HAZ stood at −2, indicating a pervasive risk of stunting within the study population. Nearly half of the children (49.7%) had experienced one or more common childhood communicable disease in the past 15 days. Moreover, the majority resided in food-insecure households (81.9%), and more than half resided in rural areas (61.6%) with lack of access to WASH (Water, sanitation, and Hygiene) facilities such as tap water and sanitary services (including latrines).

Table2displays the prevalence of inadequate nutrient intake by nutrient and age group. Among 2–3-year-old children, intakes below the Estimated Average Requirements (EAR) or Adequate Intake (AI) for vitamin C, calcium, and choline were less common. In contrast, more than half of 4–5-year-old children had inadequate intakes of these nutrients. The prevalence of inadequate intake was higher than 90% for potassium, omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids in both age groups. The added sugar intake in both age groups was within recommendations. Even after considering the children’s daily intake of 5 mcg of supplemental vitamin D (cholecalciferol acetate) provided in multiple micronutrient powders supplied by the Guatemalan Ministry of Health, 86% of children 2–3 years old and 95% of children 4–5 years old had inadequate intake vitamin D intake among both age groups. Around half of the children in both age groups had inadequate calcium and choline intakes. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) [36] for sodium is 1500 mg/day and 1900 mg/day for children aged 1–3 years and 4–8 years, respectively. More than half (55%) of 1–3-year-old children and 38% of the 4–8-year-old children consumed more than the UL for sodium.

bEnergy for ages 2–3 years was based on the average Estimated Energy Requirement (EER) for boys and girls aged 24–35 months. For ages 4–5 years, energy was based on the average EER for boys and girls aged 3–5 years with an active physical activity level (PAL).

Among children 2–3 years old, mean energy intake was 1166 ± 313 Kcal, while for children 4–5 years it was 1266 ± 293 Kcal. However, more than three-quarters (77.3%) of 4-5-year-old children had lower energy consumption than the Estimated Average Requirement (EAR); this deficiency primarily stemmed from low overall fat intake (43.9%) and low carbohydrate intake (25.8%). Within the 2–3 year age group, almost half of the sample (41.6%) consumes less energy than the EAR. This energy deficiency in the diet primarily resulted from inadequate intake of overall fats (25.8%) and Carbohydrates (11.2%). Mean protein intake was 43.7 ± 15 g/d and 45.5 ± 13 g/d for children 2–3 and 4–5 years old, respectively. Their protein intake represented 14.9% of the total daily energy consumption. Recommended total protein intake is based on the National Academies of Science recommendations, specifically 0.87 g/kg/d of protein per kg body weight for children two and three years old and 0.76 g/kg/d of protein for children four to five years old [36]. The minimum observed protein intake (17 g/d in 2–3 y and 22 g/d for 4-5y) was higher than the average recommended intake of 9.7 ± 1 g/d for 2-3y and 9.2 ± 1 g/d for 4-5y. Carbohydrates make up 63% and total fat 25% of the total dietary energy.

Based on a K-means cluster analysis of the dietary data from the 24-hour dietary recalls, we found two distinct dietary patterns (Table3). More than half of the sample consumed a grain-based dietary pattern, represented by high intakes of cereal-based drinks (atole) and corn-based preparations such as tortillas and tamales. The second was a dairy, poultry, and corn dietary pattern; characterized by higher consumption of dairy products and poultry. This dietary pattern has notably more animal-based protein. The other food groups listed in Table3(meat dishes, coffee and tea, fruits and fruit dishes) were consumed in significantly different amounts between the two dietary patterns. In terms of energy, 62% of children consuming the grain-based diet had inadequate energy intake (below the EAR), and a similar pattern was observed in 51.3% of children on the dairy, poultry, and corn diet.

The protein intake was not a problem in any of the dietary patterns. However, 43% of children in the grain-based diet compared to 23.7% in the dairy, poultry, and corn diet had an overall low-fat intake. Fewer children consuming the grain-based diet presented inadequate intake of carbohydrates (8.9%) compared to more than a quarter (26.3%) of the children in the dairy, poultry, and corn diet.

Moreover, Table4shows that the prevalence of inadequate nutrient intake of vitamin C is notably higher in the corn-based diet compared to the dairy, poultry, and corn diet. Other nutrients, such as sodium, added sugars, omega-3, omega-6, vitamin D, calcium, and choline, are also lower in the corn-based diet. In contrast, the dairy, poultry, and corn diet shows higher percentages of inadequate intake for nutrients such as folate, zinc, fiber, magnesium, and phosphorus.

Table5presents a summary of the children’s anthropometrics and socioeconomic characteristics by dietary pattern. We did not find a difference related to age, body composition, or access to WASH services between the children eating each dietary pattern. Significantly more children living in severely food insecure households consumed a grain-based dietary pattern. The grain-based dietary pattern was also more commonly consumed by stunted children, although not statistically significant from the dairy, poultry, and corn dietary pattern. When children were grouped according to their stunting status, the stunted children on the grain-based diet consumed more calories from atole drinks than any other food group. Similarly, stunted children on the dairy, poultry and corn diet ate significantly less calories from fruit than their non-stunted peers consuming the same dietary pattern. Calories (Kcal).

Figure1presents a radar plot comparing food group intake, quantified by the kilocalories consumed daily by stunted and non-stunted children. Among the children in the sample aged 2–5 years, the mean energy intake was 1209 ± 308 kcal, based on the overall calculation for both age groups. Several food groups—such as eggs, vegetables, bread, traditional Guatemalan dishes, potatoes, and snacks—were consumed in similar quantities by all children, regardless of stunting status. These food groups are not shown in the radar plot; therefore, the plot accounts for only up to 700 kilocalories of the total intake. The plot focuses on food groups with significantly different energy contributions between the two groups. While overall patterns are similar, non-stunted children consume more kilocalories from fruits, poultry, and meat dishes, whereas stunted children consume more from atoles (cereal-, nut-, or seed-based beverages) and tortillas or other corn-based masa preparations.

Given the similarity in dietary patterns between stunted and non-stunted children, Table6details the energy consumption from each food group within these patterns. The analysis found no significant differences in energy intake between the two groups of children within each dietary pattern.

Our study found that stunting was prevalent among Guatemalan Mayan children of both sexes, affecting over half of the sampled children. This finding is consistent with national stunting prevalence reports for the specific geographic region studied [29]. It also aligns with the results from anthropometric monitoring conducted by humanitarian organizations in 2019 across 14 vulnerable municipalities in four departments, including Quiche, nearby where Chichicastenango is located [55]. However, the aforementioned study reported a higher prevalence of stunting because it focused on a population targeted for interventions to reduce undernutrition in the highly vulnerable area known as the dry corridor, which is severely affected by drought.

Stunting has been linked to various risk factors, including living in a food-insecure environment, recurrent illnesses leading to inflammation, and a low-diversity diet, among others [56,57]. While household food insecurity has been linked to stunting in children under five years of age, this association was not confirmed in a pooled analyses, possibly because other factors such as the presence of infections, inflammation, and oxidative stress also contribute to delayed linear growth [58,59]. Our results indicated that at least one-quarter of the households did not have access to sanitary services, and half of the children may be exposed to inflammation due to their repeated infectious diseases. These conditions likely exacerbate the risk of stunting, as chronic inflammation significantly contributes to stunting in children by affecting nutrient absorption, growth hormone regulation, nutrient metabolism, and immune system function [60–62].

The children in our study were stunted regardless of their dietary patterns, suggesting that other risk factors, such as chronic inflammation from lack of access to WASH services [63] or living in food insecurity [58], may play a pivotal role. Additionally, food insecurity in rural and Mayan Guatemalan Indigenous populations has been associated with poor educational attainment, particularly among mothers [64]. This highlights the need for multisectoral nutritional and social policies to address the structural drivers of stunting [65].

Recognizing that sufficient nutrient intake stems from a diverse diet, we underscore the importance of understanding food patterns, groups, and ingredients rather than focusing solely on isolated nutrients [66]. The two distinctive dietary patterns we describe were very similar, but there were notable differences. First, the quantity of grain-based meals consumed varied significantly. Within the grain-based pattern, stunted children consumed significantly higher amounts of grain (mainly corn) based dishes and drinks than non-stunted children. A possible explanation may be that higher corn consumption reduces dietary diversity and exposes children to higher aflatoxin levels that may impair their growth [67,68]. The dairy, poultry, and corn diet tripled the percentage of fruit and fruit dishes (9.9% vs. 3.3%) compared to the grain-based diet. The higher fruit consumption in the dairy, poultry, and corn diet suggests a slightly more diverse and balanced diet. Fruits provide essential vitamins, minerals, and fiber, which are crucial for overall health and development. Increased fruit intake can lead to better immune function, improved digestion, and a lower risk of chronic diseases [69,70]. For children, this is particularly important for growth and cognitive development. Following this food patter might have been influenced by the family’s food environment [71].

In a grain-based diet, most energy comes from grains and added sugars. The sugar added to coffee or tea, which contains polyphenols that can inhibit iron and other micronutrient absorption, is a significant source of monosaccharides [72]. However, there is limited evidence on how the consumption of snack foods and sugar-sweetened beverages by toddlers in low- and middle-income countries (LMIC) impacts their growth and malnutrition [73]. Consistent with our findings, systematic reviews have noted that sugar-sweetened beverages provide a substantial proportion of energy intake among children in LMIC and low-resource settings [74]. These foods and beverages are often considered “empty calories” because they provide energy with little to no nutritional value, contributing to poor dietary patterns and potential nutrient deficiencies [75]. Another systematic review conducted in Pakistan, found that school-age children had a high intake of carbohydrates and a low intake of protein-rich foods, fruits, and vegetables compared to the recommended daily allowance (RDA). This dietary pattern was associated with an overall pooled prevalence of stunting in a quarter of the population [76]. In contrast, children consuming the dairy, poultry and corn diet were found to ingest more saccharides from fruits, which also include other essential nutrients supporting growth [77,78]. This highlights the importance of nutrient density in the diet, ensuring that children receive the necessary vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients for optimal health and development [79].

The high prevalence of inadequate choline intake among these children may contribute to their growth restriction [16]. The primary dietary sources of choline include liver, eggs, beef, fish, pork, chicken, milk, and specific pulses such as soybeans and kidney beans [80]. The children in our sample consume some of these foods, but the quantities were not enough to fulfill their daily choline intake. The Guatemalan Mayan Indigenous children’s diets were also inadequate in omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, which may accompany choline deficiencies [17]. Choline is a non-essential nutrient because the human liver can produce it endogenously. Still, the amount that the body naturally synthesizes is not sufficient to meet human needs. Although the effect of choline on children’s growth has been scarcely assessed, a recent review suggests choline may play a role in reducing inflammation and promoting growth in children [17,81].

This study enhances our understanding of stunting in Mayan communities and the contributing role of dietary patterns. Our findings can inform food-based dietary guidelines for this population and the redesign of supplement interventions to better complement current dietary patterns to address persistent stunting. Our results could be used to develop culturally appropriate interventions to address nutritional health disparities and promote optimal growth and development. Access to a variety of foods, including fruits, can be influenced by economic status, the land where they live and cultural practices; families with better access might be more likely to include fruits in their children’s diets.

Regarding strengths and limitations, this study presents a comprehensive dietary analysis and assessment of food insecurity in a highly marginalized Indigenous rural population. The study provides an overall characterization of the diet and nutrient intake among children under six years of age during the COVID-19 restriction period among an already food-insecure and marginalized community. Additionally, inadequate nutrient intake does not necessarily indicate clinical deficiency, which should be confirmed through biomarkers. Moreover, it should be acknowledged that our data characterizes the dietary patterns in rural and urban areas of Chichicastenango, Quiché and may not be generalizable to other regions in Guatemala, which face unique challenges related to the land and socioeconomic conditions. Furthermore, the cross-sectional nature of this study limits our ability to establish causality for stunting in this population. In addition, our data may be influenced by confounding factors such as food insecurity, infections, and other socioeconomic variables. However, the findings are consistent with other, albeit limited, evidence from the region. This suggests that achieving Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 2, Target 2.2—ending all forms of malnutrition and reducing stunting among children under 5 by 40% by 2025—requires a multidimensional approach. Our findings indicate that achieving this target in the studied region is unlikely.

Our findings confirm that stunting is associated with multiple risk factors, including food insecurity, recurrent illnesses, and low dietary diversity. Chronic inflammation and inadequate nutrient intake, particularly from a grain-based diet, may be contributing to stunting, emphasizing the need for a comprehensive approach to address these underlying causes.

This research identifies two main dietary patterns among the children: (1) The grain-based diet is comprised of tortillas and corn-based masa preparations, a significantly high amount of atoles or diluted porridge, minimum amounts of dairy products, meat dishes, coffee, and tea (which accounted for its sugar). (2) The dairy, poultry, and corn diet included dairy products, tortillas, corn-based masa preparations, poultry dishes, atoles, and a significantly higher amount of fruit than the grain-based diet. Stunted children were found across both dietary patterns. The association of both patterns with stunting suggests that factors beyond dietary intake—such as environmental conditions and food insecurity—may play a critical role. The study underscores the importance of understanding and improving dietary diversity beyond key foods and nutrient intake, particularly in Indigenous communities given the possible nutrient richness of traditional foods. It calls for multisectoral nutritional and social policies to address the structural drivers of stunting and recommends culturally appropriate interventions to enhance nutritional health and promote optimal growth and development in these populations.

Dr. Noel Solomons’ memory for guiding the implementation of the project and developed the idea of this manuscript with us. Nan Sebastiana Pol Suy (Poshita), Nan Tomasa Suy, Avexnim Cojti, and Patty Frank, who spiritually guided this project. Eva López who supporting the community approach and the implementation of the project. Rossemary Miranda (RM) from Universidad del Valle de Guatemala who entered the 24-hour recalls.

MMV, MR, GL, and HV were responsible for the conceptualization of the study. The community and institutional approach were developed by MMV, KCA, and MR. Data collection was carried out by MMV, KCA and MR. Data analysis was conducted by MMV, GL, HV, and MCC. All authors contributed to the writing and reviewing of the manuscript.

This research was funded by The Canadian Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Scholarships, Rideau Hall Foundation, Community Foundations Canada, Universities Canada, University of Saskatchewan, Universidad de San Carlos de Guatemala, Ministerio de Salud Pública y Asistencia Social de Guatemala, The Center for Studies of Sensory Impairment, Aging and Metabolism (CeSSIAM) Guatemala, and the NIH Cobre Award 1P20GM152304-01.