Caspases are a family
of cysteine proteases that act as molecular
scissors to cleave substrates and regulate biological processes, such
as programmed cell death and inflammation. Extensive efforts have
been made to identify caspase substrates and to determine the factors
that dictate specificity. We recently discovered that human inflammatory
caspases (caspases-1, -4, and -5) cleave the cytokines IL-1β
and IL-18 in a sequence-dependent manner. Here, we report the development
of a new peptide-based probe and inhibitor derived from the tetrapeptide
sequence of IL-18 (LESD). The LESD-based inhibitor showed a strong
preference for caspase-8 with an IC50of 50 nM, and was
more potentin vitrothan the commonly used zIETD-FMK
inhibitor, which is considered the most selective and potent caspase-8
inhibitor. We further demonstrated that the LESD-based inhibitor prevents
caspase-8 activation during infection in primary bone marrow-derived macrophages. In addition,
we systematically characterized the selectivity and potency of known
substrates and inhibitors of the apoptotic and inflammatory caspases
using standardized activity units of each caspase. Our findings reveal
that VX-765, a known inhibitor of caspases-1 and -4, also inhibits
caspase-8 (IC50= 1 μM). Even when specificities
are shared, the caspases exhibit different efficiencies and potencies
for shared substrates and inhibitors. Altogether, we report the development
of new tools that will facilitate the study of caspases and their
roles in biology.

Caspases are a family of related cysteine
proteases that play key
roles in regulating programmed cell death pathways, such as apoptosis
and pyroptosis.−Caspases are activated by diverse stimuli but are
structurally related, and their activation triggers the proteolysis
of what is estimated to be thousands of substrates to execute cell
death.−Caspases that induce apoptosis are generally referred to as apoptotic
caspases, and those that induce pyroptosis are known as inflammatory
caspases.

The inflammatory caspases, caspases-1, -4, and -5
in humans and
caspases-1 and -11 in mice, are activated in response to diverse pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs) or damage-associated molecular patterns
(DAMPs). A subset of germline-encoded pattern-recognition receptors
(PRRs) detects PAMPs and DAMPs and assembles into multiprotein complexes
known as inflammasomes.,Assembly of the canonical inflammasome
leads to caspase-1 dimerization, triggering its autoproteolytic activation.−Activated caspase-1 then cleaves and activates the interleukin family
of cytokines, IL-1β and IL-18, and the pore-forming protein
gasdermin D (GSDMD) to induce pyroptotic cell death.−In contrast to the canonical inflammasome pathway that utilizes
pattern-recognition receptors, caspases-4/5 in humans and caspase-11
in mice bind directly to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Gram-negative
bacteria, triggering their oligomerization and autoproteolytic activation. We recently discovered that caspase-11 activation
and autoprocessing precede and are required to form the caspase-11
noncanonical inflammasome, but whether this extends to other inflammasomes
remains unknown. Active caspases-4 and
-5 cleave and activate IL-18 but cleave and inactivate IL-1β.−It has also been reported that active caspase-4 can cleave and activate
IL-1β, but this likely occurs with slower kinetics compared
to the processing event that gives rise to the inactive species of
IL-1β.,Mouse caspase-11 cannot cleave
IL-18 but similarly cleaves and inactivates IL-1β. In this manner, the inflammatory caspases act
as initiators and executioners that induce their own activation, permitting
the cleavage of other downstream substrates.

All caspases preferentially cleave peptide bonds after an
aspartic
acid residue in the P1 position.−Caspases are structurally
related with conserved active sites and overlapping substrate specificities.,,,−As a result, it has been challenging to develop selective reagents
to probe the biology of specific caspases. Extensive efforts have
been made to develop peptide-based reporter substrates and inhibitors,
which have had limited success in producing truly selective reagents,
at least using natural amino acids.−Some success has been achieved
using unnatural amino acids to develop selective inhibitors of caspases-2,
-8, -9, and -10, offering a promising avenue for developing selective
caspase reagents.−Another strategy undertaken to develop selective
caspase reagents has been to develop small molecule inhibitors, which
generally relies on identifying and optimizing hits from screening
a fragment-based library of covalent cysteine-reactive molecules.,This approach has led to the development of a selective caspase-6
inhibitor, but specific small molecule
inhibitors of other caspases remain a challenge.

Although the
caspases are all structurally similar, and peptide-based
inhibitors and substrates display limited specificityin vitro, they have distinct protein substrates in cells, likely conferred
by protein-binding sites that are distinct from the active site, known
as exosites.,,−However, the molecular basis of substrate recognition by different
caspases is not completely understood. We recently discovered that
inflammatory caspases (caspases-1, -4, -5, and -11) recognize and
cleave IL-1β and IL-18 in a sequence-dependent manner. Notably, we demonstrated that substituting the
amino acid recognition motif found in IL-1β (YVHD) with that
found in IL-18 (LESD) facilitates IL-1β binding and activation
by caspases-4 and -5, suggesting that they preferentially recognize
the LESD motif. We also demonstrated that IL-18 has a stronger interaction
with caspases-4 and -5 compared to caspase-1, suggesting that peptide-based
inhibitors using the LESD scaffold may be specific for caspases-4
and -5 and would be an invaluable tool
for studying noncanonical inflammasome biology. Furthermore, apoptotic
caspases have been reported to cleave and inactivate IL-1β and
IL-18, but whether they also recognize the tetrapeptide sequence adjacent
to the cleavage site remains unclear.

Here, we designed and
synthesized a new fluorogenic substrate,N-acetyl-Leu-Glu-Ser-Asp-aminomethylcoumarin
(Ac-LESD-AMC),
and an inhibitor,N-acetyl-Leu-Glu-Ser-Asp-chloromethylketone
(Ac-LESD-CMK). This novel fluorogenic substrate reported the activity
of inflammatory caspases and the initiator apoptotic caspases-8 and
-10, while the inhibitor potently blocked their activity. Surprisingly,
the Ac-LESD-CMK inhibitor was most potent against caspase-8 and its
homologue, caspase-10. Usingin vitrokinetics, we
characterized apoptotic and inflammatory caspases at the same activity
units with different peptide substrates and inhibitors, revealing
key insights into the selectivity profiles of caspases. We demonstrate
that our new LESD inhibitor inhibits the proteolysis of inflammatory
and apoptotic caspase substrates in cells. Notably, the LESD inhibitor
blocked the biologically important substrate processing mediated by
caspase-8 and caspase-1, activated by infection. Altogether, we have developed
new chemical probes that will facilitate the study of both apoptotic
and inflammatory caspase biology.

We previously reported that inflammatory
caspases cleave IL-1β and IL-18 in a sequence-dependent manner, demonstrating that the LESD tetrapeptide sequence
in IL-18 is recognized and processed by caspases-1, -4, and -5. Because
apoptotic caspases have been reported to cleave and inactivate IL-1β
and IL-18,,,we first wanted
to determine if the tetrapeptide motif similarly regulates the processing
of IL-18 and IL-1β by apoptotic caspases. To test this, we expressed
wild-type IL-18 (IL-18 WT) or IL-18 where the LESD tetrapeptide at
position 33-36 was mutated to AAAD (IL-1833AAAD36), wild-type IL-1β (IL-1β WT), or IL-1β in which
the tetrapeptide sequence at position 113-116 was mutated to LESD
(IL-1β113LESD116) in HEK 293T cells.
Lysates from these cells were incubated with 0.25 activity units/μL
of recombinant caspases purchased from a commercial vendor (Enzo Life
Sciences) for either 1 or 24 h. As previously reported, caspases-1,
-4, -5, and -11 processed human IL-18 WT into the active p18 fragment,
while caspases-3 and -6 generated the inactivating p15 fragment (FigureA).,IL-18 is released by macrophages in response to infection with , which induces caspase-8
activation and caspase-8-dependent caspase-1 activation.,,Given their ability to cleave
shared substrates, which of these caspases is responsible for the
cleavage and release of IL-18 during infection has remained unclear but was presumed to be mediated by
caspase-1. Consistent with this, we did not observe caspase-8 processing
of IL-18 WTin vitro(FigureA). As anticipated, IL-18 cleavage by inflammatory
caspases was tetrapeptide sequence-dependent, as processing of IL-1833AAAD36into the active p18 fragment was significantly
inhibited (FigureA). Caspases-1, -3, -4, -5, and -6 processed IL-1β WT into
the inactive p27 fragment, and only caspase-1 was able to generate
the active p17 species (FigureB). Even though IL-18 harboring the LESD sequence was only
processed by inflammatory caspases, caspases-1, -4, -5, -6, -8, and
-10 all processed IL-1β with the tetrapeptide sequence at position
113-116 mutated to LESD (IL-1β113LESD116) into the active p17 species after 24 h (FigureB), suggesting that some apoptotic caspases
also recognize the tetrapeptide sequence but fail to cleave the native
YVHD sequence of IL-1β. To confirm that processing was direct,
we purified the cytokines from HEK 293T lysates and incubated them
with the recombinant caspases (Figure S1). Consistent with the results from lysates, we observed the same
processing events using purified cytokines, indicating direct processing
by the caspases (Figure S1). These findings
indicate that the tetrapeptide sequence of IL-1β regulates its
processing by both inflammatory and apoptotic caspases. Curiously,
although apoptotic caspases could process the LESD sequence in IL-1β,
they failed to cleave this sequence in IL-18, but the reason for this
currently remains unclear. This may be due to the presence of an exosite
on IL-1β that is recognized by apoptotic caspases, but future
studies are needed to delineate the mechanistic basis of these specificities.

Recombinant
caspases cleave IL-18 and IL-1β in a tetrapeptide
sequence-dependent manner. (A) HA-tagged IL-18 WT and IL-18 with the
tetrapeptide sequence at position 33-36 mutated to AAAD (IL-1833AAAD36) were expressed in HEK 293T cells, and
lysates were mixed with 0.25 activity units/μL of indicated
caspases for 1 or 24 h before immunoblot analysis. (B) IL-1β
WT and IL-1β with the tetrapeptide sequence at position 113-116
mutated to LESD (IL-1β113LESD116) were
expressed in HEK 293T cells and treated as in (A). Data are representative
of three independent experiments.

The observation that replacement
of the endogenous YVHD cleavage sequence in IL-1β with LESD
expanded the range of caspases able to process this substrate to caspases-4,
-5, -6, -8, and -10, in addition to caspase-1, suggests that a fluorogenic
substrate or inhibitor based on the LESD sequence may report on the
activity of these caspases. We synthesized a new fluorogenic substrate
(Ac-LESD-AMC) for testing (FigureA). We incubated equivalent activity units (0.25 activity
units/μL) of recombinant enzymes with the Ac-LESD-AMC substrate
(FigureC–K)
and used the linear rate of hydrolysis at varying substrate concentrations
to generate Michaelis–Menten kinetic parameters. An example
of the linear rates for caspase-1 is illustrated inFigureB. The extrinsic initiator
caspases-8 and -10 (FigureC,D) and inflammatory caspases-1, -4, -5, and -11 (FigureE–H) efficiently
cleaved the Ac-LESD-AMC substrate. We did not detect processing of
Ac-LESD-AMC by executioner caspases-3, -6, and -7 (FigureI–K), suggesting that
Ac-LESD-AMC is specific to initiator and inflammatory caspases. Using
the kinetic parameters, we determined the relative catalytic efficiency
(kcat/KM)
for all caspases with Ac-LESD-AMC (FigureL). Despite no IL-18 processingin
vitroby caspase-8, Ac-LESD-AMC was most efficiently hydrolyzed
by caspase-8, which was ∼10-fold faster than the human inflammatory
caspases-1, -4, and -5. Caspase-10, a homologue of caspase-8, also
efficiently cleaved the Ac-LESD-AMC probe. Of the caspases that cleaved
the Ac-LESD-AMC probe, mouse caspase-11 was the most inefficient at
cleaving Ac-LESD-AMC (∼100-fold slower than caspase-8), in
agreement with the notion that caspase-11 does not cleave mouse IL-18,
which harbors an LESD motif at the cleavage site. Although caspase-11
does not process mouse IL-18, it is able to process human IL-18 but
less efficiently than caspase-4, and recent structural studies imply
that this may be regulated by active site sterics.−We also tested
the ability of caspases to process other well-established substrates,,,,,,including
Ac-DEVD-AMC, Ac-YVAD-AMC, Ac-LEHD-AMC, and Ac-WEHD-AMC, for the extrinsic
initiator caspases-8 and -10 (Figures S2 and S3), the inflammatory caspases-1, -4, -5, and mouse-11 (Figures S4–S7), and the executioner caspases-3,
-6, and -7 (Figures S8–S10). The
kinetic values are summarized inTable.

An LESD-based probe is selective for initiator caspases.
(A) Chemical
structure of the Ac-LESD-AMC fluorogenic tetrapeptide probe. (B) Representative
linear rates of hydrolysis by 0.25 activity units/μL of caspase-1
with varying concentrations of the Ac-LESD-AMC substrate. Relative
fluorescence units (RFU). (C–K) Michaelis–Menten kinetic
profiles of Ac-LESD-AMC substrate cleavage by 0.25 activity units/μL
of recombinant apoptotic initiator caspases-8 and -10 (C,D), inflammatory
caspases-1, -4, -5, and -11 (E–H), and apoptotic executioner
caspases-3, -6, and -7 (I–K). Data are means ± SEM of
three independent experiments with two technical replicates per experiment.
(L) Relative catalytic efficiency, represented askcat/KM, of caspases for Ac-LESD-AMC
calculated fromin vitroMichaelis–Menten
curves. The graph depicts values calculated from three independent
experiments with the Ac-LESD-AMC probe. Data were fitted using the
Michaelis–Menten equation in GraphPad Prism.

Graphs depicting the raw data
are shown inFigures, , andS2–S11.

The caspase-9 preparation
was
different from the other caspases tested. Not assessed (N/A), not
detected (ND).

To test the
activity of caspase-9, we purchased full-length caspase-9,
which autoproteolyzed into the p35 and p10 fragments, and incubated
1 activity unit/μL enzyme with Ac-LESD-AMC, Ac-DEVD-AMC, Ac-LEHD-AMC,
and Ac-WEHD-AMC (Figure S11A–D).
We observed that Ac-LEHD-AMC was most efficiently cleaved (relativekcat/KM= 0.86) followed
by Ac-WEHD-AMC (relativekcat/KM= 0.35), and then Ac-LESD-AMC (relativekcat/KM= 0.15) (Figure S11E,Table). Recombinant caspase-9 did not cleave the
Ac-DEVD-AMC substrate. Caspase-2 is also an initiator caspase, but
it has specificity for 5 amino-acid peptide substrates and is unlikely
to cleave any of the tetrapeptide substrates tested.

Direct comparison of the catalytic efficiencies for
a given probe
between caspases is challenging, as each caspase was tested at an
unknown concentration normalized for activity. However, a comparison
of different substrates for the same caspase can be made. The Ac-LESD-AMC
probe was among the most efficiently cleaved substrates for caspases-8
and -10 within 3-fold of Ac-LEHD-AMC, their preferred substrate (FigureA,B,Table). Caspase-5 also efficiently
cleaved Ac-LESD-AMC, within 5-fold of its preferred substrate Ac-WEHD-AMC
(FigureE,Table), while the other
inflammatory caspases-1, -4, and mouse caspase-11 preferred Ac-WEHD-AMC,
∼10-fold or more than Ac-LESD-AMC (FigureC–F). All of the executioner caspases
preferred the Ac-DEVD-AMC substrate and failed to cleave Ac-LESD-AMC
(FigureG–I).
Altogether, our data suggest that the initiator caspases-8 and -10,
and the inflammatory caspase-5, have the highest catalytic efficiency
for Ac-LESD-AMC. Importantly, caspases have distinct substrate specificities,
and when substrate specificities overlap, the rates of hydrolysis
often differ between caspases. Our data
also suggest that other factors, such as the recently reported exosites,,,−enzyme-substrate binding sites that are distinct
from the active site, may play a major role in dictating protein substrate
specificities, as the peptide-based substrate profiles do not always
recapitulate the protein substrate specificities.

Evaluation of caspase
specificities for peptide-based substrates.
(A–I) Catalytic efficiency, represented askcat/KMof caspases with different
tetrapeptide substrates probes.In vitrokinetics
were fitted by using the Michaelis–Menten function in GraphPad
Prism to generate the kinetic parameters used to calculatekcat/KMvalues for
recombinant apoptotic initiator caspases-8 and -10 (A,-B), inflammatory
caspases-1, -4, -5, and -11 (C–F), and apoptotic executioner
caspases-3, -6, and -7 (G–I). Data are means ± SEM of
three independent experiments. ND (not detected).

Given that the Ac-LESD-AMC substrate was most efficiently processed
by caspase-8 and -10, followed by inflammatory caspase-5, we reasoned
that we could use this peptide to develop a potent inhibitor for caspase-8.
We therefore synthesized a new substrate peptide with a C-terminal
chloromethylketone warhead (Ac-LESD-CMK), a classical method for the
inhibition of cysteine proteases, and tested the ability of this new
inhibitor against commercially available caspase-8 inhibitors, zLEHD-FMK,
and zIETD-FMK, as well as the caspase-1/4 inhibitor VX-765,in vitro(Figure).,The chemical structures of the
inhibitors tested are depicted inFigureA. Each inhibitor was tested under saturating
conditions of the most efficiently processed substrate for each specific
caspase. For example, caspase-1 inhibition was assessed using Ac-WEHD-AMC
as a substrate, and caspase-3 inhibition was assessed using Ac-DEVD-AMC
as a substrate. The IC50values for each caspase and inhibitor
are summarized inTable. Caspase-8 was most effectively inhibited by Ac-LESD-CMK (IC50= 50 nM), followed by zLEHD-FMK (IC50= 70 nM),
and then zIETD-FMK (IC50= 350 nM) (FigureB,Table). VX-765 also inhibited caspase-8 (IC50= 1 μM), despite being marketed as a caspase-1 inhibitor.
Caspase-10 was also most effectively inhibited by Ac-LESD-CMK (IC50= 520 nM), followed by zLEHD-FMK (IC50= 3.59
μM) and zIETD-FMK (IC50= 5.76 μM), but weakly
inhibited by VX-765 (IC50= 42 μM) (FigureC,Table). VX-765 was the most efficient inhibitor
for caspase-1 (IC50= 530 nM) (FigureD,Table). Ac-LESD-CMK was the most potent inhibitor of caspase-5
tested (IC50= 2 μM) (FigureE,Table). Broadly, Ac-LESD-CMK and VX-765 weakly inhibited
the executioner caspases, while zLEHD-FMK and zIETD-FMK were the two
most efficient inhibitors tested for the executioner caspases (FigureF–H,Table). Taken together,
these data demonstrate that Ac-LESD-CMK is a potent inhibitor of caspases-8,
-10, and -5. Notably, the commercially available caspase-8 inhibitor
zIETD-FMK is less potent for caspase-8 compared to Ac-LESD-CMK and
does not seem to exhibit any preference, as it also blocked the activity
of the executioner caspases (caspases-3, -6, and -7) in the low micromolar
concentration range. VX-765 inhibited caspase-1, as expected, but
also blocked caspase-8 activity. zLEHD-FMK was among the most potent
inhibitors for all caspases, with seemingly no preference for any
specific caspase.

Selectivity profile of peptide-based caspase inhibitors.
Each caspase
was incubated with a saturating concentration of its preferred peptide
substrate in the presence of either the Ac-LESD-CMK, zLEHD-FMK, zIETD-FMK,
or VX-765 inhibitors at indicated concentrations. Substrate cleavage
rates were determined at each inhibitor concentration and normalized
to the no inhibitor condition for each run. (A) Chemical structures
of Ac-LESD-CMK, zLEHD-FMK, zIETD-FMK, and VX-765 inhibitors. (B) Caspase-8
inhibition was assessed using 200 μM Ac-LEHD-AMC substrate.
(C) Caspase-10 inhibition was assessed using 200 μM Ac-LEHD-AMC
substrate. (D) Caspase-1 inhibition was assessed using 200 μM
Ac-WEHD-AMC substrate for activity. (E) Caspase-5 inhibition was assessed
using 200 μM Ac-WEHD-AMC substrate. (F) Caspase-3 inhibition
was assessed using 100 μM Ac-DEVD-AMC substrate. (G) Caspase-6
inhibition was assessed using 100 μM Ac-DEVD-AMC substrate.
(H) Caspase-7 inhibition was assessed using 100 μM Ac-DEVD-AMC
substrate. Data were fitted using the [inhibitor] vs normalized response
function in GraphPad Prism. Data are means ± SEM of three independent
experiments.

Note that these values were calculated
using equivalent activity units of each enzyme, and while comparisons
can be made for different inhibitors for a given caspase, they represent
relative values when comparing between different caspases.

The caspase-9 preparation was
different from the other caspases tested. Not assessed (N/A).

We also tested Ac-FLTD-CMK, which
is a peptide inhibitor derived
from the tetrapeptide sequence of GSDMD, and zVAD-FMK, a broad-spectrum
caspase inhibitor based on the tetrapeptide sequence of IL-1β
(Figure S12). In all cases, zVAD-FMK was the most potent inhibitor, inhibiting
all caspases at low-to-mid nanomolar concentrations (Figure S12,Table). Ac-LESD-CMK inhibited the extrinsic apoptotic initiator
caspases over 100-fold more potently than Ac-FLTD-CMK (Figure S12B,C,Table). Ac-FLTD-CMK and Ac-LESD-CMK both inhibited
caspase-1 at similar IC50values (3.36 μM vs 5.67
μM, respectively) (Figure S12D,Table), while both inhibitors
weakly inhibited caspase-4 (30 μM vs 59 μM, respectively),
although caspase-4 was difficult to saturate (Figure S12E,Table). In contrast to the other inflammatory caspases, Ac-LESD-CMK
efficiently blocked caspase-5 activity (IC50= 2 μM)
better than Ac-FLTD-CMK (IC50= 15 μM) (Figure S12F,Table). Broadly, mouse caspase-11 and executioner
caspases-3, -6, and -7 were all weakly inhibited by both Ac-FLTD-CMK
and Ac-LESD-CMK (Figure S12G–J,Table). We also tested
commercially available caspase-8 inhibitors against caspase-9 and
determined that Ac-LESD-CMK was the least potent inhibitor tested
(IC50= 7.5 μM) compared to zLEHD-FMK (IC50= 0.8 μM), VX-765 (IC50= 0.54 μM), and zIETD-FMK
(IC50= 1.47 μM) (Figure S13,Table). In summary,
our new Ac-LESD-CMK inhibitor represents the most potent inhibitor
with a preference for inhibiting caspase-8 over other caspases in
our assays and thus provides a useful tool compound to explore caspase-8
biology.

To better understand
the cellular activity of Ac-LESD-CMK, we preincubated HCC1806 triple-negative
breast cancer cells with 10 μM of either Ac-LESD-CMK, Ac-FLTD-CMK,
or zIETD-FMK for 30 min, then stimulated extrinsic apoptosis, which
activates caspase-8, using TNF-α. We assessed caspase-8 inhibition by measuring the activity of the
downstream substrates caspases-3/7, which are proteolytically activated
by caspase-8 (Figure S14). At early time
points (2–6 h), we observed inhibition of caspases-3/7 activation
by all inhibitors, but both Ac-LESD-CMK and Ac-FLTD-CMK appeared to
be less cell-penetrant as they were not as potent as zIETD-FMK (Figure S14A). Immunoblot analysis demonstrated
that zIETD-FMK was able to inhibit caspase-3 and PARP processing in
cells at 24 h, whereas Ac-LESD-CMK and Ac-FLTD-CMK treated cells still
maintained some caspase-3 and PARP processing (Figure S14B).

We next tested the ability of Ac-LESD-CMK
to inhibit caspase-8 activation in THP1 cells by inducing extrinsic
apoptosis using TRAIL.,We preincubated THP1 monocytes
with 25 μM Ac-LESD-CMK, Ac-FLTD-CMK, zLEHD-FMK, zIETD-FMK, or
zVAD-FMK and then induced caspase-8 activation with TRAIL. Similar
to the results in HCC1806 cells, Ac-LESD-CMK and Ac-FLTD-CMK failed
to prevent caspase-8-mediated activation of caspases-3/7 in cells,
as evidenced by the lack of decreased signal using the caspases-3/7
dye and PARP and caspase-3 processing (FigureA). In contrast, zLEHD-FMK, zIETD-FMK, or
zVAD-FMK appeared to be cell-penetrant and were able to inhibit caspase-3
and PARP processing in cells. zLEHD-FMK and zVAD-FMK were more potent
than zIETD-FMK at inhibiting caspases-3/7 activity in cells based
on the caspases-3/7 dye.

Profiling inhibitors in human cells. (A) THP1
monocytes were preincubated
with 25 μM of the indicated inhibitors for 30 min, then treated
with 100 ng/mL of TRAIL to induce extrinsic apoptosis. The kinetics
of caspases-3/7 activation was monitored using a cell-permeable dye
and after 24 h, the cells were used for immunoblotting. Thepvalues are shown fort= 24 h and were
calculated by two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison
test comparing DMSO treatment with inhibitor treated cells. (B–D)
THP1 monocytes were differentiated into macrophages using 50 ng/mL
of phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for 2 days. Cells were preincubated
with the Ac-LESD-CMK, Ac-FLTD-CMK, or zVAD-FMK inhibitors at 0, 12.5,
25, 50, or 100 μM, or matched DMSO concentrations for 30 min
before the addition of 1 μM staurosporine for 6 h to induce
intrinsic apoptosis (B), 5 μM nigericin for 3 h to induce canonical
inflammasome activation (C) or transfection with 25 μg/mL LPS
for 6 h to induce noncanonical inflammasome activation (D). Cell lysis
was assessed by Sytox Green uptake. Protein was precipitated from
supernatants and analyzed by immunoblotting. Data are means ±
SEM of three independent experiments. ****p<
0.0001, ***p< 0.001, **p<
0.01, and *p< 0.05 by two-way ANOVA test.

Because the Ac-LESD-AMC lacked good cell penetrance,
we preincubated
differentiated THP1 macrophages with varying concentrations of Ac-LESD-CMK,
Ac-FLTD-CMK, or zVAD-FMK inhibitors for 30 min and activated intrinsic
apoptosis using staurosporine (FigureB), the caspase-1 inflammasome using nigericin (FigureC), and the caspases-4/5
inflammasomes using LPS (FigureD).,In agreement with the inhibition
potency and pan-caspase inhibition profile observedin vitro,zVAD-FMK was the most potent dose-dependent inhibitor of apoptotic
and pyroptotic cell death. zVAD-FMK dose-dependently inhibited cell
death, caspase-3 processing into the active p19 and p17 species, and
PARP cleavage when apoptosis was induced with staurosporine (FigureB). At all concentrations
tested, zVAD-FMK inhibited cell death and GSDMD, IL-1β, caspase-1,
and caspase-4 activation upon nigericin and LPS treatment, respectively
(FigureC,D). Consistent
with ourin vitrodata, Ac-LESD-CMK did not significantly
inhibit apoptosis activated by staurosporine, which activates caspase-9
to induce intrinsic apoptosis. Caspase-3 and PARP processing were
poorly attenuated with Ac-FLTD-CMK and Ac-LESD-CMK inhibitors, even
at high doses (FigureB).

At high doses, Ac-FLTD-CMK and Ac-LESD-CMK inhibited cell
death
with LPS treatment (FigureD) but had a modest impact on cell death with nigericin treatment
(FigureC). However,
both Ac-FLTD-CMK and Ac-LESD-CMK prevented GSDMD, IL-1β, and
caspase-1 activation. Ac-FLTD-CMK appeared to be more potent at inhibiting
GSDMD, IL-1β, and caspase-1 processing in cells compared to
Ac-LESD-CMK, as GSDMD and IL-1β processing were completely abrogated
at all concentrations of Ac-FLTD-CMK tested, whereas only the highest
concentration of Ac-LESD-CMK inhibited GSDMD and caspase-1 processing
(FigureC,D). Altogether,
our data suggest that Ac-LESD-CMK inhibits activation of caspase-8-dependent
cell death and modestly inhibits cell death triggered by inflammasome
activation, demonstrating its utility for studying caspase-8 biology
in cells.

We next wanted to determine the activity of the inhibitors
in a
cellular context during pathogenic infection. We thus employed a (Yptb) model, wherein infection leads to caspase-8-mediated processing
of caspase-1, which then cleaves and activates GSDMD.,We treatedMlklknockout (KO) mouse bone marrow-derived
macrophages (mBMDMs) with 100 μM Ac-LESD-CMK, Ac-FLTD-CMK, or
zVAD-FMK for 30 min, then infected them withYptband tracked the kinetics of cell death by measuring the uptake of
Sytox Green dye over time (FigureA). As anticipated, zVAD-FMK abrogated all cell death,
and Ac-LESD-CMK more significantly attenuated cell death compared
to Ac-FLTD-CMK (FigureA), suggesting that Ac-LESD-CMK inhibited caspase-8 activation in
cells. Consistent with this, immunoblot analysis demonstrated that
Ac-FLTD-CMK failed to prevent caspase-8-mediated activation of caspase-1
and subsequent GSDMD cleavage, but both zVAD-FMK and Ac-LESD-CMK abrogated
caspase-1 processing into the mature p20 species and GSDMD processing
(FigureB). Since
Ac-LESD-CMK is a potent inhibitor of caspase-8 activity and can also
inhibit caspase-1, this likely explains why it is a better inhibitor
than Ac-FLTD-CMK duringYptbinfection.

Ac-LESD-CMK
inhibits caspase-8 activation in cells. (A) MouseMlklKO BMDMs were pretreated with 100 μM of the indicated
inhibitors for 30 min beforeYptb(MOI = 20) infection.
The kinetics of cell death were tracked by measuring Sytox Green uptake
using an Incucyte. Representative images are depicted below, and the
quantification is depicted above. (B) Immunoblot ofYptb-infectedMlklKO BMDMs 2.5 h postinfection. Data
are means ± SEM of three independent experiments. ****p< 0.0001, ***p< 0.001, **p< 0.01, and *p< 0.05 by two-way
ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple comparison test comparingYptbtreatment with no inhibitor toYptbtreatment with inhibitors.

The caspases are all structurally similar, making
it challenging
to develop specific active site inhibitors. Many inhibitors have been
reported, but at high doses, most have off-target activity for other
caspases. Thus, understanding the selectivity
and concentrations needed to target certain caspases over others will
aid in uncovering their roles in biology. In the present study, we
have systematically characterized the relative catalytic efficiency
and determined the half-maximal inhibitory concentrations of peptide-based
substrates and inhibitors of inflammatory and apoptotic caspases.
We tested each caspase at the same activity units (as opposed to enzyme
concentration) and compared their activities for a given substrate
or inhibitor. A limitation of this approach is that activity units
are determined using the optimal substrate specific to that caspase,
sometimes performed at different temperatures. Without the enzyme
concentrations, exact kinetic parameters cannot be measured, and while
a comparison can be made for different substrates or inhibitors for
a given caspase, bias may be introduced when comparing between caspases.
Therefore, we interpret our catalytic parameters to be relative.

As anticipated from prior work using positional scanning peptide
libraries to determine the specificity of caspases,,,,Ac-YVAD-AMC,
a peptide substrate based on the sequence of IL-1β, was the
only substrate that was specifically cleaved by the human inflammatory
caspases (caspases-1, -4, -5), but caspases-4 and -5 are unable to
cleave this sequence on the native IL-1β substrate, suggesting that additional factors confer specificity
for protein substrates. Indeed, it is now known that exosites, alternative
binding sites distinct from the active sites, play a critical role
in substrate recognition by inflammatory and apoptotic caspases.,,−Also in agreement with prior work, the apoptotic caspases exhibited significantly higher catalytic
efficiency for the Ac-DEVD-AMC substrate compared to sequences based
on pyroptotic substrates. However, there were differences in the catalytic
efficiency among the apoptotic caspases for Ac-DEVD-AMC, implying
that they may have differences in their ability to process protein
substrates.

The observation that substrates and inhibitors derived
from inflammatory
substrate sequences conferred some selectivity for the inflammatory
caspases, and our observation that the LESD sequence in IL-18 played
a critical role in IL-18 recognition by the noncanonical inflammasomes
(caspases-4/5), prompted us to develop a specific substrate and inhibitor
pair of the inflammatory caspases. Although our new substrate and
inhibitor targeted the inflammatory caspases, they were most potent
for caspase-8 and caspase-10 compared with other substrates and inhibitors
tested for those caspases. Notably, this inhibitor did not target
caspase-9 and will be a useful tool to distinguish the contributions
of extrinsic and intrinsic apoptosis pathways. Caspase-8 is essential
for development and plays a role in regulating apoptosis and necroptosis,
and has recently been implicated in pyroptosis as well.,The existence of a potent and preferential inhibitor of caspase-8
will facilitate studies of the function of caspase-8 activity in various
biological pathways in which caspase-8 is the initiating or dominant
protease activated. For example, infection of macrophages triggers robust activation of caspase-8,
which leads to caspase-1 activation due to pathogen blockade of NF-κB
signaling.,,We found that the LESD inhibitor robustly prevented caspase-8 activation
and the activation of downstream responses. Interestingly, caspase-8
is thought to negatively regulate a constitutively active inflammatory
state in neutrophils, and its inhibition drives the production of
cytokines and chemokines that promote neutrophil mobilization and
antibacterial defensein vivo, suggesting that caspase-8 inhibition may have therapeutic
benefits in certain contexts.

Except for Ac-YVAD-AMC, all other
substrates and inhibitors targeted
both apoptotic and pyroptotic caspases and, in particular, caspase-8.
Even VX-765, which is developed to be a specific caspase-1 inhibitor,
inhibited caspase-8, and caspase-8 had high catalytic efficiency against
inflammatory peptide substrates such as Ac-WEHD-AMC and Ac-LEHD-AMC.
It is possible that, because of the pleiotropic effects it has on
biology, caspase-8 serves as a backup pathway for the inflammatory
caspases and may have overlapping substrate specificities. Consistent
with this idea, caspase-8 was demonstrated to form an inflammasome
with ASC and NLRC4 when caspase-1 is defective. We did not detectin vitrocleavage of
IL-1β and IL-18 by caspase-8, but the LESD-based tetrapeptide
substrate and inhibitor do target caspase-8. Other factors, such as
exosites, subcellular localization, and the presence of pathogenic
factors, may also influence the substrate repertoire and activity
of caspases in cells.

It was somewhat surprising that the LESD-based
inhibitor appeared
to display a preference for caspase-8. Several factors can account
for this, such as conformational changes upon substrate binding, steric
effects, and hydrophobic and electrophilic interactions at the active
site between the peptide substrate and residues in the caspase-8 active
site. For example, mouse caspase-11 lacks key electrophilic interactions
with the LESD sequence and harbors an elongated loop, compared to
the human caspase-4 ortholog, that sterically occludes IL-18 and prevents
its processing. Prior work on caspase-9
suggests that, in addition to the sequence, the local context and
three-dimensional positioning and interactions influence substrate
processing. Some sequences can be recognized
but are not processed unless the correct local environment is present.
This might explain why other caspases, such as caspases-4/5 and -6,
are unable to process the YVHD sequence in IL-1β but are able
to process IL-1β when the YVHD sequence is substituted with
LESD. Structural studies are needed to better understand the basis
of the selectivity of LESD for caspase-8.

Currently, zIETD-FMK
is thought to be a selective caspase-8 inhibitor. However, we observed that Ac-LEHD-FMK was more
potent than zIETD-FMK at inhibiting caspase-8 activity, in line with
a prior report indicating that caspase-8 processed an LEHD-based probe
4.5-fold faster than the corresponding IETD probe. However, the assumption that substrate selectivity should
match inhibitor selectivity is inaccurate, as our data indicate that
caspase-6 is inhibited by an LESD-based inhibitor despite being unable
to cleave the Ac-LESD-AMC substrate. Ac-LEHD-FMK was not selective
and exhibited potent inhibition of other caspases, such as caspases-1,
-3, and -7. Notably, our LESD-based inhibitor was also more potent
at inhibiting caspase-8 compared to zIETD-FMK and was not as potent
at inhibiting other caspases like Ac-LEHD-FMK, indicating that under
our assay conditions, it is both potent and relatively selective for
caspase-8. Although Ac-LESD-AMC was exceptionally potentin
vitro, it appeared to be less potent in cells, as high doses
were needed to achieve cellular inhibition. This is likely due to
a lack of cell penetrance, and a more cell-penetrant version is needed
to facilitate biological studies. This can likely be achieved by benzylating
the N-terminus and having a methyl ester on the C-terminal carboxylate,
as inhibitors with these functional groups (zIETD, zVAD, and zLEHD)
exhibited better cell penetrance compared to Ac-LESD-CMK and Ac-FLTD-CMK,
which lack these functional groups.

Allin vitroassays using
recombinant caspases were performed in 20 μL
reactions containing caspase assay buffer (20 mM PIPES, 100 mM NaCl,
10 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% CHAPS, 10% sucrose, pH 7). We used 0.25
activity units/μL of each indicated caspase. For cytokine cleavage
assays, 10 μg of each cytokine was transfected into 10 cm plates
of HEK 293T cells using FuGENE HD Transfection Reagent (Promega, E2312)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 24 h, cells
were harvested and lysed by sonication in 10 s pulses for 30 s at
30% amplitude in PBS and centrifuged at 12,000gto
remove cell debris. Lysates were diluted 10× in caspase assay
buffer and aliquoted for incubation with caspases or further purified
as previously described before performing
cleavage assays. At the indicated time points, samples were mixed
1:1 with 2× Licor Protein Sample Loading Buffer (Neta Scientific,
928-40004), boiled at 95 °C for 10 min, and then analyzed by
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. Antibodies and reagents used are listed
inTable.

All fluorogenic
substrates were resuspended in DMSO at 40 mM stock concentrations
and diluted to the indicated concentrations in a caspase assay buffer.
All probe experiments were completed at a 20 μL final volume,
with 0.25 activity units per μL of each recombinant caspase
(1 activity units per μL for caspase-9). Relative fluorescence
units were measured every 5 min using a Cytation 5 plate reader (Biotek).
Background fluorescence was subtracted from samples incubated with
caspases. At each concentration of substrate, simple linear regressions
(y=mx+b) were
performed using GraphPad Prism to determine the rate. Rates were plotted
against substrate concentration forn= 3 separate
runs and fit to a Michaelis–Menten curve (Y=Vmax×X/(KM+X))
on Prism. Caspase-substrate pairs that resulted inVmaxvalues under 20 RFUs/min were considered undetected.
ForVmax,KM, andkcat/KMcalculations, curves were generated for each individual experimental
replicate, andVmax,KM, andkcatvalues were recorded
for each replicate.kcatwas determined
as theVmaxvalue with the total enzyme
concentration (ET) set to 1 for all caspases. The mean and standard
error of the mean were calculated by compiling the values for each
individual run.

To determine
the inhibition of maximal enzyme activity, each caspase was incubated
with its optimal probe substrate at a saturating concentration. Inhibition
of maximal caspase activity was determined with 200 μM Ac-WEHD-AMC
for caspase-1 and -5, 1000 μM Ac-WEHD-AMC for caspase-4 and
-11, 200 μM Ac-LEHD-AMC for caspase-8 and -10, 25 μM
Ac-DEVD-AMC for caspase-3 and -7 with ZVAD-FMK, 100 μM Ac-DEVD-AMC
for caspase-3, -6, and -7 for all other inhibitors tested, and 200
μM Ac-LEHD-AMC for caspase-9. Rates were determined as described
in theIn Vitro Substrate Kineticssection.
Rates forn= 3 independent runs were plotted against
inhibitor concentration. Percent caspase activity was determined by
normalizing each independent run, with 0% activity set at 0 and maximum
activity set as the sample with no inhibitor added. Replicates were
combined, and inhibition curves were calculated for the aggregate
data using an [inhibitor] vs normalized response curve on GraphPad
Prism (Y= 100/(1 +X/IC50)).

THP1
cells were resuspended
in RPMI medium containing 50 ng/mL phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA). Cells were plated in 96-well plates at a density of 8 ×
104cells/well. After 48 h, the media was replaced with
100 μL per well of Opti-MEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 31-985-062)
containing Sytox Green (Fisher Scientific, S7020) at 200 nM. Where
indicated, cells were treated with Ac-LESD-CMK, Ac-FLTD-CMK, or zVAD-FMK
30 min before the cell death trigger was added (described below).
Cells were incubated in the trigger for the indicated time points,
and Sytox Green values were read using the Cytation 5 plate reader.
Supernatants were harvested and pooled across replicates, and proteins
were precipitated. Nigericin (Neta Scientific, 11437) was resuspended
in ethanol and added at a final concentration of 5 μM, while
staurosporine (MedChemExpress, HY-15141) was resuspended in DMSO and
added at a final concentration of 1 μM. The LPS transfection
solution was prepared by adding LPS (Cell Signaling Technology, 14011S)
(25 μg/mL final concentration) and FuGENE (Promega, E2312) (0.5%
final concentration) to Opti-MEM. This solution was gently mixed by
flicking and incubated for 15 min at room temperature before addition
to each well.

Protein samples
were run on NuPAGE
4–12% Bis-Tris Midi Protein Gel (Thermo Scientific, WG1403BOX)
at 175 V. Proteins were transferred to 0.45 μm nitrocellulose
membranes (Bio-Rad, 1704271) at 25 V for 7 min using the Bio-Rad Trans-Blot
Turbo System. Membranes were blocked using LI-COR Intercept Blocking
Buffer (Neta Scientific, 927-70010) for 1 h and stained with primary
antibodies at a 1:1000 concentration in 50% LI-COR Blocking Buffer
and 50% TBS buffer with 0.1% Tween for 1 h at room temperature or
overnight at 4 °C. Membranes were washed 3× for 15 min,
followed by incubation with Donkey Anti-Mouse/Rabbit/Goat IgG Polyclonal
Antibody (IRDye 800CW) for 1 h at room temperature. Membranes were
then washed 3× for 10 min and imaged on an Odyssey M Imaging
System (LI-COR Biosciences). Images were analyzed using Empiria Studio
version 3.2 (LI-COR), and brightness, contrast, and tone parameters
were adjusted uniformly for entire membranes in Adobe Photoshop.

HEK 293T and HCC1806 cells were purchased
from ATCC, and THP1 cells were obtained from the Bryant lab. HEK 293T
cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) withl-glutamine and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS).
HCC1806 and THP1 cells were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute
(RPMI) medium 1640 withl-glutamine and 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS). Isolated bone marrow cells from 6- to 10-week-old male
and female mice were grown at 37 °C and 5% CO2in
30% macrophage medium [30% L929 fibroblast supernatant and complete
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM)]. BMDMs were
harvested in cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) on day 7 and replated
in 10% macrophage medium onto tissue culture (TC)-treated plates.
All cells were grown at 37 °C in a 5% CO2atmosphere
incubator.

The kinetics of caspase-3/7 activity and Sytox
Green uptake were
measured in cells using the IncuCyte S3 (Sartorius). HCC1806 or THP1
cells (8 × 104cells/well) were seeded in black, clear-bottom
96-well plates and treated with apoptotic or inflammatory stimuli
as described in the figure legends. The medium was supplemented with
either the cell-permeable caspase-3/7 green dye (final concentration:
2 μg/mL) or Sytox Green (final concentration: 0.2 μM).
A series of images was collected with a 10× objective at 30 min
intervals for 24 h. The number of Sytox Green or caspase-3/7 dye-positive
cells in each image was determined using the IncuCyte S3 software
with 5 different areas/well. Apoptosis was triggered using TRAIL,
staurosporine, or TNFα, and pyroptosis was triggered using either
LPS or nigericin. If inhibitors were used, the cells were preincubated
with the reported inhibitors for 30 min prior to stimulation.

All plasmids were cloned using Gateway technology
as previously described. DNA encoding
the indicated proteins was inserted between theattRrecombination sites and shuttled into modified pLEX_307 vectors
(Addgene) using Gateway technology (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins expressed from
these modified vectors contain an N-terminalattB1
linker (GSTSLYKKAGFAT) after any N-terminal tag or a C-terminalattB2 linker (DPAFLYKVVDI) preceding any C-terminal tag,
such as V5 or HA.

(Yptb) infections were performed as previously described. Strain IP2666 was induced before infection by diluting
stationary-phase overnight cultures 1:40 in 3 mL of inducing medium
[2× yeast extract tryptone (YT) broth, 20 mM sodium oxalate,
and 20 mM MgCl2]. Cultures were grown at 28 °C for
1 h and then transferred to 37 °C for 2 h with shaking. Bacterial
growth was measured by absorbance at an optical density of 600 nm
(OD600) using a spectrophotometer. Bacteria were pelleted, washed,
and resuspended in Opti-MEM or 10% macrophage media (10% L929 fibroblast
supernatant and complete Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM)) for infection.In vitroinfections
were performed at a multiplicity of infection of 20. Indicated inhibitors
were added 30 min prior to bacterial addition, and the plate was incubated
at 37 °C. Gentamycin (100 μg/mL) was added 1 h after infection
for all infections. The plate was imaged in a Sartorius Incucyte S3.

Solvents and reagents were
purchased from commercial suppliers and used without further purification.
Analytical LC-MS was performed using a system comprising an Agilent
1260 Infinity II HPLC instrument equipped with an Agilent InfinityLab
LC/MSD XT MS detector with electrospray ionization. The system ran
with an Agilent ZORBAX SB-C18 RRHT (50 × 4.6 × 1.8 μm)
column and gradient elution with two binary solvent systems: MeCN/H2O or MeCN/H2O plus 0.1% formic acid. Preparative
HPLC was performed using a system comprising an Agilent 1260 Infinity
II HPLC system equipped with an Agilent 1290 Prep Bin Pump, an Agilent
Prep-C18 column (250 × 21.2 × 10 μm), and an Agilent
prep autosampler and fraction collector. The system ran using a UV
diode array detector, and purification was performed using gradient
elution with a MeCN/H2O binary solvent system containing
0.05% trifluoroacetic acid.

Ac-LESD-AMC was synthesized
by manual Fmoc solid-phase
peptide chemistry using Fmoc-Asp­(Wang-resin)-AMC. Following resin
swelling in DMF, iterative cycles of Fmoc deprotection (20% piperidine
in DMF containing 0.1 M HOBt, 3× 5 min), amino acid coupling
(4 eq. Fmoc AA, 4 eq. HATU in 4% DIPEA in DMF, 1 h), and washing (3×
DMF, 3× DCM) were performed until the sequence was complete.
N-terminal acetylation was achieved using 5% acetic anhydride in pyridine.
Peptides were deprotected and cleaved from the resin by treatment
with trifluoroacetic acid/water/triisopropylsilane/phenol (88:5:5:2)
for 1–3 h. The solvent was removed under a flow of nitrogen,
and peptides were precipitated with ice-cold ether. Ac-LESD-AMC was
subsequently purified by reverse-phase chromatography, eluting with
5–95% acetonitrile in water containing 0.05% trifluoroacetic
acid over a C18 column. Peaks containing Ac-LESD-AMC were identified
by LC-MS, pooled, and concentratedin vacuo.

Ac-LESD-AMC:m/z[M + H]+calcd for C30H39N5O12661.3; found 661.9.

Ac-LE­(tBu)­S­(tBu)–OH
was synthesized
by manual Fmoc solid-phase peptide chemistry on a 2-chlorotrityl resin.
Following resin swelling in DMF, Fmoc-l-Ser­(tBu)–OH
was loaded onto the resin (1.2 eq. AA, 2.5 eq. DIPEA in DCM for 1
h), and the resin was capped (3 eq. MeOH, 2.5 eq. DIPEA in DCM for
1 h). The resin then underwent iterative cycles of Fmoc deprotection
(20% piperidine in DMF containing 0.1 M HOBt, 3× 5 min), amino
acid coupling (4 eq. Fmoc AA, 4 eq. HATU in 4% DIPEA in DMF, 1 h),
and washing (3× DMF, 3× DCM) until the sequence was complete.
N-terminal acetylation was achieved using 5% acetic anhydride in pyridine.
Ac-LE­(tBu)­S­(tBu)–OH was cleaved from the resin in 20% hexafluoroisopropanol
(HFIP) in DCM at room temperature for 1 h. The solvent was removed
under a flow of nitrogen, and the crude material was used with no
further purification.

Separately, Boc-l-aspartic acid
β-benzyl ester chloromethylketone1(65 mg, 0.18
mmol) (purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Cat # sc-285170)
was dissolved in 3 mL of DCM at room temperature before the addition
of 1 mL of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and stirred for 1 h (Scheme). The solvent and
volatiles were removed under reduced pressure. Crude deprotectedl-aspartic acid β-benzyl ester chloromethyl ketone2was dissolved in 3 mL of tetrahydrofuran (THF) with HATU
(68 mg, 1.1 equiv) and DIPEA (440 μL, 5.5 equiv). To this solution,
Ac-LE­(tBu)­S­(tBu)–OH peptide (80 mg, 1 equiv) in 1 mL of THF
was added. The reaction was stirred at r.t. for 2 h, and the reaction
progress was monitored by LC/MS. The solvent and volatiles were removed
under reduced pressure, and the product was redissolved in 10 mL of
ethyl acetate before 2× 10 mL washes with 0.5 M HCl. Organic
extracts were dried over magnesium sulfate and concentratedin vacuoto yield3, which was used with no
further purification in the next step.

To a solution of3(127 mg, 1 equiv)
in THF (10 mL)
under an argon atmosphere, 10% Pd/C (13 mg, 10% w/w) was added, and
hydrogen gas was bubbled through the reaction for 2 h. The reaction
mixture was filtered over Celite, and the filter cake was washed with
THF and MeOH. Solvents and volatiles were removed under reduced pressure,
and the residue was dissolved directly in 50% TFA in DCM and stirred
at room temperature for 1 h to generate Ac-LESD-CMK. Solvents and
volatiles were again removed under reduced pressure. Ac-LESD-CMK was
subsequently purified by reverse-phase chromatography, eluting with
5–95% acetonitrile in water containing 0.05% trifluoroacetic
acid over a C18 column. Peaks containing Ac-LESD-CMK were identified
by LC-MS, pooled, and concentratedin vacuo.

Ac-LESD-CMK:m/z[M + H]+calcd for C21H33ClN4O10537.2; found 537.2.

We thank all the members of the Taabazuing lab for
their scientific discussions. This work was supported by an NIH R00
Career Transition Award (Grant# 4R00AI148598-03, C.Y.T.), an NIGMS
Maximizing Investigator’s Research Award (MIRA) (Grant# 1R35GM155239-01,
C.Y.T.), a Center for Translational Chemical Biology Pilot Award from
the University of Pennsylvania (C.Y.T. and G.M.B.), and the Colton
Center for Autoimmunity at Penn (C.Y.T.). G.M.B. is also supported
by the National Institutes of Health (Grant# R35-GM142505). N.R.R.
is supported by an NIH Chemistry Biology Interface Training Grant
(Grant# T32 GM133398). P.M.E. is supported by the Martin and Pamela
Winter Infectious Disease Fellowship. C.M.B. is a Penn Provost Postdoctoral
Fellow and is supported by the Burroughs Wellcome Fund (Grant# 1054907).
I.E.B. is supported by two NIH R01 grants (Grant# R01AI128530, R01139102A1)
and the Mark Foundation.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.4c00146.

Conceptualization:
C.Y.T.; methodology: C.Y.T., G.M.B., C.M.B., N.R.R., W.Y., and I.E.B.;
investigation: C.M.B. and N.R.R., Ma.Ku., P.M.E., S.L., W.Y., T.J.W.,
R.C.P., Ma.Ka., T.S., Mi.Ka., B.M.D., and A.B.M.; visualization: C.Y.T.,
C.M.B.; funding acquisition: C.Y.T., G.M.B., I.E.B., C.M.B., P.M.E.,
and N.R.R.; project administration: C.Y.T., G.M.B., and C.M.B.; data
curation: C.Y.T. and C.M.B.; formal analysis: C.Y.T., C.M.B., T.J.W.,
and A.B.M.; resources: C.Y.T., G.M.B., and I.E.B.; supervision: C.Y.T.,
G.M.B., and I.E.B.; writingoriginal draft: C.Y.T. and C.M.B.;
writingreview and editing: C.Y.T., I.E.B., G.M.B., C.M.B.,
Ma.Ku., N.R.R., P.M.E., A.B.M.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Published
as part ofACS Bio & Med Chem Auspecial issue“Juneteenth 2025”.