In this paper, we
describe how 3D printing can be used to fabricate
a microfluidic-based transwell cell culture system with robust fluidic
connections for long-term cell culture and recirculating flow. This
approach consists of an electrospun collagen scaffold sandwiched between
two laser-cut Teflon membranes that match the fluidic design. Madin-Darby
canine kidney (MDCK) cells were cultured on the collagen scaffold
to create an epithelial cell monolayer. Introduction of cells into
the device was facilitated by a printed reservoir that could be closed
after proper cell seeding with minimal effect of the flow profile
over the cells. The resulting MDCK cell monolayer was exposed to continuous
flow and transport through the cell layer and could be monitored by
sampling from the basolateral channel network. COMSOL simulations
and flow injection analysis were used to determine the effect of the
reservoir geometry on the shear stress that cells experience. A variety
of analytical tools were used to assess the effect of flow over the
cells in this model. This includes confocal microscopy and potentiometric
scanning ion conductance microscopy (to determine morphology and conductance),
as well as transendothelial/epithelial electrical resistance (TEER)
measurements and reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain
reaction studies (for gene expression analysis). Finally, a drug transport
study with the cell model was carried out using two drugs (caffeine
and digoxin) to determine the apparent permeability of high and low
permeability drugs, with results being similar to findings from in
vivo studies as well as studies where MDCKs have been transfected
to form more resistive barriers. This approach holds great promise
for the creation of more in vivo-like, flow-based barrier models for
transport studies.

In drug transport studies,
it is common to use static transwell
devices where one cell type is grown on a synthetic membrane. A drug
is usually added to the apical (top) side of the device and transport
through the cell monolayer is monitored by sampling from the basolateral
(bottom) side. While these simple, static approaches have been used
to develop in vitro barrier models for the blood brain barrier, kidney, and placenta,,there are disadvantages. One is the manner in which the cells are
grown on the membrane support. Cells in many biological systems are
surrounded by a basement membrane, which is a thin sheet of an extracellular
matrix (ECM). The ECM is a complex fibrous
system that is made up of many macromolecules such as proteoglycans,
glycosaminoglycans, collagen, fibronectin, elastin, and laminin and
organized in a cell/tissue specific manner.,Among
these macromolecules, collagen is the most abundant fibrous proteins
found, accounting for ∼ 30% of the ECM. Using realistic ECMs for culturing cells is key to the development
of tight junctions (TJs) between neighboring cells. These TJs attribute important biological functions including
providing a barrier for selective permeability as well as maintaining
the structural, compositional and functional polarity of cells. Formation of TJs also are important in helping
to control paracellular transport of many molecules such as nutrients,
drugs and toxins. Moreover, TJs play important roles in physiological
homeostasis by regulating signal transduction. For the development of pharmaceuticals that target the central nervous
system, the constrictive nature of TJs in the blood brain barrier
(BBB) presents a drug design challenge where measuring transport across
BBB mimics is critical. Consequently,
developing in vitro platforms for studying and characterizing cellular
TJs and barriers has become a fast-advancing research area.

Another disadvantage of static transwell devices
is the absence
of flow over the cell monolayer. In vivo, cells are exposed to flow
and hemodynamic forces, with a shear stress over their apical surface.
As a result, cells respond to this stimulus by adapting their behavior
toward the mechanical cues arising from shear stress.,This phenomenon is known as mechano-transduction, a process that
occurs when cells transform the biophysical (mechanical) stimuli into
biochemical signaling within the cellular microenvironment.,Numerous studies have reported cells can alter their morphology,
function and gene expression in response to shear stress. Endothelial cells at the BBB, epithelial cells in the intestine,,renal tubular epithelial cells in the kidney,,and
corneal epithelial in the cornea all
experience shear stress to some degree. Continuous flow over the cells
helps to supply nutrients and remove waste; however, a comprehensive
understanding of the significant impact of flow features over cells
is an active research area. There is clearly a need to create flow-based
transwell cell culture systems to investigate the effects of shear
stress on these models and result in more in vivo-like barrier mimics.

There has been work on developing microfluidic
approaches for transwell/transport
studies. This includes work to study the impact of shear stress over
cells by introducing flow into microfluidic devices.,−In terms of epithelial-based fluidic barrier models, Kimura et al.
fabricated a PDMS-based microfluidic device that has a bilayer microchannel
and a polyethylene terephthalate porous membrane sandwiched between
the two layers for culturing renal proximal tubule epithelial cells. The device was integrated into an existing automatic
cell imaging system for drug efficacy and toxicity studies. In a separate
work, Choudhury et al. devised a microfluidic device that has four
primary components: a micropatterned PDMS block with channels, a polycarbonate
porous membrane, a micropatterned intermediate layer, and a glass
slide. The device was sealed with a combination of silicone sealant
and plasma treatment. Human primary kidney epithelial cells, human
ADPKD cystic cells, and mouse PKD2 knockout cells were cultured in
the device under flow conditions, with the results providing insights
into the interplay between pressure gradients and fluid transport
in the kidney epithelium. In terms of
the methods used to make microfluidic devices, 3D printing has recently
been shown to provide many advantages over PDMS for fluidic studies. Important for this study, one advantage is the
robust nature of the fluidic connections through the use of threaded
ports.,Three-dimensional structures and flow paths
can easily be printed, and the devices can be made in batch without
the use of a clean room.

Here,
we utilized 3D printing to develop a microfluidic-based transwell
cell culture system that integrates flow over cells as well as the
ability to easily sample from the basolateral side of the barrier,
with robust fluidic connections for long-term (4–7 days) cell
culture and recirculating flow. The new microfluidic-based transwell
system consists of an electrospun collagen scaffold sandwiched between
two laser-cut Teflon membranes that match the fluidic design. Madin-Darby
canine kidney (MDCK) cells were cultured on the collagen scaffold
to create an epithelial cell monolayer. This cell line, which has
been widely used for developing kidney barrier models, was chosen due to its ability to form monolayers
with tight junctions, high electrical
resistance and low permeability. Cell
introduction was facilitated by a printed reservoir that could be
closed after proper cell seeding with minimal effect on the flow profile
over the cells. The resulting MDCK cell monolayer was exposed to continuous
flow and transport through the cell layer could be monitored by sampling
from the basolateral channel network. The effect of the reservoir
on the shear stress that cells experience in the device was investigated
with COMSOL simulations and flow injection analysis. The influence
of laminar flow at differing flow rates was characterized by using
confocal microscopy and potentiometric scanning ion conductance microscopy
(P-SICM) for cell morphology changes; impedance spectroscopy for transendothelial/epithelial
electrical resistance (TEER) measurements, and reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) for gene expression analysis.
Finally, a drug transport study with the kidney cell model was carried
out using 2 drugs (caffeine and digoxin) and LC-UV to determine the
apparent permeability (Papp) of high and low permeability
drugs, with results similar to what has been seen with in vivo studies.

All MDCK cells were
cultured on a collagen scaffold made from electrospinning
collagen I solution. Briefly, a homogeneous
solution of 8% (w/v) collagen I (Elastin Products Co., Owensville,
MO) in hexafluoroisopropanol (HFP, Millipore-Sigma, St. Louis, MO)
was sprayed through a 15 cm long, 150 μm I.D. fused silica capillary
from a screw thread glass vial onto a grounded aluminum foil sheet
that was wrapped with lens paper. A high voltage of +15 kV was applied
to the glass vial (via a platinum wire) as was 11 psi of helium. After
2 h of electrospinning, the collagen scaffolds were cross-linked with
1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)­propyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC,
400 mM, Millipore-Sigma, St. Louis, MO) andN-hydroxysuccinimide
(NHS, 400 mM, Millipore-Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in pure ethanol for
4 h, as previously described. To avoid
exposing the scaffolds to the atmosphere and becoming denatured before
cross-linking, the collagen scaffolds were handled in a glovebag (Cole
Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL) filled with nitrogen gas. All the cross-linked
collagen scaffolds were stored in a desiccator after rinsing with
ethanol and vacuum drying for future use.

All the devices used for
this study were printed with a Stratasys
J735 PolyJet printer (Eden Prairie, MN) using VeroClear resin. The
device design was completed in SOLIDWORKS and file (.SLDPRT format)
was uploaded to the printer. Upon the completion of printing all the
device components, they were subsequently cleaned overnight in a Super
DT3 CleanStation (PM Technologies, Inc., Osseo, MN) that contains
a sodium hydroxide/sodium metasilicate solution to improve the biocompatibility
of the devices. To ensure a smooth surface
for sealing, all devices were polished with sandpaper using a commercial
grinder-polisher (MetaServ 3000, Buehler, Lake Bluff, IL). The top
component of the device was sonicated for approximately 8 h so that
all the residue from the flow channel was removed. Before any cell
work, printed parts were rinsed with DI water and sterilized with
70% ethanol.

As shown inFigurea, the device used for this study has two 3D printed
components that, when assembled, form the top and bottom layers.Figure S1contains key dimensions of the CAD
device design. The channel dimensions given in the text and other
figures were measured with optical microscopy or SEM. The top layer
houses a flow channel that is 12 mm (length) x 1.10 mm (width) x 1.01
mm (depth), with printed threads for interfacing with commercially
available flangeless fittings. The channel of the device was constructed
in such a manner that the cell culture media can flow through from
threaded inlet threads to the outlet and over the cell monolayer.
This flow channel at the basement of the top layer is open after printing
but when sealed against the bottom layer, it closes and allows the
culture media to flow directly over the cells. This 3-dimensional
fluidic channel was made such that support material could be easily
removed. In the center of the top layer, an apical reservoir was printed
so that the cell seeding onto the collagen scaffold is possible. After
cells were added, this apical reservoir was left open for an hour
so that cells were immobilized and attached to the scaffold under
static conditions. After that period of time, the apical reservoir
was closed with an M4 screw (M4–0.70, 10 mm in length, PEEK,
Grainger, Lake Forest, IL) followed by the introduction of flow. Each
screw was first added to an unassembled device to a point where the
screw was flush with the top of the channel interface. The screw was
then marked so that when it was used with an assembled device, the
screw would not penetrate past the top of the channel. The M4 screw
was polished flat before use (seeFigure S2for images of screw and device interface).

3D printed microfluidic
transwell device with integrated collagen
scaffold. (a) Diagram showing CAD rendered design with an expanded
view of they layers used in device. (b) Side view diagram of the assembled
device. (c) Schematic of the experimental setup along with a picture
of assembled device. Different flow rates can be introduced over the
MDCK cells seeded on the collagen scaffold. Flow is directed into
a Falcon tube (containing 5 mL of media), with a cap that has drilled
holes for tubing and CO2exchange.

The complete device assembly involves sandwiching Teflon gaskets
between two 3D printed layers as seen inFigureb. First, the electrospun collagen scaffold
was sandwiched in between two laser-cut (275 μm thick) Teflon
gaskets after mounting the collagen scaffold on large pore (30 μm)
polycarbonate membrane (for mechanical support). The design of the
Teflon gaskets (Grainger, Lake Forest, IL) was completed with SOLIDWORKS
in such a manner that the top gasket was in compliance with the top
layer of the device (having a replica of the open flow channel) and
the bottom gasket aligned with the bottom layer of the device (having
an opening to access the basolateral channel). The speed, power, and
frequency parameters used for the laser cutter (Epilog Helix Laser,
Colden, CO) were 100%, 50%, and 800 Hz, respectively. Then, the Teflon/collagen
sandwich was placed in between the 3D printed layers. When all the
assembled components were tightened with bolts, washers, and nuts
(M4–0.70 × 25, Hillman, Cincinnati, OH), a leak-free device
was achieved. Using a torque screwdriver, it was observed that applying
55 cN·m was sufficient to tighten all the components for assembling
the flow device. The basolateral chamber was prefilled with 100 μL
of cell culture media. The access port to this basolateral chamber
was closed during the cell culture period to maintain fluid levels.
After the cells were confluent (typically 4 days after postseeding),
these access ports were made accessible for further characterization
experiments such as flow studies, TEER measurements, and drug transport
studies.

Male luer fittings (P-202X, IDEX Health & Science,
Oak Harbor,
WA) with Tygon tubing (0.02 in. ID and 0.06 in. OD, Cole-Parmer, Vernon
Hills, IL) were threaded into the printed device. This Tygon tubing
was further extended with PVC tubing (0.89 mm ID Orange/Orange, ISMATEC,
Wertheim, Germany) to connect to a peristaltic pump (IPC multichannel
pump, ISMATEC). The tubing was sterilized with 70% ethanol and prefilled
with pre-warmed cell culture media before circulating the media.Figurec shows the setup
for complete circulation of flow over a cell monolayer, with the peristaltic
pump withdrawing media from a Falcon tube (containing 5 mL of media).
In order to accommodate the inlet and outlet tubing as well as the
exchange of carbon dioxide from the incubator, the cap of the Falcon
tube had three drilled holes. Media in the Falcon tube was changed
on a daily basis.

Madin-Darby
canine kidney
cells (MDCK, Strain type: NBL-2, CCL-34, ATCC, Manassas, VA) between
passages 10–20 were cultured and maintained in T-75 flasks
(Corning, NY) using Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (EMEM,
ATCC) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin.
Cells were subcultured every other day. Before seeding cells into
the device, rinsing of the collagen scaffolds was required to eliminate
any trace HFP and NHS. This was done
by soaking the scaffolds in cell culture media for 15 min in the incubator,
followed by rinsing with cell media. This step was repeated 4 times.
Approximately 1.6 × 105cells were seeded into the
assembled device via the apical reservoir onto the collagen scaffolds.
The cells were allowed to attach to the scaffold for an hour before
adding the M4 screw and introducing flow. After cell attachment and
closing of the reservoir, different flow rates of cell culture media
(0.015, 0.2, and 0.5 mL/min) were introduced through the device for
at least 4 days to result in a confluent layer of MDCK cells.

All
finite element methods (FEM) simulations were done with COMSOL
software (version 6.2) and laminar flow physics. The purpose of these
simulations was to estimate the shear stress that cells experience
during proliferation at volumetric flow rates between 0.015 and 1.0
mL/min. The simulations consisted of two types of channel geometries,
with and without a reservoir aperture. In both cases, the channel
floor center consisted of a 50 × 50 array of hexagonally packed
semispheres (5 μm radii; bottom 25% of all the cell layer height
was removed to resemble cell–substrate attachment) to model
a monolayer of cells. The average shear stress that the cell monolayer
experiences (at each volumetric flow rate for both geometries) was
estimated by determining the shear stress at the cell array’s
most apical morphological point (see theSIfor more information on these calculations).

In order to
validate the COMSOL simulation and visualize the flow profile throughout
the flow channel, two different devices were utilized, one with the
cell culture reservoir and one without. Other than the reservoir,
all other dimensions were identical. Using a syringe pump (70–2209,
Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA), a discrete plug (introduced via
an off-chip 4-port injector) of a 300 μM fluorescein solution
was pumped into the devices at different flow rates (0.1 mL/min, 0.2
mL/min, 0.5 mL/min and 1.0 mL/min). All the injections were made using
a 4-port injector with a 1 μL volume rotor (Valco Instruments,
Houston, TX). The injected plug of analyte
was detected 10 mm downstream from the reservoir location. Images
and videos of fluorescent plugs were obtained using an inverted fluorescence
microscope (Olympus BX60) fitted with a 10X objective (Olympus PLN2X,
Japan). All images and videos were recorded with an AmScope (MU203-BI)
camera and software, then processed and analyzed using ImageJ. For
analysis and presentation purposes, all the data generated from ImageJ
were then smoothed in PeakFit (San Jose, CA) with a Savitzky-Golay
filter (0.5% window) to eliminate the background noise. The peak width
at half height (W1/2) was measured for
each peak (n = 9for each condition) using ChromPerfect
software (Denville, NJ) and variance (σ2) was calculated
from the relationship:W1/2= 2.354σ.

All topography
and local apparent conductance measurements were performed
with a home-built scanning ion conductance microscope (SICM). Single
barrel and theta barrel quartz capillaries (Sutter Inc., Novato, CA)
were pulled with a P-2000 puller (Sutter Inc., Novato, CA) to produce
nanopipettes for SICM measurements. Pipettes were filled with PBS
(x1) at a pH of 7.2 prior to measurements. Collagen scaffolds were
supported by a backing of a polycarbonate (PC) membrane (STERLITECH
Corp., Auburn, WA), which were both adhered to a perfusion cell via
3 M tape masks with a 1 mm hole punched out from the center. The PC
membrane had a pore size of 30 μm and a density of 1 ×
104pores/cm2.

Bare fiber measurements
were done by submerging the membranes in culturing media to mimic
the experimental conditions for cell culture. This media housed the
reference Ag/AgCl for topographical measurements, along with the immersed
(single barrel) pipet with a back inserted Ag/AgCl electrode. All
resulting topographical maps were taken at a 2% threshold with a DC
voltage of 0.2 V vs Ag/AgCl applied to the pipet electrode. Potentiometric-SICM
(P-SICM) studies were performed with PBS (x1) prefilled theta pipet
with back inserted Ag/AgCl electrodes, one electrode per barrel. MDCK
cells were cultured with a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min for 4 days. After
this period of time, the device was disassembled, and the collagen
scaffold (with cells) was rinsed with PBS. The cells were fixed with
a 4% paraformaldehyde solution at 4 °C for 30 min, followed by
rinsing with PBS three times.

The sample was then placed in
a perfusion cell by mounting the
cells onto the center back side of a 3D printed Petri dish (40 mm
diameter, 3 mm footed supports and an 8 mm diameter through hole;
Formlabs Form2b SLA printer with BioMed Clear v1 resin) that was adhered
with a 3 M tape mask with a 1 mm center hole. This device was placed
on an optical transparent dish and both the Petri dish and the transparent
dish were filled with PBS connecting the upper and lower chambers
of the assembled perfusion cell where the sample bridged the connection
between the chambers. The Ag/AgCl reference electrode and Pt counter
mesh electrodes were always placed at the apical side (upper chamber
of the perfusion cell), while another Ag/AgCl rod was placed on the
basolateral side of the scaffold to serve as the working electrode
to supply a transmembrane potential. A DC potential of 0.2 V vs Ag/AgCl
was applied to the pipet electrode and a gated sawtooth AC waveform
with a 200 mVPPwas applied to the working electrode at
a frequency of 5 Hz. All data was processed via Gwydion imaging processing
software.

To determine the number of cells present in the scaffold under
different flow conditions (for normalization purposes), the cell containing
collagen scaffolds were removed from the devices and incubated with
1 mL of 15 mg/mL collagenase solution (Elastin Products Co.) in a
37 °C water bath to dissolve the collagen. Then, a 10 μL
aliquot of the resulting solution was added to a hemocytometer, and
the cells were manually counted. The counting was repeated three times
and the average number of cells were used to calculate the total number
of cells on the scaffold.

To extract total RNA from the cells
cultured on the scaffolds, the scaffolds were treated with lysis buffer.
Total RNA was isolated using the Monarch Total RNA Miniprep Kit (New
England Biolab, Ipswich, MA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. For accurate comparison of gene expression between flow
conditions, the RNA template amount was normalized based on the number
of cells rather than the total template RNA in a sample. Briefly,
we determined the total RNA yield and cell number from each scaffold
and calculated the RNA content per cell. From the 0.015 mL/min flow
rate (which exhibited the lowest amount of total RNA per cell), 30
ng of RNA was used as the reference input for real-time quantitative
PCR (RT-qPCR), corresponding to RNA derived from approximately 1,094
cells. We then back-calculated the RNA amounts from the 0.2 mL/min
and 0.5 mL/min flow rate conditions that represented the same number
of cells (1,094) and used those amounts as template RNA for RT-qPCR
to facilitate per-cell gene expression comparison across all different
flow conditions. RT-qPCR was performed using a QuantStudio Real-Time
PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA). The cycling conditions
were 55 °C for 10 min, followed by 95 °C for 60 s, and 40–45
cycles of 95 °C for 10 s and 60 °C for 60 s, with the gene-specific
primers as listed inFigure S3. The raw
gene expression Cq values were normalized to canine GAPDH, which was
the endogenous internal control. To further minimize variability,
expression values were normalized to the average cell number, and
results are presented as relative expression per cell.

The TEER value (Ω·cm2) was calculated by multiplying the resistance of cell monolayer
by the active surface area of cells in the flow channel reservoir
area (0.044 cm2).

Drug transport studies were performed
on the fourth day of cell culture
using caffeine (Alfa Aesar) and digoxin (TCI America, Portland, OR).
Caffeine has been reported as a high permeability drug, whereas digoxin
is commonly utilized as a low permeability drug for transport studies.,To perform an experiment, 500 μM of caffeine or 100 μM
of digoxin solutions in transport buffer (HBSS) were perfused over
the cell monolayer from the apical compartment. The media from the
basolateral compartment was exchanged with pre-warmed HBSS. All of
the drug transport experiments were executed in an incubator by performing
replacement experiments under the “sink” conditions. Samples (10 μL) were taken from the basolateral
compartment every 30 min for 2 h in the caffeine study and every 30
min for 3 h in the digoxin transport study.

All the collected
samples were analyzed and quantified using high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC, Shimazu) with a UV–vis detector. For
the caffeine study, the analyte was separated on a Thermo Aquasil
C18 (3 μm pore, 50 mm L x 2.1 mm ID) column and detected at
the wavelength of 270 nm. For the digoxin study, an Armor C18 Analytical
Column (5 μm pore, 50 mm L × 3.0 mm ID) column was used
and digoxin was detected at 220 nm. For both caffeine and digoxin
studies, acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and DI water
with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B) were used as the mobile phase. In
all analyses, 5 μL aliquots of the samples were injected into
the separation column under binary gradient mode. The initial solvent
concentration was kept at 5% aqueous acetonitrile for 1 min, followed
by a linear increase of up to 95% aqueous acetonitrile over a period
of 10 min, with this condition being held for 3 min before returning
back to the initial concentration before the next injection.

where dC/dtis the linear rate of change of concentration in the basolateral
compartment with respect to time (μM/s),VBis the total volume of the HBSS buffer in the basolateral
chamber (100 μL),Ais active surface area
where the drug is transported from the apical to basolateral compartment
(0.044 cm2), andC0is the
initial concentration of the drug perfused over the cell monolayer
(500 μM for caffeine and 100 μM for digoxin, respectively).

The main motivation of this work
was to develop a robust transwell
fluidic device that integrates biologically derived fibers for cell
culture, a methodology to easily and reproducibly introduce cells
into the device, a means to have flow (shear) over the cells, and
utilize the device for transport studies. In order to create more
realistic in vitro mimics of vivo barriers such as the kidney and
BBB, it is essential to have flow (shear) over the cells so that the
type of mechanotransduction stimuli that occurs in vivo is replicated.
For the ECM replica, collagen scaffolds were employed in order to
provide in vivo like matrix for biocompatibility, cell adhesion, proliferation
and differentiation. The scaffolds used
for this study were electrospun using 8% (w/v) collagen solution in
HFP and cross-linked with an equimolar solution of EDC and NHS in
such a way that the fiber dimensions were maintained to be approximately
500 nm in diameter with an overall scaffold thickness of 30 μm.

A PolyJet-based 3D printer with VeroClear
resin was used to fabricate the flow device. The device was made up
of two separate layers – the top layer for the flow channel
and apical side of the cell layer and a bottom layer for a channel
network representing the basolateral side of the cell layer. The top
layer houses threaded ports to integrate flow from a peristaltic pump
through the flow channel as well as access ports for the basolateral
compartment. The two separate 3D printed layers were assembled with
the collagen scaffold being sandwiched between laser-cut Teflon using
bolts and nuts. The Teflon gaskets around the scaffold and between
the layers enable a tightly sealed device that is leak-free after
the assembly. The ability of 3D printing to produce threaded ports
that can accept fittings made integration with tubing and off-chip
peristaltic pumps facile and reproducible. After assembling the device,
cell culture media could be introduced via a peristaltic pump. In
these studies, three different flow rates were used: 0.015, 0.2, and
0.5 mL/min for cell culture studies. Cells could be cultured under
flow conditions for up to 7-days without leakage issues (extended
time periods were not investigated).

A key part of the device
is the cell reservoir and how cells are
introduced. In contrast to methods where cells are aspirated or flowed
into the device,,this approach used a reservoir
that was printed into the top layer so that cells can be pipetted
and seeded onto the collagen scaffold under static conditions. After
a period of time for cell attachment (typically 1 h), this reservoir
could then be closed with a plastic M4 screw. To keep the constant
laminar flow profile over the cells, it was important that this M4
screw was polished until a flat surface was achieved. When this screw
closes, approximately 155 μm gap formed at the interface between
the 3D printed threads of the cell reservoir and the screw (seeFigure S2). For this work, cells were seeded
on the collagen scaffold via the reservoir in the top layer. This
step allowed the cells to settle and adhere onto the scaffold for
an hour before the flow was introduced over the cells using the peristaltic
pump (after closing the reservoir). A key advantage to this approach
is that the cells can easily be accessed after the flow experiment
is complete, in a manner that does not perturb the monolayer. As will
be seen below, this enabled confocal imaging, gene expression and
TEER studies in a manner where the effects of flow on the MDCK cells
could be measured.

The
flow channel (12 mm × 1.10 mm × 1.01 mm) in the top layer
of the 3D printed component was designed in such a way that the laminar
flow of cell culture media would introduce shear stress over the cells
after the cell reservoir is closed (all reported channel dimensions
were measured with optical microscopy or SEM). The top layer was also
designed to connect the apical flow channel to 3D printed threads
from the sides of the device via a 3-dimensional flow path. To study
the optimization of the flow profile through this designed flow channel
and estimation of the shear stress the cells experience, finite element
methods (FEM) using COMSOL was utilized. This current design included
a reservoir aperture between the center of the channel ceiling and
the bottom of the threaded plug that was measured to be 155 μm.
FEM via COMSOL was used to solve the Navier–Stokes and continuity
equations to determine the shear stress (see theSIfor more information). These calculations were done for
each of the following flow rates: 0.015, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1.0 mL/min,
with resulting calculated shear stress values being 0.0096, 0.064,
0.13, 0.32, and 0.64 dyn/cm2, respectively.

The effect
of the reservoir aperture is represented inFigure, whereFigurea is a schematic showing the key channel
dimensions (including the 155 μm gap) and the direction of volumetric
flow (0.5 mL/min for the data in this figure).Figureb shows the estimated profile of the fluid
flow velocity at the channel center plane, down the length of the
channel, parallel to flow direction from left to right. It shows that
the 155 μm gap slightly perturbs the laminar flow, contributing
to the 18% decrease in applied shear stress compared to the channel
geometry without the gap. The effect of the reservoir aperture is
further demonstrated inFigure S4a, which
shows a 1D array of 30 velocity profile slices along the length of
the channel, where the plane of each slice is orthogonal to the direction
of flow.Figure S4bis a reference of unperturbed
laminar flow in the channel while inFigure S4cthe channel geometry becomes taller due to the reservoir gap. This
causes a direct influence on the laminar flow, broadening and decreasing
the flow intensity. However, as seen inFigure S4d, as the channel geometry returns to its original height
past the reservoir, the flow original profile is restored, and a sharpening
of the flow intensity is seen.

(a) Schematic of the flow channel in order
illustrate the rectangular
shape, key dimensions (including the reservoir gap), and the flow
direction. (b) COMSOL simulation with a 0.5 mL/min volumetric flow
rate showing the fluid flow rate profile along the length of the channel
as a 2D slice. Note that there is a monolayer of cells (50 ×
50 array) at the center bottom wall of the channel in (b). (c) Overlaid
results of variance (from flow injection experiments) and the inverse
of estimated shear stress (from COMSOL simulations) as a function
of the volumetric flow rate.

Additionally,Figurec shows the inverse
average shear stress results along apical points
over a monolayer of cells as a function of the volumetric flow rate.
This graph also has an overlay of the peak variance vs flow rate results
from experimental studies. These studies show that the flow intensity
profiles sharpen and increase as the flow rate increases, making the
signal more uniform along the channel geometry including the reservoir
area. This is reflected with the flow injection data, where the amount
of band broadening (expressed as variance), decreases as flow rate
increases, to the point where there is little to no difference between
the two geometries at 0.5 mL/min or higher. This shows that increasing
the volumetric flow rate in the reservoir device results in more heterogeneity
of solutes under flow while increasing the average stress on the cell
monolayer.

To study the cell morphology changes under the shear stress,
three different flow rates were applied: 0.015, 0.2, and 0.5 mL/min.
As mentioned beforehand, the calculated shear stress via COMSOL for
these flow rates are 0.0096, 0.13, and 0.32 dyn/cm2, respectively.
In order to ascertain the effect of flow on cell morphology in this
3D printed flow-based transwell device, the direction of the flow
being introduced over the cells was denoted during the cell culture.
On the fourth day of culturing cells, the cell samples were taken
out of the device and stained with ZO-1 antibodies (for ZO-1 protein),
rhodamine phalloidin (for cytoskeleton staining) and DAPI (for labeling
the cell nuclei). The previously reported static 3D printed device, and the current flow device were employed to
study the cell morphology changes under no flow vs very slow flow
(0.015 mL/min) conditions. As seen inFiguresa and b, MDCK cells
show the same morphology under no flow (0 dyn/cm2) and
very slow flow (0.0096 dyn/cm2) depicting these conditions
as “static like”. Under flow rates of 0.2 mL/min and
0.5 mL/min (0.13 dyn/cm2and 0.32 dyn/cm2, respectively),
MDCK epithelial cells respond to the shear stress by elongating and
orienting themselves in accordance with the flow direction, as seen
inFiguresc and d. This change in cell morphology can be quantified
by measuring the cell shape and elongation and calculating the inverse
aspect ratio (IAR) usingeq. A cell with a circular shape has an IAR = 1, while an elongated
cell has an IAR < 1. As shown inFigurea, the IAR values for MDCK cells in this
study clearly decrease as flow rates increase. These values show that
MDCK cells respond to the shear stress by elongating and orientating
their direction under flow rates of 0.2 and 0.5 mL/min. Since the
0.015 mL/min flow rate gave the same value as static conditions, this
flow rate was used in subsequent studies to achieve static-like conditions.

Confocal
images of MDCK cells under different flow rates (0–0.5
mL/min). The epithelial cells respond by elongating and aligning to
the direction of the flow. (a) Image of cells under no flow (static).
(b) Cells cultured under a flow rate of 0.015 mL/min (similar morphology
to cells cultured under static conditions). (c–d) Cells cultured
under a flow rate of 0.2 and 0.5 mL/min, respectively. Cell nuclei
are stained with DAPI (blue), actin in the cytoskeleton is stained
with rhodamine phalloidin (red), and ZO-1 protein is labeled with
ZO-1 antibodies and its conjugated dye (Alexa Flour488, green). Scale
bar: 100 μm.

Characterizing the response
of MDCK cells to shear stress. (a)
Plot of IAR vs flow rate shows the elongation of the cells in response
to flow (n= 6). (b) Expression of genes that encode
for tight junction proteins under different flow rates (n= 9). * indicates significantly different at 95% of confidence level.

Scaffolds used to culture cells in this study consisted
of electrospun
collagen fibers that serve as a more physiologically relevant substrate.
A control experiment to collect the topographical maps of each substrate
was done to estimate the surface roughness (seeFigure S6). Cells were cultured onto a collagen fiber membrane
and allowed to proliferate under a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The cells
were then fixed to the substrate surface and measured with P-SICM.
The purpose of this measurement was to observe cell morphology and
spatially correlative chemical information along a section of the
cell monolayer cultured under flow. As shown inFigurea, the topographical map displays cell junctions,
some of which are easily discernible between a cell and the surrounding
cell bodies, however, not all of them are apparent.Figureb, however, shows the spatially
correlated local apparent conductance map, where there are larger
local apparent conductance measurements over the cell junctions compared
to those measured over the cell bodies. Moreover, cell junctions that
were not apparent in the topography map are much more apparent in
the local apparent conductance map.

Topography (a) and local apparent conductance
(b) maps of fixed
MDCK cells, cultured onto an electrospun collagen fiber membrane taken
at 250 nm/pixel resolution and 0.2 VTM,PPat 5 Hz vs Ag/AgCl
in PBS x1 buffer media.

In order to maintain physiological homeostasis, TJs
play a vital role in biological systems. These TJs form barriers and
act as fences and gates by restricting the transport of nutrients
and toxins to the target organs such as kidneys, GI tract, and brain. TJ proteins can be classified as integral membrane
proteins and peripheral membrane associated proteins. Integral membrane
proteins are composed of claudins and occludin families, while peripheral
membrane associated proteins are made up of zona occludens (ZO) families. In MDCK epithelial cells, it has been reported
that ZO-1, claudin-1 and occludin proteins express more abundantly
than many other tight junction proteins. Therefore, in this study we chose to perform expression experiments
for genes that encode for these proteins, in order to determine the
effect of flow on the development of TJs in MDCKs.

In order
to quantitate the abundance of these three TJ proteins (ZO-1, claudin-1,
and occludin) as a function of flow rate, the expression of genes
that encode for these proteins was accomplished by using real-time
quantitative PCR (qPCR). First, in order to get an accurate cell count
for these studies, cells were cultured under conditions for 4 days,
after which time the device was disassembled. The collagen scaffolds
were digested with 1 mL of a 15 mg/mL collagenase solution, which
liberated the cells for subsequent manual counting with a hemocytometer.
The number of counted cells from the scaffolds exposed to low shear
stress (37,200 ± 6,060) was significantly higher than those to
higher shear stress (15,600 ± 3,050 and 6,670 ± 1670 for
0.13 dyn/cm2and 0.32 dyn/cm2, respectively)
as shown inFigure S7. This correlated
with an increase in cell size in response to flow (Figure S7). This can be explained by the considerably elongated
cells taking up more room in the flow channel, with fewer cells being
required for confluence. Next, the expression changes of ZO-1, claudin-1,
and occludin per cell across the three different flow rates were assessed
using qPCR. Since the number of cells in each condition was flow rate
dependent, we first quantified both the total RNA and cell count per
scaffold, allowing us to calculate RNA per cell (Figure S7). According to the data, we observed that the 0.015
mL/min flow rate studies exhibited the lowest RNA per cell, and therefore,
we used 30 ng of RNA for qPCR from that condition (corresponding to
RNA derived from 1,094 cells). We then used RNA equivalent to 1,094
cells from the other flow studies to ensure the per-cell comparison
of gene expression. All qPCR reactions were normalized to the expression
of canine GAPDH, which served as the internal control. To confirm
the reproducibility of the results, two separate peristaltic pumps
with different flow rates (such as 0.015 mL/min vs 0.2 mL/min) were
employed during the cell culture for this study to increase the reproducibility
of the comparisons. The results, which are shown inFigureb, clearly show that normalized
relative gene expression per cell for claudin-1 and occludin was at
least 2-fold higher using the higher shear rates, as compared to the
static condition. However, ZO-1 expression did not exhibit a significant
increase as a function of flow rate. A consistent increase in total
RNA per cell from cells that were exposed to higher flow rates was
also observed (seeFigure S7), indicating
a likely enhancement of transcription. It is clear from these results
that the mechanical stimuli from increased shear results in increased
expression of claudin-1 and occludin, which are important tight junction
proteins in MDCKs. These findings underscore the importance of considering
both mechanical forces and cellular context in modeling epithelial
physiology and reinforces the relevance of flow-based systems in studying
barrier tissue development.

A common measure
of cell confluence in transwell barrier studies is Trans-epithelial/endothelial
Electrical Resistance (TEER). This noninvasive
technique is commonly used each day of a transport study to asses
cell confluency. With cells that form monolayers, TEER values increase
over time, and when the values plateau, transport studies can be initiated
as a confluent monolayer exists. To study the effect of flow over
cells in the 3D printed device, as well as the integrity and functionality
of the cell monolayer after long-term exposure to flow, impedance
spectroscopy was used to determine TEER values. After the MDCK cell
monolayer was seeded and exposed to flow for 4 days, the cell reservoir
was opened (by removing the M4 screw) and impedance measurements were
made with electrodes in the apical reservoir and the basolateral access
reservoirs. A Nyquist plot was generated, and the TEER value was calculated
with the consideration of the cell monolayer active surface area usingeq. This was done for the
3 different flow conditions (static-like, 0.2 and 0.5 mL/min). As
shown inFigurea,
there was a significant increase in the TEER value when going from
the low flow (static like) condition to higher shear rates. This correlates
with the increased expression of tight junction marker data in the
previous section, showing that the ability to have appreciable shear
rates over the cells creates an increased barrier for passive transport.

Characterization
of cell monolayer integrity as a function of flow
rate. (a) Plot of TEER measurements under different flow rates (n= 9). (b) Drug permeability results using caffeine (high-permeability
drug) (n= 3) and digoxin (low-permeability drug)
(n= 6). * indicates significantly different at 95%
of the confidence level.

Finally, we
sought to demonstrate the ability of the 3D printed transwell system
to be used in drug transport studies. After culturing cells for 4
days under various shear stresses, a drug transport study was performed
in the incubator by first using caffeine, which is a high permeability
drug. The cell culture media from the
basolateral side of the cell monolayer from the 3D printed device
was first replaced with pre-warmed HBSS buffer. Then 5 mL of 500 μM
of a caffeine solution was introduced over the cells via the peristaltic
pump (with the caffeine solution being added to the Falcon tube shown
inFigurec). Samples
(10 μL) were collected from the basolateral side of the cell
monolayer via the access port every 30 min over a 2-h period. All
of the samples were collected under “sink” conditions,
where the concentration from the basolateral compartment never exceeds
10% of the concentration of analytes from the apical side. After collection, the amount of caffeine in
each sample was determined using LC-UV. The apparent permeability
(Papp) of the caffeine was calculated usingeq. As shown inFigureb, the apparent permeability of caffeine
was 28.5 ± 2.70 × 10–6cm/s (n
= 3) for flow rates of 0.015 mL/min (static-like condition)
and 16.5 ± 1.24 × 10–6cm/s (n
= 3) for a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The apparent permeability
of caffeine under flow conditions is smaller than in other studies
using MDCK cells under static conditions (79.3 × 10–6cm/s) and compares well to previous
studies where the apparent permeability of caffeine has been reported
to be 11.1 × 10–6cm/s with in vivo studies
(using rats). In addition, it has been
reported that noncerebral cell lines such as MDCK can be transfected
with a human multidrug resistance 1 (MDR-1) gene to prove that the
transfected cell line exhibits in vivo-like restrictive paracellular
pathway for screening of different pharmaceuticals.,Using the transfected MDCK cell line, the apparent permeability
of caffeine has been reported as low as 20.2 × 10–6cm/s, which also compares well to the
0.2 mL/min flow rate findings of 16.5 × 10–6cm/s.

Using a similar procedure, another transport study was
performed using digoxin, a commonly used low permeability drug.,A 100 μM solution of digoxin was perfused over the cell monolayer
and 10 μL of samples from the basolateral side of the cell monolayer
were collected every 30 min over a 3-h period. After analysis with
LC-UV, the calculation for the apparent permeability (Papp) of the digoxin was completed usingeq. The apparent permeability of digoxin was found to
be 1.57 ± 0.143 × 10–6cm/s (n
= 6) with a flow rate of 0.015 mL/min (static-like) and 0.230
± 0.0175 × 10–6cm/s (n = 6) with the 0.2 mL/min flow rate. The apparent mobility under flow
conditions was less than previous studies with unmodified MDCK with
static conditions (2.37 × 10–6cm/s) and similar to an in vivo study using rats
(0.10 cm/s x 10–6cm/s) and the previously mentioned transfected MDCK cell line (0.28 ×
10–6cm/s47). Again, these values compare
favorably to the 0.2 mL/min findings with this nontransfected cell
line. Overall, this data shows that with this flow device and flow
rates, we are able to create MDCK barrier model that has permeability
values that are similar to in vivo findings and also work with transfected
cells that have been engineered to form more resistive barriers.

In this work, a 3D printed transwell
microfluidic device was successfully
designed and fabricated in a manner that epithelial (MDCK) cells could
easily be immobilized and shear stress introduced over the cells for
long-term cell culture studies. The approach enabled transport studies
through an electrospun collagen ECM membrane. The flow profile was
characterized with FEM via COMSOL as well as flow injection analysis.
It was shown that cell morphology, ion conductance, TEER values and
expression of genes that encode tight junction proteins are all affected
by shear in the devices. A drug transport study using caffeine and
digoxin showed that this approach led to a MDCK barrier model that
has permeability values similar to those found with in vivo studies
as well as when using MDCKs that have been transfected to form more
resistive barriers. The observed increase in claudin and occludin
expression aligns with enhanced epithelial barrier properties. This
data is also well supported by the TEER and permeability data and
suggests that fluid shear stress promotes tight junction maturation
in a cell-intrinsic manner. It is clear from these studies that this
robust 3D printed transwell cell culture system with flow over the
cells and a biologically relevant ECM leads to more in vivo-like conditions
for transport studies. The ability to easily access the cells after
the flow experiment (by removing the screw) will allow future work
to examine other proteins involved in junction formation as well as
different quantitative approaches such as Western blots and metabolic
profiling. Future work will also further develop this device to increase
the shear rate that cells experience and transition to the use of
endothelial cells in the presence of flowing red blood cells to result
in a true BBB mimic.

We would
like to acknowledge funding from the National
Institutes of Health, specifically from NINDS (2R01NS105888-06A1,
for R.S.M. and L.A.B.) and NIGMS (R01 GM140191, for A.K.).

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.5c00045.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.