CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing is widely used to manipulate gene expression and integrate transgenes into specific target sites, making it a powerful tool for recombinant protein expression. In this study, we generated a single donor cassette for CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knock-in at either theαAmy3orαAmy8locus in rice cells. The transgene was inserted downstream of the promoter and first exon of the riceαAmy3orαAmy8genes, which are highly expressed under sugar-starved conditions in rice suspension cultures. We constructed a simple vector with the homologous intron sequences of theαAmy3andαAmy8, along with rice codon-optimized recombinant receptor binding domain (rcRBD) of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, a functional domain responsible for binding to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor on host cells. Using this construct,rcRBDwas successfully integrated into the intron 1 of either theαAmy3orαAmy8genes. As a result, rcRBD expression was driven by endogenousαAmy3orαAmy8promoter-signal peptide. Under the control ofαAmy3-signal peptide, rcRBD proteins was detected in both the soluble cellular protein fraction and culture medium, whereas expression driven by theαAmy8promoter-signal peptide was exclusively detected in the culture medium of rice suspension cells. The highest secreted protein yield of rcRBD in the rice culture medium under the control ofαAmy8endogenous promoter reached 20.7 mg/L, demonstrating a production efficiency comparable to that driven by the endogenousαAmy3promoter.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00253-025-13549-4.

Targeted integration at the αAmy3 or αAmy8 locus in rice cells was achieved using a single donor cassette.

rcRBD was driven by sugar-starvation inducible endogenous rice promoters.

Secreted rcRBD yield reached 20.7 mg/L in rice suspension cells.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00253-025-13549-4.

In recent years, plants have been extensively studied as platforms for recombinant protein production due to several advantages of their expression systems, including large-scale production capacity, low cultivation costs, minimal risk of human pathogen contamination, and the ability to perform post-translational modifications (Ghaderi et al.2012; Ma et al.2003; Obembe et al.2011). To date, over 100 recombinant pharmaceutical proteins, antibodies, enzymes, and vaccines have been successfully produced in plants (Francisco et al.1997; Staub et al.2000). Some of these proteins have reached the clinical trial stage (Neutralizing2009; Richter et al.2000) and have been commercialized (Magnusdottir et al.2013; Zimran et al.2018). In 2012, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Elelyso, a recombinant enzyme produced in carrot cell culture, for the treatment of Gaucher’s disease (Tekoah et al.2015). ZMapp, a combination of three monoclonal antibodies made from transgenic tobacco, successfully treated Ebola virus infections when administered toRhesus macaques(Qiu et al.2014). In 2022, Canada approved the world’s first plant-based COVID-19 vaccine, Medicago’s coronavirus virus-like particle (CoVLP) vaccine, marking a significant milestone in plant-derived therapeutics (Hager et al.2022; Ward et al.2021). Additionally, phase I clinical trials in the USA and Japan have demonstrated that the oral vaccine MucoRice-cholera toxin B (CTB) line 51 A safely induces CTB-specific antibodies capable of neutralizing cholera toxin (Yuki et al.2022). Moreover, a dose-escalation phase I trial at Chiba University Hospital, expected to conclude in 2026, aims to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of MucoRice-CTB line 19 A, an investigational oral cholera vaccine formulated as rice flour (Yuki et al.2024). These advancements highlight the growing potential of plant-based recombinant protein production systems, demonstrating their ability to compete effectively with conventional recombinant protein platforms.

α-Amylases are well-known enzymes that hydrolyze starch, and their gene expression is highly induced by sugar starvation and gibberellin (GA) during cereal seed germination (Akazawa and Hara-NiShimura1985; Beck and Ziegler1989; Lu et al.1998). The rice genome contains at least ten α-amylase genes, among whichαAmy3/RAmy3D,αAmy7/RAmy1A, andαAmy8/RAmy3Eare predominantly expressed during seed germination and in suspension-cultured cells (Yu et al.1992). The expression ofαAmy3andαAmy8is dramatically upregulated in sugar-starved rice suspension-cultured cells, whereas other α-amylase genes show only slightly increased or no changes in expression (Huang et al.1993). TheαAmy3promoter-signal peptide-based system for recombinant protein production in rice suspension culture cells is a well-established plant-based platform (Macharoen et al.2020). By fusing a target protein with the signal peptide, the recombinant protein is secreted directly into the culture medium (Huang et al.2015), allowing for simple and cost-effective harvesting and purification. Several recombinant proteins have been successfully produced using theαAmy3promoter in rice suspension cells (Hong et al.2008; Huang et al.2005; Jung2022; Macharoen et al.2021; Van Giap et al.2019). To further enhance recombinant protein yield, various strategies have been developed, including culture medium optimization (Liu et al.Kim et al.2014;2018), rice codon optimization (Bastami and Hosseini2024; Nguyen et al.2024), and genetic engineering of the rice cell host (Sinaga et al.2021). In contrast, theαAmy8promoter is less frequently reported for recombinant protein production. However, it has been used to drive recombinant protein accumulation in both rice suspension cells and aerobic rice seedlings (Chiang et al.2005; Su et al.2012). Furthermore, modification of theαAmy8promoter by adding a G box and duplicating a TA box resulted in a 28.4-fold increase in hEGF protein accumulation in hypoxic seedlings compared to the wild-typeαAmy8promoter (Wu et al.2014).

The CRISPR/Cas9 system is widely recognized for its ability to edit genes at specific target sites across various cell types and organisms (Sander and Joung2014). This system comprises two key components: the guide RNA (gRNA) and the CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9). The gRNA consists of a CRISPR RNA (crRNA), which contains a 20-nucleotide sequence complementary to the target DNA, and a trans-activating CRISPR RNA (tracrRNA), which serves as a scaffold for Cas9 nuclease (DeltcHeva et al.2011). Once the Cas9 nuclease recognizes the Protospacer Adjacent Motif (PAM) site, double-stranded breaks (DSBs) occur three base pairs upstream of the PAM site (Liu et al.2019b). These DSBs are subsequently repaired by two mechanisms: non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and homology-directed repair (HDR) pathways. In the NHEJ pathway, DNA fragments are rejoined, often resulting in insertion or deletion (indels) mutations. In contrast, the HDR pathway relies on an exogenous donor template and is commonly used for gene replacement and knock-in applications (Dillingham and Kowalczykowski2008; Schiml et al.2014; Shukla et al.2009). Recent studies have demonstrated the feasibility of achieving gene knock-in in plants using the CRISPR/Cas9 system via the NHEJ repair pathway (Pang et al.2020; Weinthal et al.2013). Additionally, multiplex CRISPR/Cas9 approaches enable simultaneous gene knock-in at multiple genomic loci. Wang et al. (2021) demonstrated that a multiplex CRISPR/Cas9 system, combined with two large donor DNA fragments, enabled the knock-in ofhuman immunoglobulin heavy(Ig H) andlight(Ig L)chaingenes into two native mouse loci,IgHandIgK(Wang et al.2021). Moreover, the same system was used to simultaneously insert two antimicrobial peptide transgenes at multiple loci in catfish (Wang et al.2024). However, in both cases, each donor DNA was specific to only one target site, limiting the flexibility of donor usage across multiple loci.

Previously, we developed a modified rice suspension cell platform for recombinant protein production by using the endogenousαAmy3promoter and signal peptide via the CRISPR/Cas9 knock-in system (Nguyen et al.2022). An artificial 3′ splicing site was fused upstream of the recombinant gene, allowing protein expression to be controlled by the nativeαAmy3promoter and signal peptide. Using this platform, green fluorescent protein (GFP) (Nguyen et al.2022) and the mature form of human bone morphogenetic protein 2 (rhBMP2m) (Nguyen et al.2024) were successfully produced. The highest yield of rhBMP2 reached 1.03% of the total soluble protein in the homozygous rhBMP2 knock-in cell line.

Although sugar starvation enhances the expression ofαAmy8andαAmy3, these genes are active in different tissues and developmental stages of rice. The goal of this study was to develop a single donor cassette for CRISPR/Cas9-mediated insertion of a transgene into intron 1 ofαAmy8and/orαAmy3loci, enabling both promoters to drive recombinant gene expression in the rice suspension cells. The receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein of is a functional domain responsible for binding to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor on the human cell membrane (Lan et al.2020). The RBD-ACE2 interaction is critical for viral entry, making RBD an attractive target for vaccine development (Dickey et al.2022; Montgomerie et al.2023; Yang et al.2020). We designed a single donor cassette flanked byαAmy8and αAmy3intron 1 target sites on both ends of the rice codon-optimizedRBDgene (rcRBD), allowing excision and insertion into either target site via CRISPR/Cas9. ThercRBDDNA fragment was successfully integrated into intron 1 ofαAmy8orαAmy3, and expression was driven by the corresponding endogenous promoter and signal peptide. The highest yield of rcRBD protein secreted into the culture medium, under the control of theαAmy8promoter, reached 20.7 mg/L.

Rice calli were induced from immature seeds ofOryza sativaL. cultivar Tainung67 (TNG67), obtained from the Taiwan Agricultural Research Institute, Ministry of Agriculture, Taichung, Taiwan. The immature seeds were dehulled, sterilized with 2.4% (v/v) sodium hypochlorite, washed thoroughly with sterile water, and placed on CIM-I medium (NiShimura et al.2006). They were then kept in a growth chamber at 28 °C to generate healthy calli. For rice suspension cells, compact and globular calli with an intense yellow color were transferred into a 125-mL flask containing 25 mL of MS liquid medium (MuraShige and Skoog1962) supplemented with 10 µM 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) and 3% sucrose. The cells were maintained on an orbital shaker at 110 rpm in a dark culture room at 28 °C and subcultured every week in fresh MS medium with 2,4-D.

The αAmy8,3 master donor vector was constructed in pET-28a backbone following the method described in Nguyen et al.2022), with modification. The final construct incorporated theαAmy8E8 site,αAmy3C3 site,AscI site,NotI site,Nosterminator DNA region (NosT),αAmy3C3 site, andαAmy8E8 site (Supplementary Fig.S1) to enable specific target ofαAmy8andαAmy3genes. The recombinant receptor binding domain (rcRBD), optimized for rice codons (Supplementary Fig.S2), was synthesized and cloned into the αAmy8,3 master donor vector usingAscI andNotI to generate the αAmy8,3-rcRBD donor cassette. To construct the pH-Cas9-αAmy3sgRNA and pH-Cas9-αAmy8sgRNA vectors, 20 base pair spacers forαAmy3andαAmy8were synthesized withBsaI overhangs and then cloned into the CRISPR vector as previously reported (Ma et al.2015).

The donor plasmid αAmy8,3-rcRBD was mixed with pH-Cas9-αAmy3sgRNA and pH-Cas9-αAmy8sgRNA in a 3:1:1 molar ratio before bombardment. One-month-old immature embryo-derived calli were transferred to CIM-II medium containing 0.4% phytagel and bombarded with the plasmid mixture using the PDS-1000/He system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) at 1100 psi, as described in a previous study (Liu et al.2014). Three days after bombardment, the calli were moved to N6 selection medium containing 50 mg L−1hygromycin B.

Genomic DNA was extracted from calli using a previously reported method (Huang et al.2005). Briefly, rice samples were ground with liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle, and genomic DNA was extracted using an extraction buffer containing 100 mM Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane hydrochloride (Tris–HCl), pH 8.0, 50 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, pH 8.0), 100 mM sodium chloride (NaCl), 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and 1% β-mercaptoethanol. Subsequently, 1 μg of each genomic DNA sample was amplified via PCR with various gene-specific primers (Supplemental TableS1). Finally, the resulting PCR products were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis.

For RT-PCR and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis, total RNA was isolated using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). To remove possible DNA contamination, the isolated total RNA was treated with RNase-free DNase I (NEB, Ipswich, MA, USA). Two and a half micrograms of total RNA were reverse transcribed using ReverTra Ace® reverse transcriptase (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan) with oligo-dT primers. A tenfold dilution of the first-strand cDNA product was amplified using the specific primer sets mentioned above. The expression ofACT1was employed as a reference gene for normalization.

The culture medium was collected and centrifuged at 18,000 ×gat 4 °C for 20 min to remove cell debris and harvest cultured-medium proteins. Total soluble cellular protein was isolated as previously described (Huang et al.2005). The concentration of the total protein was determined using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Thirty microliters of cultured medium or 100 µg of total soluble proteins were separated by 15% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) after being denatured for 5 min at 100 °C and then transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (Merck, Darmstadt. Germany). The rabbit anti-SARS-CoV-2 spike-receptor-binding domain (RBD) region antibody (Merck, Darmstadt. Germany) was used as the primary antibody, and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG was used as the secondary antibody to detect rcRBD protein. The protein signal was obtained by chemiluminescence using ECL Prime Western Blot Detection Reagent (Merck, Darmstadt. Germany). The commercial recombinant 2019-nCoV spike RBD protein with a His tag (Merck, Darmstadt. Germany) was used as a positive control.

The concentration of rcRBD in the cultured medium was determined by ELISA. A 60 µL sample was coated onto 96-well microtiter plates and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Commercial recombinant 2019-nCoV spike RBD protein was used as the standard. The rabbit anti-SARS-CoV-2 spike RBD region antibodies (Merck, Darmstadt. Germany) was added to the wells and incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Goat HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG antibodies were then added for the detection of the rabbit IgG antibodies and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. A substrate of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) solution (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) was added to the wells and incubated for 30 min in the dark, followed by the addition of 2 M H₂SO₄. The optical density at 450 nm of each well was recorded using an AMR-100 ELISA Reader (Allsheng, Hangzhou, China).

The CRISPR/Cas9 system has demonstrated the capability to perform gene knock-ins across various organisms including rice. By providing a gene donor in the form of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) or single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), the desired gene can be knocked into a target genome site via the CRISPR/Cas9 system through non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homology-directed repair (HDR) mechanisms (Han et al.2023; He et al.2016; Li et al.2017; SawatSubaShi et al.2018). In recent years, the development of multiplex target sites using the CRISPR/Cas9 system has allowed for the production of multiple single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) from a single transcript (Lowder et al.2017; McCarty et al.2020; Xie and Yang2019). Wang et al. (2024) reported a multi-sgRNA-based multi-gene editing (msMGE) system that combines with four linear dsDNA donors to generate transgenic fish bearing two copies of two transgenes at four target loci (Wang et al.2024). To overcome the limitation of one donor to one target for multiple knock-ins, we developed a single donor cassette to target two sites: intron 1 of theαAmy8and/orαAmy3genes.

TheαAmy8(Os08g0473600) andαAmy3(Os08g0473900) genes are located on chromosome 8 of the rice genome. Both genes consist of three exons separated by two introns, with each exon 1 encoding a signal peptide (SP) (Mitsui et al.1996). In a previous study, we established a CRISPR knock-in system targeting theαAmy3intron 1 for recombinant protein production controlled by the endogenousαAmy3promoter and signal peptide. Since the intron can be spliced during mRNA maturation, generating mutations via DNA knock-in at the intron site may not affect recombinant protein production. Using this system, GFP (Nguyen et al.2022) and human mature BMP2 (Nguyen et al.2024) were produced in rice suspension cell system. Here, we selected the intron 1 sites ofαAmy8andαAmy3for our single donor CRISPR/Cas9 knock-in system. We generated a donor plasmid, αAmy8,3-rcRBD, consisting ofαAmy8E8 site,αAmy3C3 site,rcRBDcDNA,Nosterminator DNA region (NosT),αAmy3C3 site, andαAmy8E8 site (Fig.1) to facilitate DNA integration at the C3 and E8 site via the NHEJ repair mechanism. To create a chimeric intron when rcRBD DNA was inserted into eitherαAmy3intron 1 orαAmy8intron 1, a 3′ splice site was added upstream of the rcRBD cDNA (Supplementary Fig.S1).

To evaluate the ability of a single donor cassette to mediate DNA knock-ins at two rice genomic sites, the αAmy8,3-rcRBD donor plasmid was co-transformed with the CRISPR plasmids pH-Cas9-αAmy3sgRNA and pH-Cas9-αAmy8sgRNA into rice calli using particle bombardment at 3:1:1 molar ratio. Following Cas9-mediated recognition of the target sequences, double-stranded breaks were introduced, releasing thercRBDdonor DNAs at either theαAmy8E8 orαAmy3C3 site. This enabled site-specific integration of thercRBD-NosT into intron 1 of eitherαAmy8orαAmy3. PCR screening identified eight calli containing potentialαAmy8SP-rcRBDand five calli containingαAmy3SP-rcRBDinserts which further subjected to the protein blot (Supplementary Fig.S3). To assess the insertion ofrcRBDcDNA into the introns ofαAmy8orαAmy3in hygromycin-resistant calli, PCR-based genotyping was performed using site-specific primers (Fig.2A). Two putativeαAmy3SP-rcRBDlines (L1 and L42) and fourαAmy8SP-rcRBDlines (L6, L32, L52, and L85) were further analyzed by 5′-junction sequencing to confirm integration sites (Fig.2B). In L1 and L42, thercRBDDNA fragments were located downstream ofαAmy3intron 1 DNA sequence, and the absence of theαAmy8E8 site suggested thatrcRBDwas excised from the αAmy8,3-rcRBD plasmid through theαAmy3C3 site (Fig.2B, Supplementary Fig.S4). In contrast, since theαAmy8E8 site precedes theαAmy3C3 site upstream ofrcRBDin the donor plasmid, C3 sequences remained detectable within the insertions at theαAmy8locus (Fig.2B, Supplementary Fig.S5). Additionally, knock-in lines were subjected to 3′-junction analysis (Supplementary Fig.S4andS5). These results indicate that thercRBDDNA was integrated into intron 1 of eitherαAmy3orαAmy8in a forward orientation in all independent lines. To our knowledge, this is the first report of recombinant DNA insertion at two distinct genomic loci using a single donor cassette, highlighting potential of this strategy for multi-site DNA integration when combined with system such as msMGE.

To evaluate the knock-in efficiency of a single donor cassette at two genomic target sites, three additional rice transformation events were performed using particle bombardment. Results from four independent examinations revealed that the frequency ofrcRBDDNA insertion intoαAmy3intron 1 in the forward direction ranged from 6.5 to 11.1%, consistent with previous observations (Nguyen et al.2022). In contrast, the frequency of forward-directionrcRBDDNA insertion atαAmy8intron 1 ranged from 26.1 to 31.1% (Table1). These results indicate that recombinant DNA is more likely to be inserted atαAmy8than atαAmy3(Table1). Notably, among a total of 77 knock-in calli analyzed, no line exhibited dual insertion event of rcRBD at bothαAmy8andαAmy3introns in the forward direction, indicating the lower rate of sequential Cas9 procession.

During NHEJ repair in a population of cells, the frequency spectrum of indels that form depends on the target’s local DNA sequence (van Overbeek et al.2016). These indels, which are usually less than 50 bp, can be reliably predicted from DNA sequences (Allen et al.2019; CHen et al.2019). The frequent occurrence of single-base-pair insertions, derived from sequences near the cleavage site, has been specifically associated with Cas9-induced double-strand breaks featuring a one-nucleotide 5′ overhang (Jones et al.2021; Shi et al.2019). Nevertheless, high size indels also happen and have an impact on Cas9 mutagenesis’s overall effectiveness (Kosicki et al.2022; Longo et al.2024).

Given these considerations, we selected transgenic rice callus lines with minimal indel mutations at the rcRBD insertion sites for further study one line each for insertion intoαAmy3andαAmy8. For theαAmy3insertion, the rcRBD-42 line, which contained a 3-nucleotide deletion, was chosen over rcRBD-1, which had a 361-nucleotide insertion. For theαAmy8insertion, the rcRBD-32 line was selected due to its relatively small 18-nucleotide deletion, the smallest among theαAmy8SP-rcRBDlines (Fig.2B).

The endogenousαAmy3andαAmy8promoters are known to be activated by sugar depletion in cultured rice suspension cells (Chan et al.1994; Lu et al.1998). It has also been shown that the endogenousαAmy3promoter can drive the expression of recombinant genes inserted intoαAmy3intron 1 (Nguyen et al.2024). Using the selected knock-in lines, we established rice suspension cell cultures to examine whether thercRBDgene was transcriptionally regulated by the endogenousαAmy3andαAmy8promoters. Genomic DNA PCR with either αAmy8_E1_F and rcRBD_R or αAmy3_E1_F and rcRBD_R primer sets confirmed the presence ofαAmy8-rcRBDandαAmy3-rcRBDinsertions in the suspension cell lines, respectively (Fig.3A). Next, 2% (v/v) of the cells were incubated in sucrose-containing medium for 3 days, followed by transfer to sucrose-free medium for 6, 12, and 24 h. Total RNAs were extracted from sugar-starved cells and subjected to RT-PCR analysis. All sugar-starved cells hadrcRBDmRNA expression, as seen in Fig.3B, and these levels rose even more while the sugar-starved treatment period. Among these lines,rcRBDexpression was slightly higher in rcRBD-42 line than in rcRBD-32 line after 6 h of sugar starvation. At 12 and 24 h of treatment, however,rcRBDwas shown to be higher in rcRBD-32 line than in rcRBD-42 line (Fig.3B, Supplementary Fig.S6).

To analyze recombinant rcRBD protein production and secretion in these selected lines, 34% (v/v) cells of wild type (WT), rcRBD-32, and rcRBD-42 lines were incubated in sucrose-free medium for 8 days. The total proteins from the culture medium and the total cellular proteins were subjected to immunoblotting analysis with anti-SARS-COV-2 spike RBD region antibodies. Fifty nanograms of commercial recombinant 2019-nCoV spike RBD protein produced from HEK293 cells was used as a positive control. The 26 kDa rcRBD proteins were detected in the culture medium of both rcRBD-32 and rcRBD-42 lines (Fig.3C), indicating that the signal peptides of both αAmy3 and αAmy8 direct rcRBD protein secretion. Additionally, rcRBD proteins were detected in the culture medium of four and sevenrcRBDknock-in T0 calli atαAmy3andαAmy8introns, respectively (Supplementary Fig.S3), further supporting this finding. Recombinant rcRBD proteins were also detected in the cytosolic protein of rcRBD-42 line but not in rcRBD-32 line (Fig.3D).

To determine the optimal production of rcRBD protein in these CRISPR-mediated knock-in rice cell lines, 20% (v/v) cells of the rcRBD-32 and rcRBD-42 lines were incubated in sucrose-free medium for 4 to 10 days. The abundance of rcRBD during sugar starvation was detected via western blotting using anti-SARS-COV-2 spike RBD region antibodies. In the rcRBD-32 line, rcRBD proteins were detected starting from day 4, with levels continuously increasing over the following days (Fig.4A). In the rcRBD-42 line, rcRBD protein was also detected from day 4, continuously increasing until day 8, after which it gradually decreased over time (Fig.4B). The yield of rcRBD in the culture medium of the rcRBD-32 and rcRBD-42 lines was measured using ELISA. The maximal yield was detected on day 8 after sugar depletion in both lines, reaching 20.7 mg/L for rcRBD-32 and 7 mg/L for rcRBD-42 (Fig.4C andD), suggesting the expressed rcRBD in the rcRBD-42 line was distributed intra- and extracellularly, reducing its yield in the culture medium compared to the rcRBD-32 line.

To test whether rice cell-produced rcRBD proteins can potentially be used as a vaccine for protecting humans from COVID-19 infection, the antigen–antibody interaction ability of recombinant rcRBD proteins isolated from the culture medium of the rcRBD-32 and rcRBD-42 lines was evaluated using the COVID-19 Antigen Detection Kit. The antibody binding signal was obtained for rice cell-produced rcRBD from both rcRBD-32 and rcRBD-42 cell lines (Fig.5). This result indicates that the rice cell-produced rcRBD protein can be recognized by COVID-19 antibodies.

In our result, we observed a higher frequency of forwardrcRBDinsertions atαAmy8intron 1 compared toαAmy3intron 1 (Table1). This could be partially attributed to the relative genomic positions of these two genes. On chromosome 8,αAmy8is located upstream ofαAmy3(Fig.1), and co-expression ofαAmy8E8sgRNA-Cas9 andαAmy3C3sgRNA-Cas9 may result in DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) at either site, or simultaneously at both sites (Supplementary Fig.S7). When both DSBs occur, a large genomic deletion (~ 8 kb) spanning fromαAmy8intron toαAmy3intron 1 region may occur. In such cases, only forward insertion ofrcRBDatαAmy8intron 1 is detectable, as insertion atαAmy3becomes undetectable due to the loss of its promoter and 5′ regulatory sequences (Supplementary Fig.S7).

In addition to genomic positioning, chromatin structure at the target site is a critical factor influencing the efficiency of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing (Liu et al.Jensen et al.2017;2019a). The accessibility of the Cas9 enzyme to its target DNA sequence is largely dependent on chromatin conformation. Prior studies have shown that Cas9 binding and cleavage are hindered in densely packed chromatin regions, such as those enriched with histones or DNA methylation (Liu et al.2019a). Conversely, Cas9 activity is more efficient in regions of open, euchromatic chromatin. Plant studies have further supported the role of chromatin characteristics in modulating CRISPR/Cas9 targeting and binding efficiency. Heterochromatic regions generally exhibit lower chromatin accessibility, leading to reduced targeting and cleavage efficiency compared to euchromatic regions (Weiss et al.2022). Furthermore, DNA repair following Cas9-induced cleavage—particularly via the NHEJ pathway—is more efficient in euchromatic regions, where the DNA repair machinery has greater access to the break site (ScHep et al.2021). Taken together, both genomic context and local chromatin structure likely contribute to the observed difference in knock-in efficiency between theαAmy8andαAmy3loci.

The relationship between gene expression and chromatin structure has long been recognized in molecular biology (Felsenfeld et al.1996; Yang and Seto2003). Euchromatin, characterized by a more open and accessible chromatin configuration, is typically associated with actively transcribed genes, as it allows transcriptional machinery to access the DNA. In contrast, heterochromatin represents a more condensed chromatin state that limits DNA accessibility and is generally linked to transcriptional repression (TaMaru2010). Under sucrose containing conditions during bombardment-mediated transformation, sugar suppression ofαAmy8is not as stringent, and residual expression has been observed compared toαAmy3(CHen et al.2002; Umemura et al.1998), suggesting thatαAmy8may reside in a more open chromatin state. In contrast, the tight sugar suppression ofαAmy3expression implies that it may be located in a more compact chromatin region. Thus, the gene editing efficiency via the CRISPR/Cas9 and NHEJ pathway might be expected to be higher atαAmy8than atαAmy3under sucrose containing culture condition. However, there is currently insufficient evidence to clearly distinguish the chromatin structures ofαAmy8andαAmy3. Further studies are necessary to fully understand how sucrose modulates chromatin structure and transcriptional activity ofαAmy3andαAmy8, and how these factors impact CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing efficiency.

In our study, theαAmy8knock-in line rcRBD-32 had higherrcRBDexpression thanαAmy3knock-in line rcRBD-42 after 12 and 24 h of sugar starvation (Fig.3B, Supplementary Fig.S6). This observation contrasts with previous reports, which found that sugar starvation inducedαAmy3expression more strongly thanαAmy8(Huang et al.1993; Yu et al.1992). We hypothesize that this unexpected expression pattern may be related to intron-mediated enhancement (IME), a phenomenon in which specific introns enhance gene expression. Although introns are typically removed during mRNA splicing, numerous studies have demonstrated their critical roles in regulating gene expression and RNA stability in plants, including inO. sativa(Morello and Breviario2008). IME has been widely documented as a mechanism through which certain introns, especially the first intron, enhance transcription (Back and WaltHer2021; Laxa2017). The first discovery of this effect was made in maize, where inclusion of introns significantly enhanced gene expression in cultured cells (Callis et al.1987). More recently, introduction of an intron into a codon-optimizedTmDGAT1gene led to a sevenfold increase in transcript accumulation across five transgenic leaf samples (Cao et al.2023). In another case, splicing of the first intron ofSh1was shown to be essential for transcript enhancement, potentially by recruiting cellular trafficking machinery through transcript modifications involving a T-rich motif (CLancy and Hannah2002). Although the exact molecular mechanisms underlying IME remain to be fully elucidated, it is believed that introns may influence gene expression both before and after transcription (Gallegos and Rose2019; Parra et al.2011; Rose et al.2011; SaMadder et al.2008). IME-associated sequence elements are frequently enriched near the 5′ end of the first intron, particularly within the 5′-UTR and proximal coding regions (Parra et al.2011). To our knowledge, no studies have yet examined whether intron 1 ofαAmy8andαAmy3contains active IME elements. Nonetheless, our findings suggest that differences inrcRBDexpression between the two knock-in lines may, in part, be influenced by intronic regulatory effects. These results confirm that the insertedrcRBDgene is transcriptionally regulated by the endogenousαAmy3andαAmy8promoters, and open new avenues for investigating IME in rice gene expression systems.

In our study, the recombinant rcRBD protein was successfully produced and was able to be secreted into culture media in both rcRBD-42 and rcRBD-32 lines. Chen et al. (2004) reported that the signal peptides (SP) of αAmy3 and αAmy8 could direct a cargo protein to localize simultaneously in dual locations: the cell wall/extracellular compartment and plastids (CHen et al.2004). Furthermore, the endogenous αAmy3 SP has been shown to direct a cargo protein, GFP, into the culture medium and the amyloplasts (Nguyen et al.2022). Our results are consistent with the observation that the αAmy3 SP directs dual localization of recombinant protein. Interestingly, our study implies that the αAmy8 signal peptide is more efficient at secreting rcRBD protein than the αAmy3 signal peptide. Therefore, a larger quantity of rcRBD protein was directed to the culture medium by the αAmy8 SP rather than to the amyloplasts.

We also noted that the molecular weight of rcRBD was smaller compared to its mammalian counterpart, which is around 38 kDa, as indicated by western blot analysis (Fig.3C). TwoN- and twoO-glycosylation sites have been identified on the SARS-COV-2 spike RBD protein that is fully glycosylated when expressed in a heterologous expression system (Antonopoulos et al.2021; Watanabe et al.2020). Recombinant RBD produced by Expi293 cells has a molecular weight of approximately 35 kDa (Garcia-Cordero et al.2021). A similar molecular weight was also found in recombinant RBD generated from HEK293T cells, which was around 36 kDa (Arias-Arias et al.2023). However, plant-produced RBD has a smaller molecular weight, around 25 kDa in BY-2 cells and 20 to 30 kDa in Medicago cells (Rebelo et al.2022). The different molecular weights of the rcRBD protein observed in different organisms are due to distinct glycol-forms (Berndt et al.2021; Mardanova et al.2022; Poodts et al.2022; Rebelo et al.2022).

Besides rice, recombinant RBD has been reported to be expressed in various expression systems, including bacteria, yeast, insect cells, mammalian cells, and plants. InNicotiana benthamiana, the highest RBD protein yield was reported to be 117 ± 41 to 63 ± 10 μg/g fresh leaves (Shin et al.2021). Additionally, RBD protein produced byMedicagosuspension cells accumulated to 0.5–2.8 mg/L (Ferreira et al.2023). Our current work surpasses previous plant systems, demonstrating that the use of the endogenousαAmy8promoter and signal peptide can yield high levels of rcRBD protein. However, in the rcRBD-42 line, rcRBD protein was targeted to both intra- and extracellular locations, resulting in lower rcRBD protein production in the culture medium compared to the rcRBD-32 line.

In addition, higher levels of protein degradation were found in the rcRBD-42 line which probably links to RNA stability. The 3′ untranslated region (3′ UTR) of messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules is a crucial component of this regulatory environment since it has been demonstrated to have a major impact on RNA stability and, consequently, protein expression levels. A wide variety of RNA-binding proteins can bind to the AU-rich regions found in the 3′ UTR, either promoting or inhibiting RNA decay (García-Mauriño et al.2017). In particular, some RNA-binding proteins can bind to the 3′ UTR and prevent mRNA from degrading, increasing the transcript’s stability and longevity and eventually raising the amount of the produced protein (Jonkhout et al.2017). In response to the availability of sugar, the 3′ UTR ofαAmy3 acts to regulate the stability of mRNA (CHan and Yu1998). Certain regions of theαAmy33′ UTR have been shown to function as destabilizing components when carbohydrates like sucrose are present. When carbohydrates are plentiful, these sequences mediate the quick breakdown ofαAmy3mRNA, which lowers the amounts of α-amylase protein. On the other hand, when sugar is depleted, the mRNA stabilizes and increases the production of proteins (CHan and Yu1998). Instead of using the 3′ UTR of endogenousαAmy3orαAmy8, theNosterminator is used in this work to indicate the end ofrcRBDgene expression, which may affect protein production in rcRBD-42 (Fig.4). Nevertheless, it is still unclear how the 3′ UTR ofαAmy8and RNA stability are related.

This study demonstrated the effective use of a single donor cassette in the CRISPR/Cas9 system to insert recombinant genes into two specific sites in the rice genome, targeting intron 1 of theαAmy3orαAmy8genes. Results showed higher efficiency of DNA insertion at theαAmy8site compared to theαAmy3site. The endogenousαAmy3andαAmy8promoters successfully controlledrcRBDgene expression, and both signal peptides facilitated rcRBD protein secretion into the culture medium, with the αAmy8 signal peptide being more efficient. Optimal rcRBD protein production was achieved on day 8 of sugar depletion, with yields of 20.7 mg/L, surpassing previous plant expression systems. Additionally, rice cell-produced rcRBD proteins could interact with the COVID-19 antibodies and have the potential to be a vaccine candidate.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

This study was supported by grants from the National Science and Technology Council of the Republic of China (Grant No. 111-2313-B-155-001-MY3 to LFH and 112-2313-B-008-002-MY3 to CAL). We thank Professors Shaw-Jye Wu (SJW) and Ching-Hui Yeh (CHY) from the Department of Life Sciences, National Central University—SJW for taking over CAL’s grant, and CHY for serving as DSS’s advisor after CAL’s passing in July 2024—and for continuing to financially support DSS through CAL’s original funding.

LFH and CAL designed the research and contributed to manuscript writing. CAL was DSS’s advisor and passed away in July 2024. Following his passing, DSS and CKH revised the manuscript in collaboration with LFH. DSS and PYH performed the experiments and prepared the manuscript. The remaining four authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

This study was supported by grants from the National Science and Technology Council of the Republic of China (Grant No. 111–2313-B-155–001-MY3 to LFH and 112–2313-B-008–002-MY3 to CAL).