Doxycycline (DOXY)-loaded hydroxyapatite (HAp) pectin hydrogel films were prepared for sustained drug release and wound healing application. A series of pectin-based, DOXY-loaded hydrogels were synthesizedviaa solution casting method. HAp at varying amounts was used as a filler to synthesize PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp (PPC-5, -10, -15, -20) hydrogels. SEM, FTIR, TGA, and XRD analyses verified the porous morphology, structural integrity, thermal stability and amorphous nature of the hydrogels, respectively. A biodegradation study of the hydrogel was conducted using phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and proteinase-K enzymatic solutions. Cell viability was evaluated using the MTT assay with HEK293 cells. Moreover, drug-loaded hydrogel dressings were developed and subjected toin vivowound healing studies on albino mice. Excision wound infliction was created to produce a 5–6 mm wide and 2–3 mm deep cutaneous wound. Swelling of the hydrogel films was found to be inversely related to the concentrations of HAp. The hydrogels exhibited significant swelling profiles in distilled water with a maximum swelling of 2519% in 140 min, while the highest swelling was observed at pH 6 in both buffer and non-buffer solutions. Antibacterial studies indicated bactericidal activity of hydrogels against both Gram-positive (S. aureus) and Gram-negative (E. coli) bacteria.In vitrorelease of DOXY from the hydrogel matrix (PPC-10) revealed 88.57% drug release in PBS solution within 3.5 h. Wound healing studies exhibited exceptional healing tendency, with complete excision wound healing achieved in 8 days. In conclusion, the remarkable biocompatible, biodegradable and nontoxic pectin-based hydrogel systems are suitable for drug delivery, tissue engineering, wound healing, and other medico-biological applications.

Pectin-based hydrogels for doxycycline release and wound healing studies.

Structural and functional enhancements through crosslinkers and bioactive fillers have made multifunctional hydrogels promising candidates for various biomedical applications. This study focuses on designing pH-responsive, biodegradable and antibacterial pectin-based hydrogels with improved mechanical, swelling and therapeutic properties. In the present work, we have prepared a series of novel pectin-based HAp reinforced and APTES cross-linked PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp hydrogels by using the solution casting method. The hydrogels were characterized by FTIR, TGA, XRD, and SEM analyses, and further evaluated for cell viability, antibacterial activity, swelling behavior, and biodegradation studies. Furthermore,in vitrodrug release andin vivowound healing studies were done to evaluate their effectiveness for various biomedical applications. Despite extensive research on pectin-based hydrogels, the integration of APTES and HAp into a pectin-PVA matrix has not been explored yet in the literature, positioning this hydrogel as a novel and multifunctional platform for various biomedical applications. Pectin/PVA/APTES/HAp hydrogels are novel due to the unique combination of natural, synthetic and inorganic components, each contributing to enhanced the functionality. This unique formulation integrates the biocompatibility and gel-forming properties of pectin, the mechanical reinforcement of PVA, the functionalization capability of APTES and the osteoconductive nature of HAp, offering a multifunctional platform for drug delivery and wound healing applications. The synergistic interaction of these components enables enhanced structural stability, targeted bioactivity and controlled drug release, distinguishing it from previously reported pectin-based hydrogel systems. The literature review of similar studies on pectin-based hydrogels for biomedical applications is provided in the SI (Table S1).

Pectin (CAS No. 9000-69-5, MW: 60 000–130 000 g mol−1, low methoxy content), APTES (CAS No. 919-30-2,Mw: 221.37 g mol−1, 99%), PVA (CAS No. 9002-89-5,MW: 146 000–186 000 g mol−1), proteinase-K (CAS No. 39450-01-6,MW: 28 930 g mol−1), HAp (CAS No. 12167-74-7, Product No. 289396,MW: 502.31 g mol−1), potassium chloride (KCl, CAS No. 7447-40-7), calcium chloride (CaCl2, anhydrous, CAS No. 10043-52-4), potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH2PO4, 99%, CAS No. 9002-89-5) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, CAS No. 1310-73-2) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Germany. Hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%, CAS No. 7647-01-0) and sodium chloride (NaCl, CAS No. 7647-14-5) were obtained from Merck, Germany. Methanol (CH3OH, CAS No. 67-56-1,MW: 32.04 g mol−1) and ethanol (C2H5OH, CAS No. 64-17-5,MW: 46.07 g mol−1) were bought from BDH England. Disodium hydrogen phosphate (Na2HPO4·2H2O, CAS No. 7558-79-4) was bought from Scharlau, Spain. Sodium azide (NaN3,MW: 65.01 g mol−1) and glycerin (CAS No. 56-81-5, MW: 92.09 g mol−1) were obtained from Dabur, India Limited. HEK-293 cells were taken from the cell line bank of Atta ur Rehman School of Applied Biosciences (ASAB)l culture core. The model drug DOXY (MW: 444.4 g mol−1) loaded on the hydrogels was purchased from a local company, Wilson's Pharmaceuticals Islamabad, Pakistan.

The solution casting method was employed to synthesize the PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp hydrogels.42,43PVA (0.5 g) and pectin (0.5 g) were individually dissolved in 40 mL and 50 mL of DW, respectively. The two polymer solutions were mixed and blended for two hours. In the next step, various concentrations of HAp clay were prepared by dissolving 5, 10, 15, and 20 mg, separately, in 10 mL of DW and sonicating for 30 min. It was then added to the mixture mentioned above and stirred for another hour. Additionally, 20 μL of APTES cross-linker was diluted using 10 mL methanol. The crosslinker solution was added dropwise to the original polymeric mixture. Finally, 20 μL of glycerin was added to avoid brittleness in hydrogels. This was followed by stirring for 1 h. Hydrogels were then obtained by pouring the solutions into Petri plates and permitting them to dry at room temperature. The dried hydrogels were designated as PPC (control), which is devoid of clay, and PPC-5, PPC-10, PPC-15, and PPC-20, which were each combined with 5, 10, 15, and 20 mg of HAp clay, respectively.Table 1outlines the composition of the PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp hydrogels, detailing the specific proportions of each component used in their formulation.

FTIR, TGA, XRD, and SEM were employed as material characterization techniques to analyze the synthesized hydrogels for their structure, stability, nature, and morphology. First, the anticipated characteristics of the hydrogel samples were examined using a FTIR spectrophotometer. The FTIR spectra of each hydrogel specimen was measured at a resolution of 2 cm−1using triangular apodization. Hydrogel samples were vacuum-dried before going through the apparatus. Utilizing Thermo-Fisher Scientific's Nicolet iS10 spectrometer (Brookhaven, USA), the vacuum-dried hydrogels were scanned. The TGA model Q50 of Thermal Analysis (TA) Instrument (Newcastle, USA) was used to measure the thermal stability of the hydrogels. Five milligrams of hydrogel material were heated in an inert environment between 15 °C and 700 °C at a rate of 10 °C per minute in a platinum pan that was part of the apparatus. The study used an inert environment created by continuous nitrogen purging at a flow rate of 40 mL min−1. The XRD instrument Xpert pro diffractometer, manufactured by PANalytical (Almelo, Netherlands), was used to investigate the nature of the synthesized hydrogels. The wavelength of the Cu Kα radiation employed in the aforementioned diffractometer was 1.544 Å. The 2θoperating range was 5°–80°, and the scan step size was 0.025°. The SEM analysis was performed on MIRA3 TESCAN (Brno, Czech Republic). The hydrogel specimen was attached to carbon conductive tape and coated with tungsten for 92 seconds at a rate of 0.8 nm s−1using the Safematic CCU-010 sputter coater. The samples were then inspected at various magnifications.

The hydrogel biodegradation rate was investigated using PBS and proteinase-K enzymatic solutions. The biodegradation percentage was computed usingeqn (1).

Wois the initial weight of the hydrogel specimen, andWtis the weight of the sample taken out of PBS and proteinase-K solutions at pre-arranged intervals (after the surface water has been removed). Pre-weighed hydrogels were added to 25 mL of PBS. Samples were removed on the 1st, 3rd, 7th, 10th, 14th, and 21st days. Weight loss was calculated by subtracting the initial and final weights, with the process conducted at room temperature without stirring. On the other hand, 0.2 mg mL−1proteinase-K was made in PBS, followed by the addition of 0.29 g CaCl2. As a precaution to prevent the growth of microbes, 0.01% w/v NaN3was added. The enzymatic solution was then supplemented with a pre-weighed, precisely determined amount of hydrogel. After that, the samples were placed in an incubator set at 37 °C. The weight loss was calculated by comparing the weight of the dried and incubated gels on the first, third, and seventh days.

The sterilization protocol was followed prior to this assay. The hydrogel samples were evaluated for cell viability using the MTT assay with HEK-293 cells. HEK-293 cells were grown in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM). A total of 1 × 104cells were plated with 2 mg of hydrogel and incubated at 37 °C. The hydrogel-free cells served as a reference group. A Bio-Rad (Washington, DC, USA) absorbance microplate reader model PR4100 was used to measure absorbance after 48 h. Furthermore, by performing the cell line experiments in triplicate, the cell viability was computed usingeqn (2).

Swelling experiments were performed to confirm the swelling characteristics of each hydrogel. 10 mg of dry hydrogel was submerged in DW, and the swelling hydrogel's weight was measured on a regular basis. The excess solvent in the beaker was wiped away using tissue paper before weighing the hydrogel. The ability of each hydrogel to swell was also evaluated in the same stream in buffer and non-buffer solutions at pH values of 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 10. Similarly, NaCl and CaCl2solutions of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1 M were used to investigate the impact of the electrolyte type and concentration on the swelling of the generated hydrogels. The ability of each hydrogel to swell was ascertained using the followingeqn (3).

whereWsandWdstand for the swelling hydrogel and dried hydrogel, respectively. The diffusion mechanism of water or solvents entering and exiting the hydrogels may be explained usingeqn (4).

The antibacterial activity was evaluated againstS. aureus(Gram-positive) andE. coli(Gram-negative) stains using the disc diffusion technique. The tested bacteria were cultivated on sterilized Petri plates, and then inoculated with LB (1% NaCl, 1% trypton, and 0.5% yeast) at a pH of 7.4.60 μL of the generated bacterial culture was put on agar plates containing 1.5% agar and LB medium. An ethanol-clean glass spreader was utilized to uniformly distribute the spilled culture across the LB agar plates. Subsequently, hydrogel samples (5 mg) were added to the LB agar plates, which were then incubated with the bacterial lawn at 37 °C. After 24 h, theIzvalues were measured using a zone reader scale with a minimum increment of 1 mm. The “0” reading on the zone reader was positioned at the center of the circle. The distance from the center to the edge of the circular area was referred to as the zone of inhibition, and was recorded in millimeters.

whereMtis the amount of drug released at timet, whereasMois the total amount of drug loaded.KH,K, andKoare the rate constants.

The guidelines set forth in European Community Council Directive 2010/63 were followed while handling each animal involved in thein vivostudy. The experimental protocol (No. F.1-5/ERC/2024) was reviewed and approved by Institutional Ethics Committee for Animal Care and Experimentation (IECACE), NIH Islamabad, Pakistan. Eachin vivoexperiment was carried out according to the guidelines and internationally accepted norms.

For the wound healing analysis, 30 female albino mice, weighing between 18 and 25 grams, were purchased. The animals were housed at NIH, Islamabad, with a temperature of 25 ± 2 °C and a relative humidity of 45 ± 5 °C throughout the wound healing procedure. The animals were given unlimited access to food and water, and were given seven days to acclimate to their surroundings before the start of the experiment. Animals were randomly divided into three groups containing ten mice in each group. For each group, the age and weight were roughly the same.

Group A: Control group (only pyodine was applied daily on the wound).

Group B: PPC-10 group (blank PPC-10 hydrogel was applied on the wound).

Group C: DPPC group (DOXY-loaded DPPC hydrogel was applied on wound).

Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of xylazine (10 mg kg−1) and ketamine hydrochloride (100 mg kg−1). The animals were shaved dorsally using an electric clipper, and a circular stainless-steel stencil was used to mark the region of the wound with methylene blue. A medical blade, sharp scissors and toothed forceps were used to produce an excision wound that was 5–6 mm wide and 2–3 mm deep along the markings. Post-operative care was guaranteed, and all surgical procedures were done under sterile conditions. The animals received treatment once every day.

wherenrepresents the number of days, like the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 6th, and 7th day. Three animals or more were employed for each measurement of the wounds' surface area. The acquired results were presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean.

Origin Pro (8.5.1), created by Origin Lab Corporation in the United States, was utilized to analyze the data statistically by one-way ANOVA. The evaluation of the swelling and kinetic parameters for drug release from hydrogels was also performed using linear fitting. Three independently conducted experiments provided the antibacterial and cytocompatibility data, which were presented as the mean ± SD.

The anticipated scheme for the HAp-incorporated PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp hydrogel forin vitrodrug delivery andin vivowound healing applications is depicted inFig. 2. The dotted and bold lines represent the physical and chemical interactions formed between the functional groups of the various components, highlighting the structural integration and bonding within the system. Pectin and PVA form the primary hydrogel network through hydrogen bonding, providing a flexible and biocompatible matrix. APTES acts as a silane coupling agent, introducing amine groups that facilitate covalent bonding with both the polymeric matrix and HAp particles, enhancing the network stability and crosslinking density. HAp is uniformly dispersed within the matrix, and interacts with both the functionalized polymers and loaded drug moleculesviaionic and hydrogen bonding. Together, these interactions create a cohesive and multifunctional structure capable of sustained drug release, mechanical integrity and wound healing.

Fig. 3(b)shows the FTIR spectra of the PPC hydrogels, which show the fundamental peaks of pectin, PVA, APTES and HAp. The stretching peak seen in the 3100–3650 cm−1area is attributed to the presence of –OH groups in PVA and pectin. The –OH group was involved in both intra- and inter-molecular hydrogen bonding inside the hydrogel matrix, as demonstrated by the peak broadening.48Furthermore, –OH bending vibrational peaks were also observed at 1329 cm−1. The C–H stretching vibrations were represented by the band that appeared at 2940 cm−1. The bands for CCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O, C–O–C, COO−, CH–OH in pectin appeared in the hydrogel at 1730 cm−1, 1086 cm−1, 1645 cm−1and 1145 cm−1, respectively. The characteristic peaks of HAp, which are attributed to the phosphate and carbonate groups, were seen at 923–1024 cm−1and 1418 cm−1, respectively. At 1441 cm−1, the C–N representative peak of the APTES was detected. The –CH2and C–O (in pectin, PVA, and APTES) were linked to bands at 1329 cm−1and 1081 cm−1, respectively. The presence of the functional groups of each component in the produced hydrogels is confirmed byFig. 3(b), which displays comparable spectral peaks of all hydrogels with varying intensities depending on their composition.

However, the FTIR spectra for DOXY showed distinctive O–H and N–H stretching peaks at 3200–3500 cm−1. At 2967 cm−1, 1680 cm−1and 1459 cm−1, respectively, the C–H, CCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O, and C–N stretching modes were discernible. Furthermore, the amide carbonyl stretching was seen at 1610 cm−1and the peak at 1620 cm−1is associated with CCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O stretching in the aromatic ring.49No peak shift was seen in DPPC. In contrast to PPC-10, comparable peaks with lower intensity and broadness values were found. Additionally, the 1500–1650 cm−1region verified the effective DOXY loading on DPPC, as shown inFig. 3(c).

The TGA curves clearly showed the three-phase breakdown of the pectin skeleton. The initial stage of the breakdown occurs between 15 and 210 °C, where solvent molecules and moisture are eliminated. PVA and pectin are hydrophilic, so a significant portion of the weight loss can be due to water evaporation, especially in the early stages of the heating process. The second phase ranged from 220 to 290 °C, which is due to degradation in the side chains of polymeric skeletons. The third and final stage at 290–650 °C is attributed to the degradation in the residual polymeric backbone.52HAp provides thermal stability due to its strong carbon–carbon bonds, which show minimal weight loss until temperatures exceed 500 °C. APTES, due to its silane groups, also provides stability, with decomposition likely to occur at temperatures above 400 °C.53Furthermore, the TGA curve of the DOXY-loaded PPC-10 (DPPC) shows the significant attractive forces between the drug and hydrogel because of the hydroxyl and amide groups in DOXY that form strong hydrogen bonds with pectin, PVA, and APTES, while there are electrostatic interactions with HAp.54These interactions increase the crosslink density, reducing the polymer chain mobility and improving the resistance of the hydrogel to thermal degradation.55The residual weights of the polymers for PPC (control), PPC-5, PPC-10, PPC-15 and PPC-20, as well as DPPC, at different temperatures are displayed inTable 2.

The TGA profiles of the hydrogels reveal clear differences in thermal stability and residual weight as a function of hydroxyapatite (HAp) content and drug loading. The control hydrogel (PPC), containing 0 mg of HAp, shows the lowest thermal stability, with a final residual weight of 12.15% at 600 °C, indicating complete degradation of the organic matrix and minimal inorganic residue. As the HAp content increases from PPC-5 to PPC-20 (5 mg to 20 mg), there is a progressive rise in residual weight at higher temperatures, demonstrating the contribution of thermally stable inorganic HAp to the overall mass. This increase also reflects the improved structural robustness due to enhanced crosslinking and filler reinforcement. DPPC exhibited the highest thermal stability (Table 2), which can be attributed to the potential interactions between DOXY and the hydrogel matrix. Overall, these differences confirm that both HAp incorporation and drug loading significantly influence the thermal degradation behavior and residual mass of the hydrogel system.

All blank hydrogel specimens had the same composition and varied only in the amount of HAp (0, 10, and 20 mg). Furthermore, the chemical cross-linking caused crystallinity, which ultimately impacted the intensity levels. PPC-20 therefore showed greater intensity values, while PPC (control) showed lower intensity values. XRD patterns suggest that all of the ingredients were successfully combined to create hydrogels with an amorphous character. The suitability of pectin for hydrogel synthesis with porous and amorphous frameworks was also shown by the XRD results, and can be further investigated for several biomedical applications like drug delivery and wound healing.

Thein vitrobiodegradation of PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp hydrogels involves the breakdown of its constituent parts under physiological or simulated biological conditions. The presence of the biopolymer pectin is primarily responsible for the degradation in hydrogels. It has glycosidic bonds between its monomers, which the enzymes can readily break in anin vivoenvironment. As a result, it produces polysaccharides with a reduced molecular weight that can enter the metabolic pathways.61After adding 30 mg of each hydrogel to a freshly prepared PBS solution, the weight loss (%) was calculated after the first, third, seventh, fourteen, and twenty-one days. The biodegradation rates of PPC (control), PPC-5, PPC-10, PPC-15, and PPC-20 hydrogels in PBS were 93, 82.70, 80, 75.33, and 72.85%, respectively, as illustrated inFig. 6(a). Likewise, as shown inFig. 6(b), the hydrogel's biodegradation was examined in proteinase-K solution. PPC (control), PPC-5, PPC-10, PPC-15, and PPC-20 underwent 93.33%, 82%, 83.3%, 76.67%, and 73.34% biodegradation, respectively. The non-linear biodegradation of hydrogels is readily apparent with faster degradation in the beginning. Furthermore, biodegradation occurs more slowly in PBS than in proteinase-K solution. The biodegradation data are provided in the supplementary material as Tables S2 and S3.

HEK-293 cells were used to test the cell viability of the PPC (control), PPC-5, PPC-10, PPC-15 and PPC-20 hydrogels. The absorbance measurements were made after 24 h, and the results of MTT assay were compared using HEK-293 cells as a reference (Fig. 6(c)). The MTT experimental findings demonstrated that cells were able to go through a cell cycle and multiply (Fig. S1–S6 in SI). The rise in the HAp amount increased this propensity by creating an environment that was favorable for cell proliferation. It enhances biocompatibility and tissue integration through its osteoconductive and bioactive qualities, which promote cell attachment, proliferation and differentiation.63All hydrogels showed increased cell proliferation as compared to the reference group. This indicated that the hydrogels were suitable for a variety of medico-biological uses, including wound dressings, tissue engineering and drug administration.Table 3provides the statistical parameters computed from the cell line results.

The HAp amount inversely affected the hydrogel swelling because of its ability to form strong attractive forces with various functionalities in pectin, APTES and PVA.71In non-buffers, PPC (control), PPC-5, PPC-10, PPC-15, and PPC-20 showed swelling of 2500%, 2767%, 2571%, 2300%, and 2100% at pH 6, respectively. PPC (control), PPC-5, PPC-10, PPC-15, and PPC-20 demonstrated 2156%, 2490%, 2392%, 2000% and 2233% swelling in buffers, respectively. The pattern of hydrogel swelling is the same in the buffer and non-buffer solutions. However, swelling is much more pronounced in the non-buffer solutions. This is because the non-buffers are made only with NaOH and HCl, so there are less positive and negative ions in them as compared to buffer solutions.72This increases the osmotic pressure and water uptake by the hydrogels. In medical-biological applications, these hydrogels' distinct and pH-dependent swelling properties can be utilized for drug release. The swelling percentage data of hydrogels in DW, buffer, and non-buffer solutions are provided in the supplementary material (Table S4).

Fig. 8(a) and (b)show the antibacterial activity of the PPC (control), PPC-5, PPC-10, PPC-15, and PPC-20 hydrogels againstE. coliandS. aureus, respectively. PPC-5 exhibited greater bactericidal activity against bothS. aureusandE. coli, withIzvalues of 3.8 ± 0.02 mm and 8 ± 0.04 mm, respectively (Table 5). Comparatively lowIzvalues for other HAp-reinforced hydrogels could be linked to its stronger binding when incorporated in the hydrogel's network in greater amounts; hence, resulting in decreased antibacterial activity.65Pectin is the major antibacterial agent, and the decrease in antibacterial activity with increasing HAp concentration can be attributed to physical and structural changes in the hydrogel matrix. At higher HAp concentrations, the hydrogel network became more compact or rigid, resulting in a reduced ability for the hydrogel to swell or expand, which limits the pectin ability to interact with bacteria. Furthermore, the increased concentration of HAp may alter the surface charge or topography of the hydrogel, which could influence bacterial adhesion or growth. Overall, the antibacterial efficiency of all hydrogels was found to be superior for Gram-negative (E. coli) bacteria than for Gram positive (S. aureus) bacteria. Each hydrogel specimen'sIzvalue is provided inTable 5.

Drug release from the hydrogel matrix is primarily influenced by swelling behavior, and the formation of intermolecular interactions between the polar functionalities of the hydrogel and drug.75In this context, PPC-10 was loaded with 50 mg of DOXY because of its favorable swelling response, stability, and cell survival. The code for the DOXY-loaded PPC-10 hydrogel was given as DPPC. Using PBS solution, the time-dependentin vitrodrug release was evaluated through absorption studies.Fig. 9(a)shows the standard calibration curve for DOXY, andFig. 9(b)presents the results of the drug's linear release pattern from the hydrogel in relation to time. 88.57% of DOXY was released in 3.5 h.

The sustained release of DOXY is evident from thein vitrodrug release patterns. Three main processes that regulate drug release from hydrogels are swelling, diffusion and erosion.76For drug delivery applications, researchers have documented DOXY release from a variety of biopolymeric hydrogel matrices. Kavishet al.synthesized glutaraldehyde-crosslinked chitosan hydrogel, which demonstrated 58% DOXY release in under 2 h.77In another study, collagen and hyaluronic acid-based biohybrid hydrogel membranes released 90% DOXY at pH 7.4 and 80% at pH 8.3 in 12 h, showcasing a significant drug release capability that is influenced by pH levels.78The 88.57% release of DOXY from PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp at pH 7.4 in 3.5 h in current studies was found to be more pronounced than that reported for its release from other biopolymeric hydrogels. The greater and sustained drug release profile is attributed to its effectiveness for use in biomedical applications, especially as a drug delivery system for treating bacterial infections of the skin, gastrointestinal system, and urinary tract,etc.

To verify the transport mechanism of DOXY from DPPG, the drug release numerical data were fitted into kinetic models usingeqn (5)–(7)and the resulting graphs are shown inFig. 9(c)–(e), while the relevant data are provided in the supplementary material as Table S5. These equations explain the zero-order, Korsmeyer-Peppas, and Higuchi kinetic models, respectively, which are used to confirm the drug release mechanism.79The calculated parameters for these kinetic models are shown inFig. 9(c–e, inset Tables). The regulated release of DOXY from the hydrogel was validated by the slope (0.0041, 7.837, and 0.7487) and regressionR2(0.912, 0.966, and 0.972) values derived from the linear graphs of the zero-order, Higuchi kinetic, and Korsmeyer-Peppas models, respectively. Furthermore, they demonstrated that the time-dependent diffusion-controlled mechanism governs the release of drugs from the hydrogel.58All of the hydrogels without drug followed Fickian diffusion, as obvious from the slope (n< 0.5) values inTable 4. However, release of the drug (DOXY) from the hydrogelviaexamining the kinetic models revealed that Fickian diffusion was only followed in the zero-order kinetic model, where the slope value was found to be lesser than 0.5. On the other hand, anomalous diffusion occurred in the other two models due to the greater slope values.67,68However, the numerical value of the slope was found in accordance with then> 1 and 0.45 <n> 0.89 for the Higuchi and Korsmeyer-Peppas models, respectively, indicating that the anomalous diffusion process was involved in DOXY release from APTES cross-linked Pectin/PVA/Hap hydrogelsviaSuper Case and non-Fickian diffusion, respectively.67,80It is evident from the regression coefficients that the drug release data were best fitted to the Korsmeyer-Peppas model with greaterR2(0.972) among all models. Therefore, DOXY release from the reported hydrogels is due to the combination of diffusion and swelling imparted by the polymeric chain relaxations in aqueous media. This is in strong agreement to the previously reported DOXY release studies.81In conclusion, DOXY release from the aforementioned pectin-based gels obeyed the non-Fickian release mechanism. Initially, the drug was released due to the swelling, which is relatively faster. Later on, DOXY concentration gradient regulated its releaseviadiffusion process.

The wound healing process is dynamic and usually progresses from the first inflammatory response to full resolution, and ultimately healing.82Hydrogel-based wound dressing development from biomaterials has garnered much research attention since hydrogels appear to be favorable media for promoting wound healing due to their high water content and capacity for water retention.83An animal experiment was conducted in this study to evaluate the hydrogel's efficacy in the healing of skin wounds.Fig. 10(a)shows the representative images of the wounds' sizes treated with PPC series during the monitoring of the wound healing process (day 1–day 7). Additionally, to quantitatively assess the wound healing process, the decrease in the wound size was computed usingeqn (8)and is displayed inFig. 10(b) and (c). There were signs of infection and inflammation, as well as a comparatively slower healing process in the control group, with daily pyodine applications.

Comparing the PPC-10 and DPPC hydrogel treatment groups to the control group, the hydrogel groups exhibited better healing and no signs of infection. At all time points, the DPPC-treated wounds showed significantly greater wound healing than the PPC-10 treated wounds. This could be attributed to the role of HAp in enhancing the binding affinity between the drug and the inorganic phase and may reduce porosity, leading to a slower and more sustained release of DOXY. This prolonged release supports wound healing over an extended period by maintaining effective drug concentrations and leveraging HAp's regenerative properties.

Structural and mechanical improvements by cross-linkers and fillers in multifunctional hydrogels have made them viable materials for various biomedical applications. This study aims to develop novel pH-sensitive PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp hydrogels, and to investigate them for applications requiring prolonged DOXY release. By varying the amount of HAp, novel PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp pH-sensitive hydrogels were synthesized and tested for applications requiring prolonged DOXY release. According to the FTIR data, there was a well-defined binding between the functional groups linked to Pectin, PVA, APTES, and HAp. SEM, XRD and TGA confirmed the porosity, amorphous nature and thermal stability of the hydrogels. The hydrogels' incorporation of HAp is closely linked to their thermal and bio-degradational stabilities. Because PPC-20 contained the highest concentration of filler, it was the most stable of the hydrogels. By measuring the proportion of swelling in non-buffer and buffer solutions, the hydrogel's sensitivity to pH was demonstrated. Each hydrogel showed the highest percentage of swelling at pH 6. However, because of polymeric complexation, the increase in the electrolyte's concentration decreased the swelling percentage. The sustained release of DOXY in PBS was evaluatedin vitro, and it was found to be 88.57% in 3.5 h. The DOXY release from the DPPC hydrogel preferably followed the Korsmeyer-Peppas model. In the wound healingin vivostudies, the hydrogels showed exceptional performance by showing ∼100% healing of 6 mm excision wounds in 8 days. The efficacy of HAp-incorporated PEC/PVA/APTES/HAp hydrogels makes them an effective, cyto-compatible, bio-degradable, pH-responsive and antibacterial platform that can be used for various biomedical applications.