Lead halide perovskite
(LHP) nanocrystals have demonstrated a significant
electronic response to their local environment due to their ionic
lattice nature. Here, we demonstrated their tunable dipole alignment
via solution-processed methods. We synthesized LHP nanocubes and nanoplates
in air and characterized them by UV–vis spectrophotometry and
transmission electron microscopy. Using atomic force microscopy, UV–vis
spectrophotometry, and back focal plane fluorescence microscopy, we
characterized thin films of nanocubes on untreated glass, nanoroughened
glass, and polymer film (poly­(methyl methacrylate), PMMA), as well
as a perovskite nanocubes-nanoplate binary film on etched glass. Most
notably, the dipole orientation factor can be modulated from 0.47
to 0.59 (effective transition dipole moment angle from 47° to
40°) by using glass or PMMA, respectively. Understanding the
tunable anisotropic transitions in these materials at the nanoscale
is required to control light emission into specific modes, which will
maximize efficiency in devices such as light-emitting diodes, photovoltaics,
and quantum information technology.

Perovskite nanocrystals have emerged as
one of the most promising
semiconductor material classes. Their
highly tunable light emission has already made them attractive for
a wide range of applications, including lighting, encryption, solar,,laser, sensing,,scintillation, and now quantum information technologies.−Additionally, inorganic lead halide perovskite (CsPbX3(X = halide)) (LHP) nanocrystals have exhibited desirable properties
such as remarkably high quantum yields, quantum coherence and quantum optical properties,−single photon emission,−and superfluorescence.−This young class of materials has the potential to
address the grand materials challenges of next-generation devices.

LHP
nanocubes were synthesized under ambient conditions via ligand-assisted
reprecipitation adapted from Brown et al. In short, cesium carbonate was complexed with octanoic acid to form
cesium octanoate and then injected into a lead bromide-octyl phosphonic
acid precursor in air at room temperature under constant stirring.
After 30 s, a solution of didecyldimethylammonium bromide in toluene
was injected to quench the reaction. The colloidal product was cleaned
and size-selected before further use (seeSupporting Information). Confined LHP nanoplates were synthesized via
a microemulsion approach adapted from Pan et al. In short, cesium bromide dissolved in hydrobromic acid
was injected into a lead bromide solution in hexane containingN,N-dimethylformamide and an oleylamine-oleic
acid ligand pair. Immediately upon injection, the reaction was quenched
by a small addition of ethanol. The crude product was centrifuged,
and plate-containing supernatant was retained as product without further
treatment.

Absorbance
and normalized relative photoluminescence spectra for
colloidal suspension of (a) CsPbBr3nanocubes with emission
at 503 nm and (b) CsPbBr3nanoplates with emission at 462
nm. (c) Relative photoluminescence spectra for thin films of CsPbBr3nanocubes (503 nm), nanoplates (462 and 489 nm due to plate
fusing), and a bilayer of nanocubes and nanoplates (469 and 500 nm).
The peak at 438 nm is a spectral artifact from the excitation light
source. (d)-(e) Transmission electron micrographs of nanocubes (estimated
length 7.4 nm) assembled in a monolayer. (f)-(g) Transmission electron
micrographs of larger (100s nm long) fused populations and smaller
(estimated length 9.5 nm, 3 monolayers thick) nanoplates used as
a spectrally distinct emitter.

TEM was used to characterize the size and morphology of the nanocubes
and nanoplates. Nanocubes were estimated to be around 7.4 nm in length.
Nanoplates were estimated to be around 9.5 nm laterally, and the larger
flakes of fused particles were 100s of nm laterally. The small nanoplates
are estimated to be 3 monolayers thick based on the emission wavelength. Both populations of nanoplates had sufficiently
blue-shifted emission that could be distinguished and optically filtered
from the nanocubes being studied.

Thin films of LHP nanocubes were deposited
by spin coating as-synthesized
nanocube suspensions onto different substrates, creating four distinct
environments: untreated borosilicate glass (untreated), nanoroughened borosilicate glass (etched), insulating
polymer (polymer-treated), and a nanoplate predeposition
(perovskite-treated). Untreated borosilicate glass
was used to compare the behavior of CsPbBr3nanocubes to
prior studies.,A caustic etch of potassium hydroxide
in ethanol (pH 11–12) was used to treat the borosilicate glass
and understand how roughening might also exaggerate the electronic
substrate interaction by increasing surface area. We also investigated
the use of an insulating polymer layer as the substrate. An approximately
40 nm-thick film of poly­(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was deposited
via spin coating. PMMA has a similar refractive index to borosilicate
glass (1.49 vs 1.51, respectively) and thus should only alter the
local electronic environment and not the optical environment, allowing
for a direct comparison between the glass and PMMA substrates. Finally,
to elicit how Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET) or more
complex exciton transport schemes affected dipole orientation,,perovskite nanoplates were deposited via spin coating before depositing
nanocubes to create a binary film. Because these nanoplates had the
same composition as the nanocubes (CsPbBr3) and the emitting
layer thickness is much smaller than the wavelength of light, any
changes in the photoluminescence spectra and angular emission resulted
from the interactions from high energy (nanoplates) to low energy
(nanocubes) components and not from optical or chemical changes (e.g.,
halide diffusion of mixed samples).

There was no significant shift in the photoluminescence when the
nanocrystals were deposited into the thin films. Thin films of nanocubes
alone showed an emission peak at 503 nm, and thin films of the nanoplates
alone showed an emission peak of 462 nm (Figure(c)). However, the nanoplate film also showed
a significant secondary PL peak at 489 nm (Figure(c)), which was attributed to the fusion
of plates. Finally, the perovskite-treated sample (binary population)
showed two distinct emission peaks at 469 nm and at 500 nm, which
aligned well with the peaks from the nanoplate and nanocube colloidal
suspensions, respectively. The nanocube signal intensity was more
than five times greater than the nanoplate signal intensity. From
this we concluded that the less intense nanoplate signal could be
sufficiently cut out using a long-pass filter, allowing us to isolate
and study the angular signal of the nanocubes only.

We characterized
the conformality and thickness of nanocube films
on each substrate and substrate roughness by using atomic force microscopy
(AFM).Figureshows
the thickness variation over a representative area (2 × 2 μm)
as well as a representative thickness profile of the nanocubes on
each substrate. For all nanocube-only cases, the nanocube island thickness
was estimated to be 4–8 nm (average 5.98 nm), which agreed
reasonably well with the particle size of 7.4 nm estimated from TEM.
The nanocube-only substrates showed similar total coverage of monolayer
groupings or “islands” of nanocrystals, but islands
of nanocubes were larger and more irregular across the untreated wafer
(Figure(a)) as opposed
to films on etched or polymer-treated wafers (Figure(b), (c)). The perovskite-treated sample
formed slightly thicker islands on average (10.31 nm). Additionally,
we confirmed that the etched substrate had a larger roughness than
the untreated substrate (Root Mean Square roughness of 3.50 and 0.76
nm, respectively). The polymer-treated substrate had an RMS roughness
of 1.56 nm. The nanocube-nanoplate binary film shows a higher total
coverage of nanocrystals than the other three substrates, around 34%
versus around 15% for cube-only samples. While the two species are
indistinguishable using AFM, the presence of PL signal from both populations
was observed in the binary film. SeeSupporting Informationfor further details.

Atomic force micrographs
of CsPbBr3nanocube thin films
fabricated via spin coating onto a silicon wafer that was (a) untreated,
(b) etched, (c) polymer-treated with 40 nm-thick PMMA, and (d) perovskite-treated
with spectrally distinct CsPbBr3nanoplates. Islands of
nanocubes assembled in a monolayer were present in each sample, and
the untreated silicon had an irregular distribution compared to the
other nanocube-only samples. The average height of these islands across
nanocube-only samples was 5.98 nm (seeSupporting Information and Figure S4). The average height of the nanocubes
and nanoplates together was 10.31 nm. Illustrative extracted cross
sections (background normalized to 0 nm) showing height profiles corresponding
to nanocubes on (e) untreated, (f) etched, (g) polymer-treated, and
(h) perovskite-treated wafers. The white line in each scan (a)-(d)
shows where cross section was extracted.

We resolved the angular emission pattern
of each sample using back
focal plane fluorescence microscopy (BFPFM), also known as Fourier
plane fluorescence microscopy. The focal
plane in a traditional imaging microscope was transformed from the
sample plane to the Back Focal Plane by inserting an additional lens
(Bertrand lens) between the microscope objective and the tube lens. The Back Focal Plane shows a 2D projection of
the angular emission pattern.,We performed BFPFM
using a home-built inverted microscope with excitation by a 405 nm
continuous wave laser and a 100× oil immersion objective. A linear
polarizer allowed us to study the p-polarized angular emission. Longpass
filters were used to isolate the nanocube photoluminescence, removing
any background laser or nanoplate emission. Additional details are
included in theSupporting Information.

The horizontal and vertical dipole contributions from a sample
were determined by fitting the average collected emission pattern
across 25 images to a simple three-layer analytical model which determines
the angular emission pattern resulting from a thin emissive film on
a substrate (here, glass) surrounded by air.,,−Orientation factor (Θ)
was defined as the relative strength of in-plane dipoles to all dipoles,
according to the convention given by Kim et al.

whereCis a normalization
constant arising from the integration time of the collection media
and excitation intensity, ρipand ρipare the density of states of s- and p-polarized
in-plane dipole contributions, and ρopis
the out-of-plane dipole contribution. The density of states is a function
of the photoluminescence wavelength, the refractive indices of the
three layers, and the thickness of the emissive layer. When modeling
density of states for our samples, we used a wavelength of 503 nm
(peak photoluminescence of the nanocube films), a refractive index
of 1.92 (estimated from TEM using an effective medium approximation,), and a thickness of 0 nm, which is an accepted approximation for
submonolayers of nanocrystals or when thickness is much smaller than
the wavelength of light.,SeeSupporting Informationfor further details.

Because
we investigated fluorescence from the same nanocrystals
across substrates with nearly similar outcoupling behavior, the density
of states (ρip, ρip, ρop) remained the same across
all substrates. Thus, any change in the angular emission pattern arose
from changes only in the effective dipole orientation.Figure(a) models how the projected
Back Focal Plane evolves as effective TDM, or dipole alignment, changes.
This is shown clearly in the p-polarized cross section (ky= 0), or the cross-section taken across
the center of the image. When there are
only horizontal dipoles present (TDM = 0°, Θ = 1), the
p-polarized k-space axis (kx) decreases sharply to 0 at |kx| = 1. As the vertical dipole strength increases
(TDM > 0°, Θ < 1), the signal increases for |kx| ≥ 1. When all dipoles
are vertical (TDM = 90°, Θ = 0), the p-polarized axis shows
instead an abrupt increase in photoluminescence intensity at |kx| = 1. A TDM of 35° (Θ
= 0.67) is expected for samples with isotropic dipole contributions
(two horizontal dipoles and one vertical dipole), which can be seen
in either unconfined, isotropically shaped nanostructures or randomly
oriented assemblies of particles or dyes, such as CdSe quantum dots.

(a) Modeled BFPFM signal for a thin film of known effective
transition
dipole moments of 0° (all dipoles in-plane), 35° (isotropic),
50°, and 90°. The extracted cross sections show how TDM
changes the signal. (b) – (e) Experimental BFPFM signal, best
fit BFPFM model, and effective TDM for each substrate: (b) untreated
(TDM = 47 ± 1°), (c) etched (TDM = 46 ± 1°), (d)
polymer-treated (TDM = 40 ± 1°), and (e) perovskite-treated
(TDM = 44 ± 1°). (f) Extractedkxcross sections for emission on each substrate. Shading
indicates one standard deviation from the averagekxcross section. (g) Orientation factors
for LHP nanocubes on a given substrate in the literature as compared
to this work for high and low coverage films. Dashed line indicates
isotropic dipole orientation.

Figure(b)-(e)
(left-hand column) shows the experimental BFPFM images of perovskite
nanocube thin films on substrates of untreated glass, etched glass,
polymer-treated glass, and perovskite-treated glass. Additionally,
the extractedkxcross
section is shown inFigure(f) to highlight the response to each substrate. The shading
around each cross section shows one standard deviation from the average.
The untreated and etched samples showed overlappingkxcross sections, demonstrating the same
dipole orientations. However, both the polymer-coated glass and the
perovskite binary film showed a reduced signal at |kx| ≥ 1 outside of the variance
of the previous samples, demonstrating a more horizontal dipole alignment
compared with the other treatments. The polymer-treated sample had
a much stronger decrease, indicating the most horizontal alignment.

We then fit each BFPFM image to the theory ineqto quantify the orientation of the dipoles
as the effective transition dipole moment angle (TDM) and the orientation
factor (Θ) for these four substrates. The best fit to the theoretical
angular emission pattern is shown in the right-hand column ofFigure(b)-(e). An isotropic
dipole alignment (TDM = 35°, Θ = 0.67) would be expected
in the case of no structural or confinement anisotropy in the emitting
film. However, as shown inFigure(g), perovskite nanocrystals have shown an enhanced
vertical dipole component for most surface treatments studied in prior
work,,and for sparse
films, in particular. This effect is
likely due to charge redistribution in response to the substrate.,When two dissimilar materials are brought into contact, charge is
generated due to a work function mismatch. The work function mismatch
between glass (5.0 eV) and perovskite
(4.0 eV) creates interfacial charge and,
because of the ionic nature of the perovskite lattice, charges redistribute
within the perovskite near the surface, generating a more exaggerated
vertical electronic dipole that is not seen in traditional semiconductor
nanocrystals with more covalent lattices. Additionally, it is theorized that this redistribution is even stronger
for isolated groups of particles, and indeed more vertically oriented
dipoles have been observed for sparser films.

The untreated glass substrate in our study fit to a TDM of
47 ±
1° and orientation factor Θ = 0.47, also showing an enhanced
vertical dipole component. This corroborated prior work from Jurow
et al., who showed that a similar density of nanocubes on a glass
substrate had a TDM of around 46.8°. We hypothesized that the nanoroughening of glass might further influence
the dipole alignment by increasing the surface area and thus the generation
of interfacial charge. While the roughening did improve the film uniformity
as shown by AFM, this treatment was shown to have no effect on the
dipole alignment, yielding a TDM of 46 ± 1° and orientation
factor Θ = 0.48, statistically the same as the untreated glass
substrate.

As shown by thekxcross sections, nanocubes on a PMMA substrate had a greater
fraction
of horizontal dipole contributions than those on the glass substrates.
This led to a lower effective TDM angle (40 ± 1°, Θ
= 0.59) that approached isotropic dipole behavior (TDM = 35°,
Θ = 0.67); this change in orientation was statistically significant
as compared to the etched treatment (p-value = 7.54e-07). Notably,
this polymer-treated substrate achieved the same nearly isotropic
behavior as more densely packed films from prior studies (Figure(g)), which is surprising
given that sparse films tend toward more vertical dipole alignments. PMMA did not show a significantly increased
contact angle with water over untreated glass (θwater= 63 ± 7° versus θwater= 59 ± 2°),
indicating similar substrate polarity. Instead, our hypothesis for
this TDM effect builds on intuition established by Jurow et al. The work function difference between PMMA (4.68
eV) and perovskite (4.0 eV) is smaller than glass (5.0 eV) and perovskite, and as a result, the polymer-treated substrate
is expected to have fewer interfacial charges and therefore less charge
redistribution. Our observations indicate that having a thin layer
of PMMA is sufficient to reduce the vertical dipole strength by over
20%, bringing these nanostructured films much closer to their expected
dipole alignment.

As a precursor to more extensive studies of
the relationship between
FRET and TDM, we studied nanocubes in the presence of nanoplates.
Interestingly, as in other on-glass films, a vertically asymmetric
TDM was again observed, though less than the untreated and etched
substrates. After spectrally isolating the nanocube signal, the angular
emission patterns fit to a TDM of 44 ± 1° and orientation
factor Θ = 0.52. The extracted orientation for the binary film
on an etched substrate was statistically different than the nanocubes
alone on an etched substrate (p-value = 0.00015). While dipole-mediated
energy transfer is a well-studied effect,,,we note the effect of energy transfer on
the TDM of perovskite nanocubes could not be decoupled from the effects
of increasing film coverage (15% to 34%) in this study.,Further, charge generated at the nearby glass interface is highly
relevant to exciton behavior in both the perovskite nanocubes and
nanoplates. We note the work function of CsPbBr3increases
with confinement, so work function mismatch of the different populations
of nanoplates could contribute to this effect. Further studies should continue to investigate the mechanism
of the unique optoelectronic response of CsPbBr3nanocubes
in a binary film.

We showed the angular
photoluminescence response of LHP nanocrystal
thin films is due to changes in the local electronic environment through
substrate modifications. LHP nanocubes were synthesized via in-air
methods and deposited via spin coating onto four substrates that changed
the electronic environment while maintaining a comparable optical
environment. We compared untreated glass, nanoroughened glass, a thin
insulating polymer film, and a distinctly emitting nanoplate treatment.
We used back-of-flight fluorescence microscopy, which provided a 2D
spatial projection of the 3D angular emission signal, to quantify
the effects of the substrate on light emission. We fit the resulting
emission patterns to a photonic density of states model and extracted
the effective transition dipole moment (TDM) orientations. Nanostructured
films of nanocubes on untreated borosilicate glass, nanoroughened
glass, or in the presence of confined nanoplates exhibited an enhanced
vertical dipole component (TDM = 44–47 ± 1°, Θ
= 0.52–0.47), while nanocubes on a PMMA substrate showed nearly
isotropic dipole alignment (TDM = 40 ± 1°, Θ = 0.59).

Generally, films of randomly oriented particles are expected to
behave as isotropic emitters at an interface (TDM = 35°, Θ
= 0.67). However, by leveraging this unique electronic response of
perovskite nanocrystals to their local environment, we can tune the emission mode directly to the desired application,
allowing improved external quantum efficiency and energy transfer
in solar concentrators or LEDs.,,Specificity of emission mode may also enable enhanced coherence
for quantum information technologies, for which perovskite nanocrystals
are already a promising candidate.,,This work demonstrates that perovskite nanocrystals
can access tunable photophysics via facile benchtop processes, opening
the door to a greater suite of quantum and new-wave semiconductor
research by reducing the processing expense of such materials systems.

Data was
acquired at the Electron Imaging Center for Nanosystems
(EICN) and the Nano Pico Characterization Laboratory (NPC) at the
University of California, Los Angeles’s California NanoSystems
Institute (CNSI). The authors wish to thank D. Katz for advising polymer
deposition procedures and M. Dudala, C. England, A. Grishchenko, and
G. Nerhood for useful discussion. C.N.E. thanks J. Eisler-Chen and
L. Eisler-Chen for useful discussion.

The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.5c00054.

L.E.P. and
C.N.E. conceived of the idea of the manuscript. L.E.P. carried out
all experiments and analysis and wrote the manuscript with support
from B.R. and C.N.E. B.R. wrote the code for fitting BFPFM signal
to a model of dipole alignment and assisted on the fitting of experimental
BFPFM images. C.N.E. advised the project. All authors have given approval
to the final version of the manuscript.

L.E.P. is funded
by the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) Fellowship.
Material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 2240140.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.