Basic management for patients who have suffered a cardiac arrest and are admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) after resuscitation includes setting targets for blood pressure and managing sedation and temperature. However, optimal targets and management are unknown.

The STEPCARE (Sedation, Temperature and Pressure after Cardiac Arrest and Resuscitation) trial is a multicenter, parallel‐group, randomized, factorial, superiority trial in which sedation, temperature, and blood pressure strategies will be studied in three separate comparisons (SED‐CARE, TEMP‐CARE, and MAP‐CARE). The trial population will be adults admitted to intensive care who are comatose after resuscitation from out‐of‐hospital cardiac arrest. The primary outcome will be all‐cause mortality, and the secondary outcomes will be poor functional outcome (modified Rankin Scale 4–6), Health‐Related Quality of Life using EQ‐VAS, and specific serious adverse events in the intensive care unit predefined for each trial. All outcomes will be assessed at 6 months after randomization. The prognosticators, outcome assessors, statisticians, data managers, steering group, and manuscript writers will be blinded to treatment allocation. This statistical analysis plan includes a comprehensive description of the statistical analyses, handling of missing data, and assessments of underlying statistical assumptions. Analyses will be conducted according to the intention‐to‐treat principle, that is, all randomized participants with available data will be included. The analyses will be performed independently by two statisticians following the present plan.

This statistical analysis plan describes the statistical analyses for the STEPCARE trial in detail. The aim of this predefined statistical analysis plan is to minimize the risk of analysis bias.

Through STEPCARE, this international collaboration aims to improve the evidence for critical care in cardiac arrest patients. Here we describe the statistical analysis plan that will outline the statistical analyses for the STEPCARE trial in detail.

Unconsciousness defined as not being able to obey verbal commands (Full Outline of UnResponsiveness (FOUR) score motor response of <4) or being intubated and sedated because of agitation after sustained ROSC.

Trial sites will have access to an internet‐based application for immediate randomization to ensure adequate allocation concealment and sequence generation. Each patient will be assigned to three trials simultaneously. Randomization will be performed with permuted blocks of varying size, stratified for trial site only. Investigators will be blinded to the block sizes. The team treating the patient (physicians, nurses, and others) will not be blinded to the allocation group due to the inherent difficulty in blinding the interventions (sedation, temperature, and arterial pressure). Measures will be taken to ensure that the information about allocation will not be disseminated beyond the immediate group of caregivers responsible for patient care. The clinicians performing neuroprognostication, outcome assessors, statisticians, data managers, steering group, and manuscript writers will be blinded to treatment allocation.

The STEPCARE trial includes three separate comparisons.

In the SED‐CARE trial, participants are randomized to either continuous deep sedation or minimal sedation. Initially, patients could be sedated to ensure safe transport, imaging, coronary angiography, and other invasive procedures. Following randomization, the Richmond Agitation‐Sedation Scale (RASS) score and FOUR score motor response will be collected every 4 h. For patients randomized to continuous deep sedation, the target will be a RASS from −4 to −5 upon admission to the ICU and continued sedation until 36 h after randomization. In patients randomized to minimal sedation, sedative agents should be used only as needed for clinical care. After the 36‐h intervention period, the sedation strategy for both groups will be at the discretion of the treating physician as needed for clinical care.

In the TEMP‐CARE trial, participants are randomized to fever management with or without a device. The intervention period will commence immediately after randomization. Core body temperature will be continuously monitored (preferentially via a bladder catheter, but an alternative core temperature site such as esophagus or blood will be allowed). For participants allocated to fever management with a device, temperature management devices will be started to achieve a core body temperature of ≤37.5°C if the temperature reaches the trigger of ≥37.8°C within 72 h of randomization. For participants allocated to fever management without a device, fever will be managed as per standard treatment for any critically ill patient in the ICU, including exposure and pharmacological agents, where considered clinically necessary. The temperature intervention will last until 72 h after randomization, or until extubation, whichever occurs first. If the participant regains consciousness and does not require invasive ventilation prior to 72 h after randomization, then temperature management is at the discretion of the treating clinician. After discharge from the intensive care unit, temperature management is also at the discretion of the treating clinician.

In the MAP‐CARE trial, participants are randomized to a mean arterial pressure (MAP) target of either >85 mmHg or >65 mmHg. All patients must have invasive monitoring of blood pressure. The intervention period will commence immediately after randomization, but titration of vasopressors to the MAP target may be delayed until the patient has completed the required diagnostic work‐up (e.g., computed tomography scan or coronary angiography) and is admitted to intensive care. The means to achieve the desired MAP target will be up to the treating clinician, but the primary recommendation is to titrate a vasopressor unless the patient is hypovolemic, in which case judicious doses of fluids should be prescribed. The MAP intervention will last until 72 h after randomization, or until extubation, whichever occurs first. After 72 h, or earlier if the participant regains consciousness and is extubated, and after discharge from intensive care, the management of MAP will be at the discretion of the treating physician.

The primary assessment time point will be 6 months after randomization for all outcomes. The outcomes are defined as primary, secondary, and exploratory. The sample size is based on the primary outcome, and our primary conclusions will be based on the results of the primary outcome.

Based on the results of the TTM trial, TTM2 trial, and information from the International Cardiac Arrest Registry (INTCAR),9we estimate that within 6 months after randomization, approximately 60% of the participants will die. We hypothesize that 6 months after randomization, 54.4% of the participants will die in the intervention groups, corresponding to a relative risk reduction of 9% (relative risk, RR = 0.91). With an acceptable risk of type‐1 error of 5% and an acceptable risk of type‐2 error of 10% (power of 90%), a total of 3278 participants (1639 in each pairwise comparison) would be required.

We plan to investigate the possible effects of adjustment for site and possible interactions between interventions using simulations.10Preliminary simulations suggest that if there are interactions between the trial interventions on outcomes, it would be necessary to increase the sample size. The STEPCARE trial is being conducted with the assumption that there will be no such interactions between the trial interventions on outcomes. However, to accommodate the possibility of minor interactions, an increase in the sample size (5%) has been chosen to account for this. The combined effect of withdrawn consent and missing data on the primary outcome in the TTM2 trial resulted in a sample size reduction of approximately 2%. We assume a similar result in the current trial (1.8%). Considering the above‐mentioned factors, we will increase the sample size by 6.8% and recruit a total of 3500 participants.

We estimated the statistical power of all secondary outcomes.11With an estimated sample size of 3500 participants in total, the functional outcome measure (dichotomized mRS) has a power of 98% to detect a relative risk of 0.90 for a poor functional outcome (mRS 4–6) in the experimental group, with 65% of cases in the control group experiencing a poor functional outcome.

In SED‐CARE: We estimate a power of 92% to detect a relative risk reduction or increase of 9% for the predefined serious adverse events with 61% of cases in the control group.

In TEMP‐CARE: We estimate a power of 92% to detect a relative risk reduction or increase of 9% for the predefined serious adverse events with 63% of cases in the control group.

In MAP‐CARE: We estimate a power of 91% to detect a relative risk reduction or increase of 10% for the predefined serious adverse events with 57% of cases in the control group.

The anticipated intervention effects in the above‐mentioned sample size and the power estimations correspond to an absolute risk reduction of 5.6%.

We will conduct all analyses according to the intention‐to‐treat principle (ITT), that is, all randomized participants with available data will be included in all analyses.

We will assess if the statistical and clinical significance thresholds are crossed (Bayes factor calculations will be reported in supplementary material).17Assessment of clinical significance will be based on the anticipated intervention effects used in the sample size and power estimations.17Our primary conclusion will be based on the primary outcome, so all tests of statistical significance (including subgroup analyses) will be two‐sided with a threshold of 5%.17No conclusions will be drawn based on secondary outcomes.

It is generally acknowledged that regression analyses ought to be adjusted for the stratification variables used in the randomization.18,19,20Hence, when analyzing each of the three trials, we will adjust all analyses for ‘site’ and the allocated intervention in the two other trials (e.g., the SED‐CARE outcomes will be adjusted for ‘site’ and the allocated TEMP‐CARE and MAP‐CARE interventions). We will assess whether there are significant interactions between trial interventions (for details, see Section 2.14).

We plan to reanalyze all three trials using Bayesian statistics. Separate statistical analysis plans will be published.

We will analyze the primary outcome as a binary variable (alive or dead). We will analyze the secondary outcomes as follows: (I) We will evaluate the functional outcome by dichotomizing the modified Rankin scale (0–3 vs. 4–6), or if this is missing, dependent versus independent in basic activities of daily life (moving indoors, eating, dressing, personal hygiene). (II) We will analyze serious adverse events as a binary variable (one or more versus no serious adverse event). Additionally, we will present each specific serious adverse event separately by risk ratios and 95% confidence intervals. (III) We will analyze HRQoL by EQ‐VAS scale as a continuous variable (0–100).

We will present dichotomized outcomes as proportions of participants in each group with the event, as well as relative risks with 95% confidence intervals. We will analyze dichotomous outcomes using mixed effects generalized linear models using a log‐link function with ‘site’ as a random intercept using an exchangeable covariance matrix, and we will include the allocated intervention in the two other trials as fixed effects. If the analysis does not converge, we will use mixed effects logistic regression to analyze dichotomized data and relative risks will be obtained using either G computation in R (R Core Team, Vienna, Austria) or the NLCOM command in Stata 18 (StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA).

We will present continuous outcomes as means and standard deviations for each group, along with 95% confidence intervals for the means of the groups and the mean differences between the groups. We will analyze continuous outcomes using mixed effects linear regression with ‘site’ as a random intercept using an exchangeable covariance matrix, and we will include the allocated intervention in the two other trials as fixed effects. We expect that a large proportion of the participants will die before the assessment of HRQoL. When assessing health‐related HRQoL, we will, therefore, in a secondary analysis, impute a ‘0’ for all participants who died. We will analyze these data using the stratified Wilcoxon test stratified for the other interventions.

We will present count data as means, mean differences, and 95% confidence intervals or medians, interquartile ranges, and 95% confidence intervals (bootstrapping) depending on the observed distribution. We will analyze count data using the stratified Wilcoxon test stratified for the other interventions.

We will present mock tables for the three comparisons separately in each protocol. This includes baseline tables, results tables, survival curves, and graphs/tests illustrating separation between the groups (sedation, temperature, and MAP).

We will perform sensitivity analyses assuming that all participants with missing data were either all alive or dead.

The aim of this predefined statistical analysis plan is to minimize the risk of biased data‐driven analyses. This statistical analysis plan describes the analyses for the three STEPCARE trials: SED‐CARE, TEMP‐CARE, and MAP‐CARE in detail.

This statistical analysis plan has several strengths. The methodology is predefined and detailed to avoid data‐driven analyses and risks of outcome reporting bias. All primary and secondary outcomes are patient‐centered, and our primary conclusions will be based on the primary outcome to limit problems with multiplicity.17We will analyze data according to the intention‐to‐treat principle and, if necessary, use multiple imputation and best‐worst/worst‐best case scenarios to assess the potential impact of the missing data on the results.22Furthermore, we plan to systematically assess whether underlying statistical assumptions are fulfilled for all statistical analyses.

This statistical analysis plan also has limitations. Our primary conclusions will be based on the main outcome, while we will also evaluate secondary outcomes, exploratory outcomes, and subgroup analyses. We have not adjusted our significance thresholds for all comparisons, acknowledging that this approach increases the risk of type I errors. Additionally, the anticipated intervention effects, which informed our sample size and power calculations for the secondary outcomes, are based on a pragmatically applied identical intervention effect across all three trials using clinical judgment and results from earlier similar trials. This anticipated effect is deemed both realistic and of significant value to patients. When drawing final conclusions, we will consider the elevated risk of type I errors and uncertainties surrounding the anticipated intervention effects.

Here we describe the statistical analyses for the STEPCARE trial in detail. The aim of this predefined statistical analysis plan is to minimize the risk of analysis bias.