The regulatory network governing triacylglycerol (TAG) and fatty acid (FA) accumulation in hexaploidCamellia oleiferakernels remains unclear due to the lack of an appropriate reference genome. In this study, we combined oil trait measurements with multi-omics analyses (global transcriptomics, miRNA sequencing, proteomics, and metabolomics) across 3 harvest stages, using the hexaploidC. oleifera‘Changlin 40’ genome as reference.

Integrated analysis of oil traits and multi-omics data demonstrated that premature harvesting (1 week before the recommended date) decreased oil production and enhanced saturated FAs composition, while postponed harvesting (1 week after the recommended date) preserved oil yield and increased oleic and linolenic acid contents. Comprehensive pathway analysis identified 11 key metabolic pathways involved in TAG and FA biosynthesis and catabolism, revealing their coordination with terpene and flavonoid synthesis under the influence of carbohydrate metabolism. Within the 11 metabolic pathways, key regulatory enzymes comprised alcohol dehydrogenase and galactosidase that negatively regulated TAG biosynthesis, palmitoyl-protein thioesterase that mediated short-chain saturated FA formation, and acyl-CoA thioesterase that enhanced long-chain unsaturated FA production. Additionally, we detected novel associations between TAG/FA accumulation and non-canonical factors, including noncoding RNAs (circR007, lncR114741, miR167h, miR166, miR398a-3p, miR398d, and miR396a-3p), proteins (seed storage protein, caffeic acid O-methyltransferase, galactose oxidase, No Pollen Germination 1, Coronatine Insensitive 1), and metabolites (L-carnitine and L-glutamate). The reliability of our findings was confirmed through qRT-PCR (RNA validation) and Parallel Reaction Monitoring (protein validation).

This study established the regulatory network TAG and FA accumulation in hexaploidC. oleiferakernels, and provided foundational molecular framework for breeding high-yield, high-qualityC. oleiferacultivars through marker-assisted selection.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12870-025-07063-y.

OilCamelliaencompasses over 60Camelliaspecies cultivated mainly for edible oil [1], with hexaploidC. oleiferabeing the most important [2]. This species is widely grown in subtropical southern China [3]. Given the high reliance on imported edible oils, oilCamelliacultivation in China is expanding. However, many plantations still rely on low-yield cultivars, which need to be replaced with higher-yield varieties [4]. AlthoughCamelliaoil is rich in ω−9 monounsaturated fatty acids (FAs), its low ω−3 polyunsaturated FA levels [5]. Breeding newC. oleiferacultivars with relatively high yields (triacylglycerol (TAG) content) and optimized FA profiles is critical for advancing China’s oilCamelliaindustry [6]. Given the long juvenile phase of this species [7], marker-assisted selection can accelerate breeding by elucidating regulatory networks for TAG and FA accumulation in kernels.

Research has focused on TAG and FA synthesis in oilCamelliaseeds, key processes inCamelliaoil production. Lin et al. (2018) [8] identified 12 lipid biosynthesis-related transcripts through transcriptome sequencing across 4C. oleiferaseed stages. Gong et al. (2020) [9] highlighted the role of alternative splicing events and transcription factors (TFs), such as WRI1, MYB, and ZIP TFs, in TAG biosynthesis, with WRI1-associated genes driving FA biosynthesis. Using multi-omic analysis, Ye et al. (2021) [10] found TFs and proteins that regulate flavonoid and TAG synthesis inC. hainanicaseeds. Notably, alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) negatively regulates linoleic acid, whereas the MIKC_MADS TF influences polyunsaturated FA synthesis. Yang et al. (2022) [4] reported that SAD/FADs, WRI1s, and DGATs coordinately maintain high oleic acid levels inC. oleiferaseeds. However, without a reference genome, de novo transcriptome assembly often introduces errors, impacting gene expression quantification [11].

Since 2022, the genomes of 3 diploid oilCamelliaspecies have been sequenced. Shen et al. (2022) [3] mappedC. chekiangoleosaoil biosynthesis pathways. Lin et al. (2022) [1] identified 14 domestication-related genes associated with lipid metabolism inC. nanyongensis. InC. lanceoleosa, ACCase gene amplification and high expression of key enzymes underpin the high oil and oleic acid contents [12]. Using theC. nanyongensisgenome as a reference, Yang et al. (2024) [13] linked 12 genes to late-stage TAG biosynthesis and α-linolenic acid regulation in hexaploidC. oleifera. However, the numerous alleles of polyploid species pose challenges, as diploid reference genomes can bias expression quantification [6]. To date, key challenges in the accumulation of TAG and FAs in hexaploidC. oleiferaresearch include the following: (1) significant transcriptome quantification errors due to de novo sequencing or diploid reference genomes, which are now addressable with the newly sequenced hexaploid genome [2]; (2) insufficient focus on TAG and FA catabolism despite their impact on oil accumulation [1]; and (3) limited exploration of noncoding RNAs [14–16], metabolites [17], and genes/proteins outside the main pathways in lipid metabolism.

Studies on the factors shaping key economic traits in oilCamelliaoften examine seeds at different developmental stages [4,8,10,13]. Our previous study [18] demonstrated that harvesting hexaploidC. oleiferaseeds at the recommended date, one week before, and one week after that date results in significant differences in seed moisture content, oil yield, and the FA composition ofCamelliaoil. These variations furnish an excellent system for probing the regulatory network governing TAG and FA accumulation.

Therefore, building on our earlier work [18], the present study first employed samples from the same location collected in different years, as well as materials from additional sites, to further validate the temporal dynamics of oil traits across distinct harvest periods. Then fresh kernels were subjected to multi-omic analyses, including transcriptomic, miRNA sequencing, proteomic, and metabolomic analyses. Using the hexaploidC. oleiferagenome as a reference, differentially expressed genes, circRNAs, lncRNAs, miRNAs, proteins, and metabolites across the harvest stages were identified and analyzed for KEGG pathway enrichment. Coexpression networks were built to integrate RNAs, proteins, and metabolites in pathways such as glycerolipid metabolism, FA synthesis substrates and coenzymes, FA biosynthesis, and FA catabolism. Selected RNAs were validated via qRT‒PCR, and proteins were validated via parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis. On the basis of these results, a regulatory network for TAG and FA accumulation was constructed. This study offers theoretical insights for optimizing harvest timing and developing high-yield, high-FA-qualityC. oleiferacultivars.

In 2020,Camellia oleifera‘Huaxin’ specimens were collected from an orchard (27°46′18’’N, 109°3′37’’E) located in Heping Village, Bijiang District, Tongren City, Guizhou Province, China. The region exhibits a mean annual temperature of 16.9 °C, an annual frost-free period of 291 days, precipitation of 1,250–1,400 mm, and an average annual sunshine duration of 1,171 h. The orchard contained 6-year-old trees managed under consistent cultivation practices. To ensure sample representativeness, 36 fruits exhibiting uniform morphological characteristics (shape, size, and color) were randomly selected from 3 individual trees (12 fruits per tree) during the peak fruiting stage. Harvesting was conducted at 3 distinct time points: 6 days before the officially recommended maturity date (31 October, BM), on the suggested normal harvest date by local agricultural authorities (7 November, NM), and 6 days after-recommended harvest (14 November, AM). At each harvest stage, fruit from 3 plants (12 fruit in total) were pooled and divided into two parts: one for high-throughput sequencing and the other for oil extraction and FA composition analysis. For omic analyses, the pericarps and seed coats of 4 fruit were removed, and approximately 10 g of kernels was used per biological replicate. Three replicates were frozen in liquid nitrogen for global transcriptome sequencing, proteomic profiling, miRNA sequencing, and metabolomic analysis. Seeds from the remaining 8 fruit were divided into 3 replicates for oil extraction and FA analysis.

To minimize the influence of climatic variability on experimental outcomes and to further validate temporal variations in oil traits, seeds ofC. oleifera‘Huaxin’ were collected during the same 3 harvesting periods in 2021 (31 October, 7 November, and 14 November) from both Heping Village and Yuping County (27°21ʹ21ʹʹN; 108°56ʹ34ʹʹE) using identical sampling protocols. The collected samples in 2021 were subsequently analyzed for oil content and FA composition.

All plant materials were obtained from cultivated orchards and not from wild populations; therefore, no specific permissions were required for sample collection. The identity ofC. oleifera‘Huaxin’ was confirmed by Prof. Xiaofeng Tan at Central South University of Forestry and Technology, based on morphological characteristics and local cultivar registration records. No voucher specimen was deposited due to the cultivated nature of the material.Camellia oleiferais not listed under the Convention on the Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), and all experimental procedures complied with institutional, national, and international regulations concerning the use and study of cultivated plants.

Camelliaoil was extracted using the Soxhlet method [19], and the kernel water content and oil yield were calculated. For FA composition analysis, the oil was converted to fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs), which were identified using a standard mixture of 37 FAMEs (Supelco, USA; details of chemical names, molecular formulas, and calibration curves are provided in Table S1) and analyzed via gas chromatography‒mass spectrometry (GC‒MS). Detailed information on the instrumentation, experimental procedures, and the oil trait data for the 2020 samples can be found in our previously published paper [18].

RNA from 9 samples was extracted using the mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit (Ambion, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol for total RNA isolation and miRNA enrichment. RNA integrity was assessed using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, USA), and quantification was performed with a NanoDrop 2000 UV‒Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). Global transcriptome libraries were prepared according to the manufacturers’ protocols using the Agencourt RNAClean XP (Beckman Coulter, USA), the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA LT with Ribo-Zero Plant kit (Illumina, USA), and the Agencourt AMPure XP kit (Beckman Coulter, USA). miRNA libraries were constructed with the NEBNext Small RNA Library Prep Set for Illumina (NEB, USA). Library fragment sizes were assessed on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer with the DNA-1000 Kit (Agilent Technologies, USA), and concentrations were determined using the Qubit dsDNA Assay Kit (Life Technologies, USA). All libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 S4 flow cell, yielding 150 bp paired-end reads. Low-quality raw reads were filtered using fastp (v0.20.1) [20], and clean reads were uploaded to the Sequence Read Archive under accession number PRJNA1100942.

Proteomic and metabolomic analyses were conducted via LC‒MS. Detailed methods for protein extraction and digestion and LC‒MS analysis, along with related instrumentation parameters, were described in our previous publication [18]. The raw proteomic data are deposited in iProX (https://www.iprox.cn/.) under accession number iPX0004276001. The sample preparation steps for metabolomics are detailed in Wucai (Brassica campestrisL.) [21]. Analyses were performed using an ACQUITY UPLC I-Class PLUS system (Waters Corporation, USA) coupled with a QE high-resolution mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The chromatographic conditions were the same as those reported in rice (Oryza sativa) leaves [22]. An electrospray ionization (ESI) source was used to scan the samples in positive and negative ion modes. The detailed parameters for the scans are provided in Table S2. The raw metabolomic data are deposited in the China National Center for Bioinformation (https://www.cncb.ac.cn/.) under accession number PRJCA025830.

Using HISAT2 (v2.2.1) [23], we aligned the global transcriptomic clean reads to theC. oleifera‘Changlin40’ reference genome [2]. On the basis of the resulting binary alignment/map (BAM) files, StringTie (v3.0.0) [24] was used to assemble reads aligned to genes. HTSeq (v2.0.7) [25] provided the read counts for protein-coding genes, and FPKM values [26] were calculated to measure gene expression levels. Bowtie2 (v2.5.3) [27] and eXpress (v1.5.1) [28] were applied with default parameters to quantify lncRNA transcripts, generating FPKM values and counts. circRNAs were identified using find_circ (v1.2) [29] with the Bowtie2 results to detect back-splicing junction sites, as described by Ye et al. (2015) [30]. Reads per billion (RPB) values [31] were computed for each circRNA. For miRNA sequencing, read processing, unannotated miRNAs, and secondary structure prediction, the methodology used forPericallis hybridawas followed [32]. The expression levels of known and newly predicted miRNAs were quantified using transcripts per million (TPM) values as the metric [33].

The main steps for protein identification and quantification were as described in our previous study [18], except that the sequence database was updated from the UniProtCamelliaprotein sequence database (37,100 entries, version 2021.3) to the reference genome. The raw metabolomic data were processed using Progenesis QI v2.3 (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). Metabolites were analyzed qualitatively using the Plant Metabolites Database (PmDB,http://www.pmdb.org.cn/). Compounds scoring below 36 out of 60 were excluded. The ion intensity per compound in each sample served as the quantification standard, and the data matrices combined positive and negative ion data. Principal component analysis (PCA) of various types of RNA, protein, and metabolite expression values across 9 samples was performed to ensure sampling appropriateness [34] prior to multi-omic bioinformatic analysis.

The lncRNA transcript sequences were aligned to the reference genome to determine their genomic positions on the basis of genome annotation [9]. Back-splicing sites of circRNAs were mapped to the reference genome to identify source gene regions, and their start and end sites were aligned with known gene exons to determine the best transcripts [35]. The miRNA target genes were predicted using TargetFinder (v1.7) [36] with default parameters.

DESeq2 (v1.42.1) [37] was used to normalize RNA counts, calculate fold changes, and test differential significance using the negative binomial distribution (NB) method. Differentially expressed RNAs (DEcircRNAs, DElncRNAs, DEmiRNAs, and DEGs) were identified with thresholds ofP< 0.05 and fold change > 2 or < 0.5. Differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) were identified according to the criteria of our previous study [18], whereas metabolites (DAMs) were identified using multivariate and univariate analyses [38].

Protein-coding transcript and protein sequences were aligned to the Swiss-Prot database (http://www.gpmaw.com/html/swiss-prot.html.) for GO annotation and subcellular localization analysis. Transcripts, proteins, and metabolites were annotated using KAAS (http://www.genome.jp/tools/kaas/) for KEGG pathways. The significance of the enrichment of differentially abundant substances in each pathway was calculated via hypergeometric distribution testing [39].

The expression values of transcripts, proteins, metabolites, circRNAs, lncRNAs, and miRNAs related to TAG and FA accumulation were extracted from pathways, including ko00561, ko00010, ko00410, ko00620, ko00061, ko00062, ko01040, ko00071, ko00591, and ko00592. Spearman correlation analyses [40] were performed for each substance and DEGs, DAPs, DElncRNAs, and DAMs, as well as all circRNAs and miRNAs. Correlations withP< 0.05 were retained, and 1 entity from each category was selected per substance on the basis of the Spearman coefficient,Pvalue, and frequency of occurrence. Filtered substances were combined for each pathway, and Spearman correlations among all substances were recalculated. Correlation pairs withP< 0.05 and absolute coefficients > 0.95 were retained. The regulatory network for TAG and FA accumulation was reconstructed by organizing substances into 4 modules: glycerolipid metabolism, fatty acid biosynthesis, fatty acid catabolism, and substrates and coenzymes for fatty acid synthesis.

For the 4 RNA types, validation was performed via qRT‒PCR with the Roche LightCycler 480 II System (Roche, USA) and the KR123 FastKing One Step RT‒PCR Kit (Tiangen, CN). The qRT‒PCR protocol was as described by Zhao et al. (2024) [15].TIF3H1served as the internal reference gene [41], and primers for miRNA and other RNA types are provided in the qRT-PCR sheet of Table S3. The RNA expression levels were normalized using the 2−ΔΔCtmethod [42]. For circRNA qRT‒PCR, RNA samples were split into two parts: one treated with RNase R (GSPure, CN) for circRNA expression and the other for internal reference gene detection [43]. PRM validation of the DIA proteomic data were conducted as described in our previous study [18]. Relevant details for the 42 target proteins validated by PRM are also provided in the PRM sheet of Table S3.

All data analysis and visualization were conducted in R (v4.4.0). One-way ANOVA was performed using the agricolae package (v1.3–7), with normality and variance homogeneity tested beforehand [44]. PCA was conducted with FactoMineR (v2.11) [45]. Correlation analysis was performed via the cor.test function in R with Spearman’s method [46]. Bar charts, pie charts, radar plots, bubble plots, and scatter plots were created with ggplot2 (v3.5.1) [47]. Venn diagrams were generated using VennDiagram (v1.7.3) [48]. Heatmaps and chord diagrams were visualized with ComplexHeatmap (v2.24.1) and circlize (v0.4.16) [49]. Network diagrams were created using igraph (v2.0.2) [50], and metabolic pathway illustrations were prepared as described by Sato et al. (2023) [51].

The seed moisture content (Fig.1A) and kernel oil yield (Fig.1B) at two locations in 2021 again showed that the BM samples exhibited the highest moisture content and the lowest oil yield (P< 0.01). At NM and AM, the seed moisture decreased slightly, and the kernel oil yield increased slightly.

In kernels harvested at the 3 stages, 6 FAs were detected (Table S4): 16:0, 18:0, 18:1, 18:2, 18:3, and 20:1, with oleic acid as the dominant FA. The levels of saturated FAs gradually decreased with delayed harvest. Among the unsaturated FAs, the level of arachidonic acid peaked at AM and showed significant differences at AM compared to BM and NM. The linoleic acid content was similar at BM and NM but significantly greater at BM and NM than at AM. The relative content of single ω−3 FA changed in a pattern similar to that of arachidonic acid.

Global transcriptome sequencing, miRNA sequencing, proteomics, and metabolomics identified 45,177 protein-coding genes, 18,283 lncRNAs, 421 circRNAs, 429 miRNAs, 7,982 proteins, and 20,841 ions inC. oleiferakernels across the 3 harvest stages (Fig. S1). The identified lncRNAs, circRNAs, miRNAs, and metabolites are listed in Table S5. Among the 2,582 metabolites, 17 super classes were identified, with lipids and lipid-like molecules and phenylpropanoids and polyketides as the main classes (Fig. S2). PCA of circRNAs, lncRNAs, miRNAs, transcripts, proteins, and metabolites across 9 samples (Fig.2A) revealed that samples from each harvest stage were aligned along the timeline of harvesting periods. Under the set threshold, 37 DEcircRNAs, 824 DElncRNAs, 50 DEmiRNAs, 1,141 DEGs, 549 DAPs, and 444 DAMs were identified (Fig.2B). The distributions of differentially expressed RNAs, DAPs, and DAMs across pairwise comparisons are shown in Fig. S3.

KEGG enrichment analysis was performed on the best transcripts for DEcircRNAs, partner RNAs for DElncRNAs, DEmiRNA target genes, DEGs, DAPs, and DAMs. Among the 104 enriched pathways (Fig. S4), starch and sucrose metabolism (ko00500) appeared in 5 substance categories. Eleven pathways related to TAG and FA synthesis and degradation (red boxes, Fig. S4) and lipid (glycerophospholipid, ether lipid, sphingolipid), terpenoid, and flavonoid metabolism (blue boxes, Fig. S4) were also identified.

In the 4 omic datasets, 121 genes, 31 proteins, 2 metabolites, 34 lncRNAs, and 1 miRNA associated with glycerolipid metabolism were identified (Table S6). The expression levels of genes, proteins, and metabolites in the ko00561 pathway across the 9 samples are shown in Fig.3A, whereas noncoding RNA expression data for triglyceride metabolism are presented in Fig.3B. The genes and proteins involved in TAG synthesis peaked at NM or AM, whereas those involved in TAG degradation peaked at BM and AM. Most genes presented expression trends matching those of the corresponding proteins, but in some cases, protein accumulation lagged one harvest period behind gene expression (Fig. S5).

Spearman correlation analysis revealed that RNAs, proteins, and metabolites outside glycerolipid metabolism were most strongly correlated with pathway components. KEGG annotations revealed many correlations with amino acid metabolism pathways (Fig. S6). We recalculated correlations for RNAs, proteins, and metabolites directly or significantly associated with glycerolipid metabolism. AtP< 0.05, 21,976 edges were identified (Table S7). Edges with absolute |Spearman coefficient|> 0.95 were visualized (Fig.3C). Among the 10 most frequent nodes, 6 were proteins, with the most frequent being CoADH. The remaining nodes included ComiR166a, CoGLA (galactosidase), CoCupin1 (seed storage protein), CoCOMT (caffeic acid O-methyltransferase), CoDNA2 (nuclease Dna2), CoMACPF (membrane attack complex/perforin), ComiR398a-3p, ColncRNA11741, and clausarinol.

As a direct source of acetyl-CoA for FA synthesis, the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway involves numerous RNAs, proteins, and metabolites (Table S8). Some enzymes in this pathway were involved in 5 additional pathways related to TAG and FA accumulation (ko00561, ko00410, ko00620, ko00071, ko00592; Fig.4). The levels of most glycolytic enzymes peaked at AM, whereas gluconeogenesis enzymes were predominantly expressed at NM (Fig. S7). Five metabolites were identified in this pathway, 3 of which were phosphate compounds with a glycerol structure. Glycerone phosphate accumulated the most in the BM group, whereas glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and glycerate 2-phosphate accumulated in the NM group. Notably, substances significantly correlated with other compounds (|Spearman coefficient|> 0.95) included 2 proteins (No Pollen Germination 1 (NPG1), Coronatine Insensitive 1 (COI1)), 2 miRNAs (ComiR167h, ComiR396-3p), 1 circRNA (CocircR007), and 1 metabolite (Kudzusaponin SA4) (Fig. S8A).

Malonyl-CoA is derived primarily from the β-alanine (ko00410) and pyruvate metabolism (ko00620) pathways, in which numerous RNAs, proteins, lncRNAs, and metabolites were identified (Table S9 and Table S10). These pathways also involve enzymes linked to ko00061 and ko01040 (Fig.5). Malonyl-CoA degradation peaked at BM, while its synthesis was highest at NM (Fig. S9). With high correlation, the 2 most cooccurring substances, CoNPG1 and CocircR007, were found in the ko00010 pathway, along with 2 metabolites (L-glutamic acid and L-carnitine) and a protein (galactose oxidase, GAO) (Fig. S8B).

Twenty-five transcripts, 7 proteins, 12 lncRNAs, and 1 miRNA involved in biotin metabolism (ko00780) (Fig. S10 and Table S11). After correlation analysis, 45 compounds outside this pathway were filtered out (Table S11). Among these, 40 were annotated in the KEGG database and were mostly involved in sugar, amino acid, terpene, flavonoid, and lipid metabolism (Fig.6). At a correlation coefficient threshold of 0.9, 2 terpenes (GAV, GAMc) and the FA synthesis geneCoFabIwere frequently detected (Fig. S8C).

The biosynthetic pathways of fatty acid biosynthesis (Fig. S11A-B), fatty acid elongation (Fig. S11C-D), and biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids (Fig. S11E-F) are direct pathways for FA synthesis. In the multi-omic data, 110 transcripts, 35 proteins, 3 metabolites, 46 lncRNAs, and 1 miRNA were identified (Table S12). The subcellular localization of the genes corresponding to these 110 transcripts included 8 sites: plastids, the Golgi apparatus, the endoplasmic reticulum, the cytoplasm, mitochondria, the membrane, peroxisomes, and glyoxysomes (Fig.7A). The genes in the ko00061 pathway were mainly localized to plastids, whereas those in ko00062 were predominantly in the endoplasmic reticulum. For the ko01040 pathway, transcripts were equally localized to plastids and the endoplasmic reticulum (Fig. S12). The acyl carrier protein, which is vital for FA synthesis, was observed in plastids, mitochondria, and the endoplasmic reticulum (Fig.7A). The multi-omic data revealed peak expression of most proteins and metabolites involved in FA biosynthesis, elongation, and unsaturated FA biosynthesis at NM and AM (Fig. S11). However, short-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase exhibited the highest expression at BM, whereas long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase expression peaked at AM (Fig. S11D). Two FAs were detected: α-linolenic acid, the expression of which peaked at AM, and γ-linolenic acid, the expression of which peaked at NM (Fig. S11E-F). In the FA synthesis coexpression network (Fig. S8D), the substances with the highest frequency of high-degree associations were CoNPG1 and ComiR167h.

The breakdown of FAs involves 3 KEGG pathways: fatty acid degradation (Fig. S13A-B), linoleic acid metabolism (Fig. S13C-D), and α-linolenic acid metabolism (Fig. S13E-F). Many transcripts and pathways related to TAG and FA accumulation are shared across these pathways (Fig.7B and Table S13). At BM, simple FA synthesis increased (Fig. S13B). The expression of the enzyme involved in the initial step of phosphatidylcholine degradation was highest at AM (Fig. S13D, F). Additionally, the accumulation of 3 products of α-linolenic acid metabolism was greater at BM and NM (Fig. S13F). In the FA catabolism coexpression network, highly connected molecules such as CocircR007, CoGAO, and CoMACPF were prominent, along with a new miRNA398 family member (Fig. S8E).

To construct a comprehensive regulatory network for TAG and FA accumulation, correlation coefficients were recalculated (Table S14) for the top 50 RNAs, proteins, and metabolites from the 4 functional modules and coexpression networks (Fig.8A). Using the Louvain algorithm, 5 modules were identified. Excluding the core module, the remaining 4 genes were assigned to TAG metabolism, substrates and coenzymes, FA biosynthesis, and FA degradation on the basis of weighted values across modules (Fig.8B). Among the top 25 nodes with the highest connectivity, 19 belonged to the substrate and coenzyme modules, which peaked at BM and NM and included the intersection of all 4 original modules, ComiR167h, and clausarinol (marked with pentagrams in Fig.8B). Three nodes were in the TAG metabolism module, peaking at AM, whereas another 3 were in the FA biosynthesis module, peaking at NM.

Twenty RNAs that appeared in both the individual module analyses and the coexpression network were validated via qRT‒PCR. Most expression patterns matched the omic data across the 3 harvest stages (Table S15). Combined with PRM-based protein validation (Table S16), a brief comprehensive regulatory network for TAG and FA accumulation inC. oleiferakernels was constructed (Fig. S14).

The harvest period is crucial for yield and quality in horticultural crops [52]. The traditional harvest stage for oilCamelliafruits has been established through long-term practices to optimize oil yield at different stages [18]. However, within the same hexaploidC. oleiferacultivar, fruit development can vary across individual plants and even within fruit on the same plant [53]. To minimize developmental stage-related differences, preselected fruit [18] were used in this study.

Harvesting one week earlier than the recommended time resulted in higher kernel moisture content and lower oil yield than harvesting at the other two stages (Fig.1). Delaying the harvest by one week did not significantly affect the kernel moisture or oil yield (Fig.1). Six FAs were detected inC. oleifera‘Huaxin’ oil (Table S4), which is identical to the FA composition of the ‘Huashuo’ cultivar within the same genetic line [54]. However, ‘Huaxin’ oil lacked the ω−7 unsaturated FA 16:1, which is present in theCamelliaoil of the Changlin series [1,8]. This difference likely reflects varietal-related differences. Omic analyses confirmed this, as no ∆9 desaturase for ω−7 FAs was identified at the gene or protein level (Fig. S11E-F). Early harvest led to a greater proportion of saturated FAs, whereas delayed harvest increased the 18:1, 20:1, and 18:3 contents (Table S4). These differences in oil content and FA composition across the 3 harvest periods in ‘Huaxin’ provide valuable insights for exploring the regulatory networks of TAG and FA accumulation.

Multi-omic technologies are powerful tools for revealing molecular mechanisms in plants [55–58]. Among these, global transcriptome, miRNA, and proteome sequencing relies on high-quality reference genomes to improve result accuracy [59].

OilCamelliaspecies exhibit complex polyploidy [60]. To date, the genomes of 4 Sect. Oleifera species have been sequenced: diploidC. nanyongensis[1] andC. lanceoleosa[12], tetraploidC. monosperma(C. oleiferavar.Monosperma) [6], and hexaploidC. oleifera‘Changlin 40’ [2]. As ploidy increases, the likelihood of genes having alleles across different chromosomes increases [61].

HexaploidC. oleiferais widely cultivated in China, with ‘Huaxin’ and ‘Changlin 40’ as representative cultivars. Thus, the genome of ‘Changlin 40’ was selected as the reference genome. The transcriptomic reads were aligned to the genomes ofC. nanyongensis,C. lanceoleosa, andC. oleifera‘Changlin 40’ to evaluate their suitability. Although the total mapping rate toC. nanyongensiswas slightly high, the proportion of multimapped reads was exceptionally high, exceeding 75% for the hexaploid ‘Changlin 40’ genome (Table S17). These results validate the ‘Changlin 40’ genome as the most suitable reference for subsequent analyses.

To analyze the optimal harvest time and construct a regulatory network for TAG and FAs, confirming the consistency of metabolic states within samples from the same harvest stage is essential [53]. The PCA results revealed that genes, circRNAs, lncRNAs, miRNAs, proteins, and metabolites from 3 samples per stage were clearly distinguishable from those of samples from other stage (Fig.2A), indicating consistent metabolic states at each stage and clear separation among stages. The metabolites detected in the 9 samples were primarily lipids, lipid-like molecules, phenylpropanoids and polyketides (Fig.S2). TAG and FAs are lipids, whereas phenylpropanoids and polyketides are linked to flavonoid-like compound metabolism [62], another functional component ofCamelliaoil [10,63].

Differential abundance analysis revealed numerous DEcircRNAs, DElncRNAs, DEmiRNAs, DEGs, DAPs, and DAMs across the 3 stages (Fig.2and Fig. S3). KEGG enrichment of 5 kinds of substances related to starch and sucrose metabolism (ko00053) confirmed that lipids in oilCamelliafruits are derived primarily from starch conversion [64]. In addition to the 11 pathways directly linked to TAG and FAs, other lipid, flavonoid, and terpene metabolism pathways were also identified (Fig. S4). Squalene, a functional component ofCamelliaoil, belongs to the terpene class [65]. These findings highlight the importance of harvest timing forC. oleifera‘Huaxin’ in determiningCamelliaoil yield and quality.

The primary component ofCamelliaoil is TAG, containing FAs as acyl groups [65]. Glycerolipid metabolism is the key pathway linked to TAG accumulation [1]. In the hexaploidC. oleiferakernel transcriptome, 121 genes encoding 17 entities within this pathway were identified. Proteomic data revealed isoenzymes for these entities (Fig.3A and Table S5). The allele dosage effect influences economic traits in polyploid plants [61]. However, previous studies identifying key genes forCamelliaoil accumulation or quality [1,4,10,13,18] have often overlooked this effect, potentially causing inconsistencies between differential gene/protein expression and metabolite accumulation.

In this study, we aggregated the gene and protein expression levels for each entity and constructed KEGG pathway diagrams separately at each level. Aggregation revealed trends in gene, protein, and metabolite expression related to glycerolipid metabolism. The genes and proteins involved in TAG degradation peaked at BM or AM, whereas those involved in TAG synthesis peaked at NM and AM (Fig. S5). This explains why theCamelliaoil content showed little difference between BM and AM (Fig.1B). Protein expression sometimes lags behind gene expression owing to the substantial amino acid demand for protein synthesis. Coexpression network analysis revealed that transcripts, proteins, and metabolites outside the pathway are heavily involved in amino acid biosynthesis and metabolism (Fig. S6).

The coexpression network of RNAs and proteins involved in glycerolipid metabolism (Fig.3C) highlights ADH (EC1.1.1.2, YC2428270.1, Fig. S4) as highly connected. ADH catalyzes the interconversion of glycerol and glyceraldehyde and negatively regulates linoleic acid synthesis in oilCamelliafrom Hainan [10]. Across the harvest periods, CoADH (YC2428270.1) was negatively correlated with the linoleic acid content. Another CoADH isozyme (YC336180.1) showed no direct correlation with linoleic acid according to the proteomic data (Table S6). While not directly involved in FA synthesis, ADH is critical to TAG metabolism, with results suggesting its close link to TAG accumulation in hexaploidC. oleifera.

In ko00561, CoGLA showed high connectivity and peaks at BM (Fig. S14). This enzyme catalyzes the conversion of digalactosyl-diacylglycerol to monogalactosyl-diacylglycerol (Fig. S5), enhancing membrane fluidity and lipid synthesis [66]. The abundance of proteins outside the pathway, such as CoCupin1, a seed storage protein [67], and CoCOMT, which enhances protein dimerization and stability [68], also peaked at BM (Fig. S14). Among noncoding RNAs, miR166 is linked to lipid synthesis in plants such as soybean [69] andXanthoceras sorbifolium[70]. ColncRNA11741 targets a ZIP TF gene (Fig. S14) crucial for oil synthesis inC. oleifera[9]. The levels of both RNAs also peaked at BM, suggesting that this period is preparatory for TAG biosynthesis.

In FA synthesis, acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA are key substrates [1]. Under oxygen-limited conditions in the kernel, acetyl-CoA is derived from glycolysis/gluconeogenesis [4], whereas malonyl-CoA originates from the ko00410 and ko00620 pathways [71]. KEGG annotations revealed that the level of gluconeogenesis peaked at NM, acetyl-CoA synthesis peaked at AM, and malonyl-CoA degradation peaked at BM (Fig. S7, Fig. S9 and Fig. S13). Acetyl-CoA serves as a substrate for malonyl-CoA synthesis, influencing TAG assembly (Yang et al., 2024). This explains why the TAG content was similar at NM and AM (Fig.1B and Fig. S14). Coexpression analysis revealed that CocircR007 affects acetyl-CoA, malonyl-CoA, and FA metabolism (Fig. S14 and Fig. S8). The best transcripts corresponding to circR007 encode urease (Table S5). As an important coenzyme in the synthesis of saturated FAs [72], coenzyme R (biotin) is involved in the metabolic pathway whose final product is urea. These findings suggest that substrate and coenzyme metabolism impactCamelliaoil accumulation in hexaploid oilCamellia.

FA synthesis and elongation in storage lipids occur mainly in plastids and the endoplasmic reticulum [73], as inCamelliaoil (Fig.7A and Fig. S13). Subcellular localization of FA synthesis proteins also revealed their presence in mitochondria, which are responsible for functional lipid and medium-chain FA production [74]. The KEGG enrichment results indicated that early harvesting promotes short-chain FA synthesis, whereas delayed harvesting increases long-chain FA synthesis (Fig. S11), which is consistent with changes in the 16:0 and 20:1 ratios (Table S4 and Fig. S14). FA biosynthesis and degradation occur simultaneously, influencing FA accumulation. At AM, the expression of phosphatidylcholine 2-acylhydrolase peaked (Fig. S13), increasing the content of phosphatidylcholine, a key precursor for unsaturated FA synthesis [1]. The relative content of 18:1 was highest at AM, whereas those of 4 metabolic products of 18:3 were highest at BM and NM (Fig. S12).

RNAs, proteins, and metabolites outside TAG- and FA-related pathways also play significant roles. Noncoding RNAs such as ComiR167h, found in 4 modules (Fig.8A and Fig. S14), are linked to lipid metabolism in high-oil plants such asCamelina sativa[75], perilla [76], and soybean [69], with expression negatively correlated with 18:3 levels [75]. Two miR398 family members are highly connected in terms of FA metabolism and TAG biosynthesis (Fig. S7 and Fig.7). miR398 regulates lipid synthesis inX. sorbifolium[70] and impacts grain traits in rice [77]. miR396a-3p influences grain size in rice and soybean [78,79].

CoCOI1, which is involved in acetyl-CoA metabolism, regulate jasmonate accumulation [80], which peaked at NM (Fig. S8 and Fig. S14). NPG1 affects FA elongation via KAS enzymes, impacting pollen development [81,82]. It also influences acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA metabolism (Fig. S8 and Fig. S14). GAO, which is involved in galactose metabolism, is highly connected in malonyl-CoA and FA degradation networks, which is consistent with the role of carbohydrate metabolism in oil accumulation [83].

At the metabolite level, 3 kinds of terpenoids, clausarinol, GAV, and GAMc, show high connectivity in multiple modules, impacting biotin metabolism and FA synthesis (Fig.8and Fig. S14). KZS-SA4, a triterpenoid, is also highly associated with acetyl-CoA metabolism, indicating that the synthesis of TAG and FA inCamelliaoil is accompanied by the production of terpenoids. In malonyl-CoA metabolism, L-carnitine promotes lipid oxidation [84], whereas glutamate, a precursor for glutathione, protects unsaturated FAs from oxidative damage [85]. The levels of both metabolites peaked at NM (Fig.7), consistent with the optimal oil content and FA composition observed at AM.

FA synthesis is essential for TAG production. And FA synthesis and elongation occur mainly in the plastids and endoplasmic reticulum (Fig.8A and Fig. S12). Plastids are semiautonomous organelles [86], and the endoplasmic reticulum is a key site for protein synthesis and processing [73]. Isolating and purifying these organelles from hexaploidC. oleiferaseeds, followed by proteomic analysis, would minimize cytoplasmic protein dilution and help build a more accurate regulatory network for FA and TAG accumulation. Noncoding RNAs play crucial roles in the accumulation of FA and TAG inCamelliaoil (Fig. S14). However, unanchored scaffolds in current oilCamelliagenomes [1–3,6,12] introduce uncertainty in noncoding RNA chromosomal localization. The development of a more refined hexaploidC. oleiferagenome will facilitate noncoding RNA marker identification and support marker-assisted breeding.

In summary, we analyzed the moisture content, oil yield, and FA composition of hexaploidC. oleiferakernels harvested at 3 stages. Using the hexaploidC. oleiferagenome as a reference, we conducted global transcriptome sequencing, miRNA sequencing, proteomics, and metabolomics. The results revealed that harvesting 1 week early reduced the oil yield and increased the saturated FA content, whereas delayed harvesting increased the contents of unsaturated FAs such as 18:1 and 18:3. PCA distinguished samples from different harvest stages across circRNAs, lncRNAs, miRNAs, proteins, and metabolites. Pairwise comparisons under defined thresholds identified 37 DEcircRNAs, 824 DElncRNAs, 50 DEmiRNAs, 1,141 DEGs, 549 DAPs, and 444 DAMs. KEGG analysis revealed differences in TAG and FA accumulation, which were influenced by FA precursors, biosynthesis, degradation, glycerolipid metabolism, and related lipid, terpenoid, and flavonoid synthesis. Within 11 pathways directly related to TAG and FA accumulation, ADH and GAL regulate TAG accumulation, while PPTs promotes short-chain saturated FA accumulation, and ACOTs promotes long-chain unsaturated FA accumulation. Numbers noncoding RNAs (circR007, lncR114741, miR167h, miR166, miR398a-3p, miR398d, and miR396a-3p), proteins (Cupin1, COMT, NPG1, GAO, and COI1), and metabolites (clausarinol, L-carnitine, and L-glu) outside main pathways also influencing TAG and FA accumulation.

WJG and GXM conceived and designed the research. SJ, WJL, HTY and ZMM do the oil traits data detection and omics bioinformatic analysis. ZZJ, LM and WZH collected the plant materials. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This work is funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 32260376), the Guizhou Provincial Basic Research Program-Natural Science (Nos. QKHJC-ZK[2021]YB159 and QKHJC-ZK[2024]YB682), the Doctoral Scientific Research Start-up Foundation from Tongren University (No. trxyDH1910), and the Graduate Innovation Fund of Tongren University (Nos. trxyyc-202314 and trxyyc-202405).