Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLA) play central roles in histocompatibility and immune system functions, including antigen presentation. Accurate typing of Class I and II HLA genes is crucial for transplant tissue matching, characterising autoimmune diseases and informing cancer immunotherapy. Clinical serology and PCR-based testing are the gold standards for HLA typing, but offer only single-field resolution (e.g., HLA-A*11). Whole genome sequencing (WGS) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) can achieve higher, three-field resolution (e.g., HLA-A∗11:01:01), although some HLA genes can be challenging to type from sequencing data. With the increasing use of germline WGS, tumour WGS and tumour RNA-seq in cancer patient care, there is an opportunity to combine these three dataset types to improve HLA typing accuracy and confidence, and to identify clinically relevant HLA type changes in tumours. To achieve this, we developedconsHLA, a tool that employs this consensus HLA typing approach.

We obtained matched germline and tumour WGS and RNA-seq data from 86 high-risk paediatric cancer patients (76 brain cancers, 10 leukaemias) from the ZERO Childhood Cancer precision medicine program. We examined 10 HLA typing packages, selectingHLA-HDto develop ourconsHLAworkflow asHLA-HDcan employ all three dataset types, analysing both Class I and II HLA genes at three field resolution. UsingconsHLAwe achieved 97.9% concordance with gold standard HLA test results. We observed 90.5% allele consistency across the three sequencing NGS inputs. Typing inconsistencies in at least one of 12 clinically relevant HLA genes were observed in 29 of the brain tumour cases. 32% of these had clinically relevant explanations. To assist clinically, we implementedconsHLAas a fully automated workflow producing a clinician-friendly HLA-typing report.

To leverage cancer patient germline and tumour WGS and tumour RNA-seq data we developed an automated workflow,consHLA, that produces consensus typing of HLA genes in a clinically relevant timeframe. This workflow provides higher resolution patient HLA-typing than current gold standard approaches, identifies HLA alterations arising in patient tumours and generates clear, simple reports.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12859-025-06223-z.

HLA genes of the human major histocompatibility complex encode cell surface proteins critical for cellular immune responses to infections, autoimmune diseases and transplant rejection [1]. Class I HLA-A, -B and -C proteins are expressed on virtually all nucleated cells and facilitate presentation of intracellular antigen peptides to CD8+T cells to mediate elimination of virus infected and neoplastic cells [2]. Clinically relevant Class II HLA proteins (DRA, DRB1, DRB3, DRB4, DRB5, DQA1, DQB1, DPA1 and DPB1) are expressed by antigen presenting cells and tissue macrophages that present peptides to CD4+T cells for foreign antigen detection [3], although its expression can be induced in other cell types, e.g., with interferon-γ stimuli [4]. Other minor HLA types also exist with tolerogenic, immune surveillance, or other non-immune functions [5–7].

These class I and class II HLA genes can exhibit substantial allelic variation among genetically distinct individuals, a key factor in rejection of tissue transplants between HLA-unmatched patients. Obtaining accurate and high resolution of HLA typing is thus central to tissue matching that ensures successful graft tolerance following transplantation. In cancer treatment, these alleles are critical for determining stem cell transplant tolerance or rejection. Their roles in immune-based cancer therapies are also of increasing interest, particularly in cancer vaccine design [8,9]. Current gold-standard HLA typing employs either serological testing, or molecular assays, traditionally using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), sequence specific oligonucleotides (SSO), and increasingly using targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) assays [10], delivered by accredited pathology laboratories and commercial providers. However, new molecular methods that use whole genome sequencing (WGS) are emerging which offer more precise, accurate and reliable HLA typing [11]. WGS also allows retrospective typing when there are no tissues amenable to serological testing.

Many conditions, including cancer and immune disorders are now being investigated using WGS [12,13] and RNA-seq tissue analysis. These next generation sequencing (NGS) methods are emerging as important or even first-line diagnostic and prognostic tools that are increasingly cost effective. For this reason, patient germline and tumour WGS and tumour RNA-seq datasets are increasingly employed in paediatric precision medicine cancer programs [14–18]. HLA typing can therefore be performed for these patients using their tissue NGS data analysed by informatics workflows. A range of computational tools have been developed to perform HLA typing, differing widely in accuracy, resolution, computational cost, type of NGS input, genome reference usage and range of HLA molecules they investigate. For example, all current tools type HLA class I molecules, but onlyHLAminer,HLAscan,HLAreporter,HLA-VBseq v2andHLA-HDalso type HLA class II genes [19–23]. Most tools do not use both WGS and RNA-seq datasets as inputs, butOptiType,HLAminerandHLA-HDtools can take both [19,21,24]. Accuracy and resolution of NGS HLA typing methods can be high [25], although some HLA genes are problematic to type from sequencing data due to high levels of genetic polymorphism and regions that are difficult to sequence accurately [26,27]. To achieve our goals of high accuracy typing we leveraged the available combination of independent NGS datasets from a patient using a consensus approach to improve typing accuracy and increase confidence in allele calls. This approach also revealed somatic HLA gene allele-specific expression that may contribute to genetic immune escape (GIE), of key interest in cancer immunotherapeutics [11].

Here we present our new workflow for consensus HLA typing across germline and tumour WGS and tumour RNA-seq patient data. We demonstrate how the workflow integrates seamlessly with clinical and research NGS analysis pipelines to produce a report for 12 HLA genes to two-field resolution or better.

Patient data was obtained from the Australian ZERO Childhood Cancer Precision Medicine program [12,28]. Patients were either enrolled on the TARGET pilot trial or the PRISM clinical trial (NCT03336931). Informed consent was collected for each patient enrolled. Ethics was approved for the TARGET trial by Sydney Children’s Hospitals Network Human Research Ethics Committee (LNR/14/SCH/497) and the PRISM trial by the Hunter New England Research Ethics Committee of the Hunter New England Local Health District (17/02/015/4.06) and the New South Wales Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC/17/HNE/29). Approval of research use for these patients was provided by the Sydney Children’s Hospitals Network Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC/18/SCHN/515). Ten haematological malignancies and 76 brain cancer patients enrolled in the ZERO program were used in the analyses presented here; their cancer diagnoses are summarised in Supp. Figure1. These individuals had germline and tumour WGS and matched tumour RNA-seq data prepared for clinical reporting purposes as described in Wong et al. [12]. The ten haematological malignancies had matching clinical HLA reports, eight reports of which were obtained from the Australian Red Cross Blood Service, one from the New York Blood Centre and one from the Perth Children’s Hospital. All HLA results were typed using sequence-specific oligonucleotide assays based on common and well-documented HLA alleles from the Immuno Polymorphism Database ImMunoGeneTics (IPD-IMGT/HLA) reference release 3.44 [29].

HLA gene alleles are described here using the IPD-IMGT/HLA nomenclature standard that uses up to 4 colon-separated fields (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/imgt/hla/), e.g., HLA-A*02:01:01:02 N [30]. This gives the gene name then (after the asterisk) the first two fields represent serological type and subtype (allele) for each HLA gene, which sufficiently identifies an HLA allele for most clinical purposes [22]. Fields 3 and 4 indicate synonymous gene substitutions at the DNA level (http://hla.alleles.org/nomenclature/index.html) [30,31]. While many applications require only two fields, clinical applications such as tissue typing often benefit from the greater precision of three-field accuracy.

While there are many Class-I and Class-II HLA genes, for typing we focussed on a subset of HLA genes that are of common clinical interest, consisting ofHLA-A,-B,-C,-DRA -DRB1,-DRB3,-DRB4,-DRB5,-DQA1,-DQB1,-DPA1, and-DPB1. To identify the HLA-typing algorithm most appropriate for our needs, we considered next-generation sequencing (NGS) HLA typing packages that can accurately type HLA genes to at least three-field accuracy from both WGS and RNA-seq data, and support sequencing alignment to both GRCh37 and GRCh38 reference genomes (Table1).HLA-HD[21] was the only tool to satisfy all criteria.HLA-HD(v1.4.0) was obtained fromhttps://www.genome.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp/HLA-HD/(Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University).

Table shows the features that were used in deciding which package to use inconsHLA.

TheconsHLAworkflow takes as input filtered paired-end FASTQ files from germline and tumour whole genome sequencing (WGS) and tumour RNA-sequencing data. For each individual NGS input, it performs read filtering and HLA typing usingHLA-HD(Fig.1A). The workflow then parses the results and generates a consensus HLA report (Fig.1A, B).consHLAwas constructed as a common workflow language (CWL) (v1.0 and v1.2) to enable easy integration into NGS analysis pipelines. TheconsHLAworkflow can be executed from the command line or in any system where a CWL runner (such as cwltools, athttps://github.com/common-workflow-language/cwltool) is implemented. All modules were containerised using Docker (Docker Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA;https://docs.docker.com). The HLA report generation module was written in R Markdown (v4.2.0) and a consensus parser module written in Python (v3.9).consHLAwas designed, implemented, and tested on the CAVATICA platform (https://www.cavatica.org) which utilises Amazon cloud computing services and resources. In addition,consHLAwas tested and worked on Cromwell with Microsoft Azure, Ubuntu server (Focal Fossa 20.04.5) with 16 cores and 60Gb of memory, as well as macOS 12.2.1 with M1 Pro and 16Gb of memory.

consHLArequires paired-end FASTQ files from germline WGS, tumour WGS and, where available, tumour RNA-seq. We used ~ 30x depth germline WGS, ~ 90x depth tumour WGS and from tumour RNA-seq, with 80–100 M reads. To identify HLA-specific reads, we obtained from IPD-IMGT/HLA reference HLA gene sequences (release 3.44) and usedBowtie2(v2.4.1) [35] to generate an HLA reference index (Fig.1A). WGS and RNA-seq reads were aligned to the HLA reference index usingBowtie2, then converted back to paired-end FASTQ files usingsamtools(v1.10) [36]. These HLA-specific reads were provided as input toHLA-HD[2] (Fig.1).HLA-HDruntimes for four patients were assessed using either all reads in the FASTQ files or only the HLA specific reads filtered usingsamtools-view. Runtimes were reduced by an average of 31% for WGS and 27% for tumour RNA-seq when using the filtered reads (Table2). Runtime was measured on Amazon Web Services compute EC2 instance model c4.2xlarge with 8 CPUs, 15Gb of RAM, and 1024Gb of attached storage.

A key feature ofconsHLAis the use of consensus allele judgements from multiple NGS datasets from a patient to derive or confirm the two alleles of each HLA gene. Consensus alleles were determined from the outputted HLA-HD alleles passed into an algorithm that follows the principle of majority rule. The algorithm will first select the allele types at a three-field resolution that have appeared in two or more of the datasets for each HLA gene. If no such allele types were found, the algorithm relaxes the comparison criteria and performs the same task with only two-field resolution. The algorithm terminates when two (heterozygous) or one (homozygous) allele(s) are/is found for a gene. Otherwise, the gene’s HLA type will be labelled as “No consensus”, denoting a complete disagreement of HLA type among the patient’s NGS datasets. The pseudocode describing the algorithm of the consensus parser module is shown in Fig.2with example outputs shown in Table3.

HLA alleles for each NGS dataset are output in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON). Consensus alleles for all genes and clinically relevant HLA genes are output as both JSON and text (.txt) files for ability to input into other analysis pipelines or workflows (Fig.1B). The consensus HLA alleles are tabulated and outputted as a PDF into a layout matching current standard clinical typing reports (Fig.3). An independent report is generated for each patient, facilitating the use of NGS technology as a first line diagnostic tool for clinical application.consHLAadds value in delivering easy to interpret reports that summarise the consensus HLA calls from the NGS platforms inputted.

We calculated the runtime for the fullconsHLAworkflow analyses of the 76 brain tumour samples. The average runtime for both germline and tumour WGS input was approximately 10 h (Fig.4). For RNA-seq, 85% of samples had a runtime below 10 h, with the exception of one outlier running for over 20 h. HLA typing for the three platforms can be configured to run in parallel, with the entireconsHLAworkflow taking an average 15 h per patient.

To enable workflow set up, testing and validation ofconsHLAby others we have providedconsHLAanalysis outputs and HLA typing for publicly available tumour (and matched germline) WGS and RNA-seq for the human metastatic cell line COLO829 on our GitHub site (athttps://github.com/CCICB/consHLA). The COLO829 dataset was obtained fromhttps://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.consHLAtyping of COLO829 (see report shown in Fig.3) gave identical outcomes to previous typing [37].

During the development ofconsHLAa new tool,LILACfor HLA allele typing of MHC Class I genes became available from the Hartwig Medical Foundation (Netherlands) [11]. This tool has been demonstrated to be fast and accurate for tumour-normal tissue comparisons. This led us to deployLILACto investigate HLA class I alleles whereconsHLAreported a discrepant result in attempt to resolve the accurate HLA typing.LILACwas run on 10 patient samples.LILAC(v1.4.2) was obtained fromhttps://github.com/hartwigmedical/hmftools/releases/tag/lilac-v1.4.2.

We obtained clinical HLA typing results from 10 haematological malignancy patients for 12 HLA genes and compared the clinical grade gold-standard HLA detection assay results to determine the accuracy ofconsHLAoutput. Clinical results were reported with either one or two field accuracy, dependent on the detection resolution of each assay.HLA-DRA(coding for the binding partner of HLA-DRB proteins) was successfully analysed inconsHLA, however, since this gene is highly conserved with almost no functional variation it is not generally included in traditional clinical testing [38] and is not included in this comparison. Of the 220 possible HLA alleles, clinical testing successfully typed 142 alleles with at least one field resolution (64.5% typing success rate); of these 93 reached two field resolution (Table4). We then ranconsHLAon the 10 haematological malignancy patients.consHLAsuccessfully typed 214 of the 220 alleles (97.3% typing success rate), which included all 142 alleles typed by the standard clinical method.HLA -A,-B,-C,-DRB1,-DQA1,-DQB1,-DPA1and-DPB1genes had 100% typing success rate byconsHLAin comparison to 54% forHLA-DRB3, 82% for-DRB4and 19% for-DRB5from clinical testing.

The clinical andconsHLAmethods showed 99.3% (141/142) concordance (Table4). It is important to note thatHLA-Bcalls from one patient were an HLA-B*60 and HLA-B*62 in clinical testing andconsHLAoutputted HLA-B*40:01:02 and HLA-B*15:01:01 respectively. These are considered a match as both are serological subtypes genetically equivalent to the outputted HLA alleles by DNA analysis [39–41]. The only mis-classified call was HLA-C*04:82 in clinical testing whileconsHLAreported HLA-C*04:01. These two alleles belong to the same allele G group (C*04:01:01G) and P group (C*04:01P), where they have identical peptide and antigen binding domains (exon 2 and 3 for HLA-C). Their sequences differ by a three amino acid duplication in exon 5 which is outside the binding regions and has no known clinical impact [42].

consHLAsuccessfully matched the clinical typing to either 1- or 2-field resolution where available, confirmingconsHLAprovides highly accurate HLA typing calls. In addition,consHLAreported typing to 2- or 3-field resolution providing higher precision than the corresponding clinical testing.

Given the high level of concordance betweenconsHLAand clinical typing methods, we appliedconsHLAto a cohort of 76 paediatric brain cancer patients for whom germline WGS, tumour WGS and tumour RNA-seq data were available. AllconsHLAruns executed successfully, producing HLA types for each NGS input and a consensus call for each of the 12 HLA genes (Supp. Table1).

Typing success rate forHLA-A,-B,-C,-DRA,-DRB1,-DQA1,-DQB1,-DPA1and-DPB1was between 99% and 100%, whileHLA-DRB3,-DRB4, and-DRB5were 64%, 58% and 33% respectively (Supp. Figure2). Low success rate forHLA-DRB3,-DRB4, and-DRB5when typed usingHLA-HDon NGS data was also reported by Dashti et al. [26]. This could be attributed to their paralogous relationship withHLA-DRB1[27] or the absence of these gene loci in an individual [43], which could introduce complexities to HLA-HD’s probabilistic model for read assignment, leading to the “Not Typed” output. This is in keeping with clinical methodology, suggesting they may carry either undocumented or null alleles at these gene loci [44]. Therefore,HLA-DRB3,-DRB4, and-DRB5were excluded from subsequent analysis. It is worth noting that although poor typing success rate was observed at the individual gene level with individual NGS data set as reported by other studies, the consensus approach resolved at least one of theHLA-DRB3,-DRB4, and-DRB5genes based on three independent NGS inputs for all 76 patients.

For nine HLA genes in 76 patients, a total of 684 diplotypes were typed, each representing the two allele haplotypes of a single HLA gene locus in a patient.consHLAcalled a full consensus across all three NGS inputs in 619 (90.5%) diplotypes (Fig.5A). Five diplotypes from two patients were unable to be typed from at least one of the NGS inputs, therefore consensus was not determined. For six diplotypes, a consensus was observed between tumour WGS and RNA-seq but disagreed with germline WGS. The remaining 54 (7.9%) diplotypes exhibited either complete discrepancy where all three NGS inputs disagreed with each other (1; 0.1%), or a discrepancy happened in the tumour in either WGS only (16, 2.3%), or RNA-seq only (37; 5.4%) (Fig.5A).

At least one discrepancy was called in all nine genes being typed and was observed in 29 out of 76 patients (Fig.5B, C).HLA-DPA1had the highest rate of discrepancy, including one patient with a complete discrepancy; interestingly, the remaining 17HLA-DPA1discrepant patients were only discrepant in tumour RNA-seq (Fig.5B).HLA-DQA1andHLA-Calso showed high number of discrepancies in tumour RNA-seq, with five each (Fig.5B). Tumour WGS discrepancy was most prominent inHLA-A(four patients) and for patients zcc85 and zcc212 tumour WGS discrepancy was observed in seven and six out of the nine HLA genes, respectively (Fig.5C).

The consensus approach showed that different types of discrepancies can be identified based on the NGS inputs, and such discrepancies provide evidence of mutations in specific HLA loci. For example, in cancer, somatic mutations can occur in HLA gene loci; these can include single nucleotide variants (SNV), loss of heterozygosity (LOH) or allele specific expression (ASE). These mutations within HLA genes may allow the tumours to undergo GIE, which may aid tumour progression but may also present a novel immunotherapeutic target. It is important to distinguish between typing discrepancies that have clinically relevant implications and those arising from technical issues. Therefore, we examined the discrepancies we observed in this study to determine their likely clinical relevance, or whether they may have resulted from technical limitations; the latter could include poor sample or sequence quality, low coverage of the HLA alleles or sensitivity of the HLA typing tool.

We first examinedmultiQCsequencing reports and inspected the aligned reads in the integrative genome viewer (IGV). All 5 of the cases where an HLA gene allele pair was ‘Not determined’ (these were exclusively in zcc215 and zcc217),IGVindicated low read coverage in the HLA region, withmultiQCindicating sequence degradation in either germline or tumour WGS. A further, 3 out of 6 tumour consensus cases and 1 tumour RNA-seq discrepancy case were caused by poor sample quality also from zcc215 and zcc217. Similarly, 3 cases of tumour RNA-seq discrepancy seen in patient zcc795 affectingHLA-B,-Cand-DQA1were caused by contamination from foreign material in the tumour sample. We obtained a second tumour sample from patient zcc795 which showed no contamination, withconsHLAreporting no discrepancies. A poorly sequenced intragenic region inHLA-DRB1,-DQA1, and-DQB1was observed inIGVfor 3 tumour RNA-seq discrepancies and 1 tumour WGS discrepancy. A total of 21.5% (14/65) discrepancies were a result of technical issues (Fig.6).

Where technical issues did not explain the discrepancies, we ranLILAC(see Implementation and Methods section) to resolve HLA class I genes on the remaining 10 patients (29 discrepancies: 1 germline WGS discrepancy or tumour consensus, 15 tumour WGS discrepancies and 13 tumour RNA-seq discrepancies).LILACtyping agreed withconsHLAin all but two diplotypes (both of which involvedHLA-C) and showed evidence of somatic LOH in 4 patients, accounting for 15 tumour WGS and 2 tumour RNA-seq discrepancies (Fig.6). In the two diplotypes with disagreement betweenLILACandconsHLA,LILACfound no discrepancy although it gave a warning message that a novel haplotype was present with sufficient read support but not fitting to a known allele. In both cases, theconsHLAallele solution was ranked as second best inLILAC. In one of these,IGVinspection revealed a SNV in exon 3 ofHLA-Cin RNA-seq potentially giving rise to a mutated HLA allele. A deeper analysis, outside the scope of this study, would be required to accurately identify the cause of this discrepancy.

The remaining 30 typing discrepancies occurred within HLA class II genes. Ten of these discrepant alleles matched to the same IPD-IMGT/HLA allele P and G group, where alleles have the same antigen and peptide binding sites, and it was uncertain if they have clinical implications in the context of GIE (Fig.6). A further 17 discrepancies were related toHLA-DPA1, with homozygous HLA-DPA1*01:03:01 called in germline and tumour WGS with heterozygous HLA-DPA1*01:03:01 and 01:05 called in tumour RNA-seq. The IPD-IMGT/HLA database indicates that HLA-DPA1*01:05 is a truncated form of HLA-DPA1*01:03:01, potentially resulting from alternative splicing. Indeed, alternative splicing ofHLA-DPA1has been observed in brain tissue [45]; however, proper confirmation of alternative splicing requires further work outside the scope of this study. These discrepancies were thus also classified as being not clinically relevant (Fig.6). The final three tumour RNA-seq discrepancies showed evidence of ASE.

As shown from our analyses, the types of discrepancies detected byconsHLAreflected both technical artifacts and biological processes, some of the latter having clinical impact (SNV, LOH, and ASE). Therefore, in theconsHLAreport we append a descriptive section that highlights these discrepancies (Fig.7), providing information to assist in their clinical interpretation.

To increase confidence in HLA typing usingHLA-HDwe constructed ourconsHLAworkflow to leverage the germline WGS, tumour WGS and tumour RNA-seq from cancer patients undergoing molecular analysis. The results of ourconsHLAworkflow showed high concordance (97.9%) with gold-standard clinical HLA typing. This confirms that theHLA-HDpackage used with ourconsHLAconsensus algorithm can accurately type HLA genes using patient germline and tumour WGS and tumour RNA-seq data. For clinical research use our workflow includes automated output of an easy-to-read report providing consensus typing of the major HLA genes. We observed an averageconsHLAtotal run time of 15 h, but alternative processing unit configuration may make this significantly faster. We propose that theconsHLAworkflow can be used routinely for patients enrolled on personalised medicine programs utilising multiple genome-wide NGS modalities from both DNA and RNA. This approach provides more robust and accurate HLA typing than conventional clinical tests [12], matching the high accuracy of commercial targeted NGS-based HLA genotyping methods, while also reducing the number of assays needed.

Accurate HLA typing is essential for tissue matching for non-autologous tissue transplantation, including for bone marrow grafting that is often required in cancer. Tissue type matching ofHLA-A,-B,-C,-DRB1,-DRB3,-DRB4,-DRB5,-DPA1,-DPB1, -DQA1and-DQB1needs to be sufficiently close, all of which can be investigated usingconsHLA. In addition,consHLA'suse of theHLA-HDtool enables the typing of additional HLA genes and pseudogenes that are not commonly used in tissue matching. These may be of clinical interest in the future, both for improving tissue matches and for researching conditions linked to particular HLA sub-types [46].

Another key aspect ofconsHLAis that it can identify discordance between either germline and tumour samples, or tumour DNA and RNA. Such discrepancies may be of clinical importance, for example, it may identify GIE that impairs immune surveillance due to HLA gene silencing, deletion, mutations or ASE [1,11]. We performed a detailed investigation to further understand the discrepancies using data visualisation tools, QC reports from our NGS analysis pipelines and an alternative typing tool,LILAC, to provide independent checks ofHLA-HDtyping output. The most common clinically relevant cause of discordance resulted from LOH or ASE in the tumour. A high number of discrepancies were related to limitations with NGS data, due to poor read coverage or quality. This was particularly common inHLA-DRB3,-DRB4and-DRB5, which have previously been reported as difficult to sequence accurately [26,27].

Information on patient germline-tumour discordance is also essential for the emerging use of neoantigen-based immunotherapy design since it has implications for neoantigen presentation to the immune system [11,47,48]. Determining cancer neoepitope presentation for cancer vaccines [8,9] requires high-resolution HLA typing thatconsHLAcan provide, and beyond the commonly investigated HLA genes.

We also note that NGS-based typing methods such asconsHLAcan be used to HLA type tissue for individuals retrospectively where appropriate high depth NGS data is available. This is particularly important for samples where tissue is unavailable for serology clinical typing.

TheconsHLAworkflow, employing theHLA-HDpackage, is easy to install, configure and has been designed to link to current NGS analysis pipelines with the computation runtimes feasible using cloud computing resources. It provides high precision, accuracy and confidence in NGS-based HLA typing in cancer patients using germline and tumour WGS and RNA-seq data and can identify HLA discordance using the consensus algorithm within theconsHLAworkflow. Accurate HLA typing from NGS data is an important analysis that can be performed within precision medicine programs, especially as NGS analysis is being rapidly adopted as a first-line diagnostic test for many diseases [49]. Identification of discordance in typing the germline and tumour samples can also provide significant biological information that may have clinical implications.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Supplementary Material 1: Supplemental Table 1: HLA typing results for 76 patients with brain tumour. Based onHLA-HD, genotypes ofHLA-A,-B,-C,-DRA -DRB1,-DRB3,-DRB4,-DRB5,-DQA1,-DQB1,-DPA1, and-DPB1in germline WGS, tumour WGS and RNA-seq for each patient are reported.

Supplementary Material 2: Supplemental Table 2: EGA study and dataset identifiers for patients’ paired tumour-germline WGS and RNA-seq.

Supplementary Material 3: Supplemental Figures 1 and 2.

We thank the ZERO Childhood Cancer Program (which includes the TARGET and PRISM trials) for providing access to the samples used in this study.