Trametes sanguineabelongs to the polyporaceae family and its fruiting body possesses several benefits. In the current study,Trametes sanguineaZHSJ (T. sanguineaZHSJ) isolated from the chestnut tree wood was studied for its whole genome sequence and transcriptome sequence with their annotations.T. sanguineaZHSJ genome is 41.3243 Mb in length with a total of 135 contigs with N50 contig length 2.8138 Mb. A total of 10886 genes ofT. sanguineaZHSJ were annotated. Further, RNA sequencing and assembly represented 11861 genes, out of these 10,507 genes were annotated with four annotation databases. Moreover, denovo prediction annotation performed by Funannotate represented 12,268 coding genes and simple sequence repeats (SSR) prediction represented total 1,242 SSR and among them 707 were trinucleotide repeat motifs.

Trametes sanguineaLloyd (T. sanguinea) belongs to polyporaceae family and it is an edible and medicinal fungus widely cultivated in Yunnan province of China1. The fruiting body of this mushroom possess several polysaccharides with potential medicinal benefits such as antitumor activity by inhibition of migration, invasion and tumor microvascular activity2. Whereas the bioactive polysaccharide (TS2-2A) ofT. sanguinearecognized by toll – like receptor (TLR4) and stimulates production of concern cytokines by RAW 264.7 macrophages and hence facilitates immune enhancement3. The treatment with crude polysaccharides ofT. sanguineaattenuated myocardial damage by doxorubicin (DOX) induced cardiotoxicity through inhibiting autophagy of cardiomyocytes by inhibiting autophagy associated marker microtubule associated protein 1 A/1B – light chain 3 (LC3A) – related autophagy signaling pathways and inhibiting apoptosis of cardiomyocytes via inhibition of cleaved poly (ADP – ribose) polymerases (PARP) – related apoptosis signaling pathways thus expressing cardioprotective activity4. Moreover, polysaccharide – based composite particles fromT. sanguineaeffectively healed diabetic foot ulcers by killing bacteria, reducing reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and enhancing activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT)5. Furthermore, partially acetylated heteropolysaccharides (TS1-1A) fromT. sanguineafruiting body evinced anti-human cytomegalo virus (HCMV) by preventing attachment of virus and arresting the replication of virus by down regulating NAD (P) H Quinone Dehydrogenase 1(NQO1) and heme oxygenase – 1 (HO-1) proteins concerned with oxidative stress and thus representing antiviral activity6. Moreover, the diabetes induced mice when treated withPinussp. sawdust andT. sanguineamycelium extract represented decrease in non- high density lipo-protein (HDL) cholesterol and triglycerides and thus suggested treat dyslipidemia7.

Moreover,T. sanguineahas several other benefits such as biodegradability and biotransformation of triphenyl phosphate8, 2,4,6 – trinitrotoluene (TNT)9and polychlorinated biphenyls (Sadañoskiet al.10). Moreover,T. sanguineahas potentiality in hydrolyzing lignin by secreting several lignocellulolytic enzymes such as cellulases, xylanases, laccases and manganese peroxidases11–13. Furthermore,T. sanguineapossess potentiality in bioremediation by decolorization of hazardous recalcitrant complex synthetic textile dyes14. However, the current study revealed information about the whole genome sequencing, RNA sequencing, functional annotations of coding genes and denovo prediction of these annotated genes. Hence, the study of the complete genome ofT. sanguineaZHSJ provides new insights for further research into this medicinally important fungus and its specified genes that are responsible for producing compounds with prominent medicinal activities such as antitumor, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial etc. Further research on biosynthetic pathways of these compounds would aid in identifying and producing novel medically important drugs industrially through genetic bioengineering.

The fungal strain has been collected from Mengyin Yun Meng scenic area, Linyi city, Shandong province, China, from the chestnut tree wood. The fruiting body was surface sterilized and cut into small 1 cm pieces and placed on to the potato dextrose agar (PDA) medium containing plates and incubated at 25 °C for 7 – 14 days, the obtained fungal culture was maintained as pure culture by inoculating on to the PDA medium. Later, the agar plugs of the fungal culture grown on PDA for 7 days have been inoculated on to the liquid PD broth medium and incubated at 25° C for 7 days to obtain required amount for genomic analysis. The genomic DNA was isolated from theT. sanguineaZHSJ cultured in the liquid medium for 7 days. The mycelium was separated from the broth by centrifuging at 9000x g for 1 minute15. The mycelium that was sedimented at the bottom was subjected to freeze dry by using liquid nitrogen and grinded well to crack the cell wall and elute the DNA. Later, the extraction of DNA was performed by following the instructions of Bioflux Biospin DNA extraction kit purchased from Hangzhou Bioer Technology Co., Ltd., Hangzhou, China. Library construction and sequencing of genome was performed by using combination of PacBioSequelIIe and Illumina sequencing platforms16. For Illumina sequencing the DNA samples were fragmented to ~400 bp using CovarisM220 acoustic shearer by following manufacture’s protocol. Illuminia sequencing libraries were prepared from the fragments by using NEXTFLEX Rapid DNA seq kit17. Further, 5′ prime ends were end-repaired and phosphorylated and 3′ ends were A- tailed and ligated to sequencing adapters. Then, adapters ligated products were enriched by PCR and further these libraries were subjected to Illumina Novaseq 6000 (Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA, USA). Furthermore, for PacBio sequencing, genome DNA was fragmented to ~10Kb then purified end – repaired and ligated with SMRT bell sequencing adapters by following manufacturer’s instructions (Pacific Biosciences, CA), later, PacBio library was prepared and sequenced on one SMRT cell using standard protocol18.

T. sanguineaZHSJ grown in PD broth for 7 days at 28 °C, the mycelium was collected after incubation and the mycelial cell wall was degraded by grinding the sample with liquid nitrogen and 100 mg of the mycelial powder was subjected to RNA extraction by using Omega Bio- TEK E.Z.N.A fungal RNA kit by following the instructions provided by the kit. Further, from total RNA mRNA was enriched by using RNeasy pure mRNA bead kit and following the instructions to obtain pure mRNA from the crude RNA sample. Later, mRNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA, where the first strand of cDNA was synthesized in M-Mulv reverse transcriptase system by using fragmented mRNA as template, oligonucleotides as primer and RNaseH was used to degrade RNA strand. The second strand of cDNA was synthesized with dNTPs as raw material under DNA polymerase I system by completing cDNA end repair and A tailing. Further, adapters were ligated to cDNA and 200 bp of cDNA was screened and purified by Hieff NGS ® DNA selection beads. Later, cDNA library was amplified by PCR and final detection is carried out by using Illumina NovaseqXplus.

T. sanguineaZHSJ total genome size was represented as 41324262 bp and it possesses 135 number of contigs, out of these 31-contigs sequences were referred as mitochondrial sequences. GC %, number coding genes, KEGG genes, COG genes and RNAs were represented in (Table1).

Basic genomic statistical information ofT. sanguineaZHSJ.

The total genome size, N50 contigs, coding sequences and RNAs were represented statistically.

The genome sequence was assembled by using PacBio reads and Illumina reads. The original data is transferred to sequence data via base calling for Illumina sequencing data and they were defined as raw data or raw reads which were saved in FASTQ file. Further, from this raw data the low-quality data has been removed by quality trimming resulting in formation of clean data. The statistical method was used to calculate the base distribution and quality fluctuation of each cycle of all sequencing reads which could intuitively reflect the library construction quality and sequencing quality of the sequencing samples from a macroscopic perspective and analyze the base distribution of samples. The third-generation quality control of the sample and the second-generation quality control data were represented in (Table2) (Fig.1). The cDNA reads obtained from sequencing were further subjected to filtering through fastp (version 0.180) by using parameters such as removing reads containing adapters, removing reads containing more than 10% of unknown nucleotides (N) and removing low quality reads containing more than 50% of low quality (Q value ≤ 20) bases. Low quality data has been filtered by several parameters and clean reads were obtained (Table3). Further, filtered data was subjected to analyze the base composition and mass distribution to provide a visual representation of the quality of the data. Here, the more balanced the base composition is, the higher the quality (Fig.2).

Statistical information of third generation and second-generation quality control data ofT. sanguineaZHSJ.

The sequence of 496 bp was inserted into the sequencer to obtain clean reads. Here, after the quality control the percentage of bases with Phred value greater than 20 and 30 bases to the total bases were represented, which refers that the larger the Phred value, the better the quality of the sequence.

Quality control of sequencing data. (a) The distribution of base error rate before and after the quality control here, x- co-ordinate indicates the arrangement of bases on the reads from 5′ to 3′ end and second ordinate represents average error rate (%) of all reads. Here, the first half represents the first end of sequencing and the other half is the other end sequencing read’s error rate distribution. (b) Base composition distribution map before and after quality control, here, x- axis represents arrangement of the bases on reads from 5′ to 3′ end and y- axis represents the percentage of the reads at A, C, G, T and N location with different colors. As the start sequence attached to the primer adapter initially there was fluctuation of A, C, G and T but later stabilized. Moreover, lesser unknown bases N represents sequencing sample were less affected by the system’s AT preference. (c) The distribution of the average mass value of each base of all sequencing reads before and after quality control, here, the data represents base co-ordinate of the reads on x-axis and base average mass value of the reads on y- axis, whereas first half of the graph represents distribution of the base average and the other half is the other end distribution of the base average. (d) Sequencing length distribution of clean reads ofT. sanguineaZHSJ.

Low quality data has been filtered by removing reads containing adapters, reads with greater than 10% N content, A- base reads and low-quality reads. After filtering, data represents clean reads with Q20% - 5.68 Gb, Q30% - 5.53 Gb, N% - 76,665 bp and GC% - 3.38 Gb.

Transcriptome quality control – Base distribution before and after filtration. The base composition and position of bases along with reads were more balanced after filtration. The more balanced the base composition the higher the quality of the data.

Genomic assessment was performed by analyzing GC-depth distribution and k – mer frequency distribution. GC- depth distribution was analyzed by using SOAP (short oligonucleotide alignment program)19and Bowtie 2 (version 2.5.1) softwarehttp://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml20. Whereas, K-mer frequency distribution was analyzed by k – mer analysis tool kit (KAT)21. In GC – depth analysis original reads of paired – end (PE) library was aligned to the assembly sequence to obtain base depth. Here, GC content was represented as 50 – 60% and the sequencing depth was represented at 100. This represents there is no obvious GC – bias. However, the GC- depth distribution was divided into three layers, whereas the major distribution was at 50 – 70% and the minor distribution was at 15 – 35%. The blast analysis of these sequences represented no contamination. Hence, the three-layer distribution would be due to heterozygosity causing homologous chromosomes to assemble into one or two strands at heterozygous sites (Fig.3a). For, k – mer frequency analysis PE sequencing reads were used, in which high quality sequencing region was selected and 17 – kmer depth was taken by base and portion of the frequency of each depth was counted. Here, at the depth of 92 the highest peak with frequency of 1.651% was represented. However, due to heterozygosity two peaks were represented as the lowest peak preceding the main peak and the tail of the main peak represents the repetition (Fig.3b).

Result of genomic assessment. (a) GC content distribution analysis represented at 50–60% and the sequencing depth was represented at 100 evincing there is no GC-bias. (b) k- mer frequency analysis represents at the depth of 92 the highest peak with frequency of 1.651%.

HiFi reads of clean data were assembled into contigs using CANU (correct- then – assemble assembler) and assembly software hifiasm v0.19.5 and later error correction of the PacBio assembly was performed using the Illumina clean reads. Assembly evaluation has been performed by CEGMA (core eukaryotic genes mapping approach) (version 2.5)22http://korflab.ucdavis.edu/datasets/cegma/and BUSCO (Benchmarking Universal single – copy orthologs) (version 5.4.5)23http://busco.ezlab.org/.GapCloser(version1.12)https://sourceforge.net/projects/soapdenovo2/files/GapCloser/bin/r6/GapCloser-bin-v1.12-r6.tgz/downloadsoftware was used to fill in the gaps in the results of second-generation assembly24. Transcriptome denovo assembly was analyzed by short reads assembling program Trinity. Where, Trinity is a software package that combines three components, such as Inchworm, Chrysalis and Butterfly. Here, Inchworm assembles reads by k-mer based approach, resulting in collection of linear contigs, Chrysalis clusters related contigs that correspond alternatively to the spliced transcripts or unique portions of paralogous genes and then builds a de Bruijin graphs for each cluster of related contigs. Further, Butterfly analyzes the path of reads and read pairings in the context of the corresponding de Bruijin graph and outputs one linear sequence of each alternatively spliced isoform and transcripts derived from paralogous genes25. Funannotate (v1.8.17)26was used to perform denovo prediction. Funannotate employs an evidence based integrative approach to identify protein coding genes by incorporating homology-based protein alignments and transcriptome data processed through trinity (v2.5.1) and PASA (v2.5.3)27. These evidence sources generate hints for ab initio predictors such as Augustus (v3.5.0)28and GeneMark-ES/ET (vG.72)29. Further, EvidenceModeler (v2.1.0)30integrates these predictions with weighted evidence, resolving conflicts and selecting the most reliable gene models. The genome prediction was performed by analyzing coding genes prediction, non- coding RNA gene prediction and repeat sequence prediction by using Marker2 software (gene prediction of fungi)http://www.yandell-lab.org/software/maker.html31, Barrnap (version 0.4.2)https://github.com/tseemann/barrnap/and tRNAscan – SE (version 1.3.1)http://trna.ucsc.edu/software/were used to analyze rRNA and genome contained in the tRNA for prediction32. Whereas to analyze the repeat prediction Repeatmasker softwarehttp://www.repeatmasker.org/was used33. Denovo assembly of the quality control clean reads represents 135 total contig number. G + C% was represented as 52.08% and the detailed information was represented in (Table4) and out of these 135 contigs 12 contigs possess major coding genes (Fig.4a). Assembly evaluation was performed by BUSCO and CEGMA (Table4). The tRNA’s prediction indicated 1280 number with 21 types (Fig.4b). Repeat prediction analyzed by Repeatmasker software represented 25.81% genome possess repeats with 1,06,65,171 bp, these interspersed repeats were referred as transposon elements that include DNA transposons, retrotransposons and unclassified repeats. DNA transposons were 209 in number (n), whereas retrotransposons were categorized into long terminal repeats (LTR) n = 641, short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs) n = 16 and long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs) n = 170. Whereas 1902 were unclassified repeats (Table4). Further, Unigenes were sorted from longest to shortest and the assembly was analyzed based on N50 number and length. The smaller the number of N50s the better the assembly quality (Table4). Further, assembly quality was analyzed by unigene length distribution analysis (Fig.4c) and the integrity of assembly was analyzed further by BUSCO and represented in (Fig.4d).

Statistical information of genome assembly, evaluation and prediction ofT. sanguineaZHSJ.

The genome sequence and transcriptome sequence after quality control were subjected to assembly and genetic prediction.

Genome assembly and prediction. (a) The Circos plot depicting the genomic assembly and prediction ofT. sanguineaZHSJ. 12 large contigs of theT. sanguineaZHSJ genome were represented in circle1 and circle 2 represents predicted annotated coding genes, circle 3 and 4 representing the short and long reads across the genome and represents the repeat regions in between these 12 contigs with more than 20 kb in size. (b) The abscissa representing types of tRNA’s and the ordinate representing the number of tRNA’s, here, methionine represented in highest number compared to others. (c) Unigene length distribution. (d) BUSCO analysis, a total of 290 BUSCOs were searched, among them 278 were complete BUSCOs, 274 were complete and single copy BUSCOs, 4 were complete and duplicated BUSCOs, 12 were fragmented BUSCOs and there were no missing BUSCOs.

Basic genome annotation performed by using alignment tools such as BLAST, Diamond and HMMER to annotate the predicted genes fromT. sanguineaZHSJ with five major data bases NR (non- redundant protein) database34, Swiss – port library, Pfam (protein families) library35, COG (cluster of orthologous genes) data basehttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/36, GO (gene ontology) databaseshttp://www.geneontology.org/37and KEEG Notes (Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes) databasehttp://www.genome.jp/kegg/38. The predicted coding genes were annotated based on basic functions and these functional annotations were carried out by comparing with five major databases such as, NR database, Swiss- port library, Pfam library, COG database and GO database. However, NR and Swiss- port database annotations are based on protein sequence alignments, a total of 10886 genes ofT. sanguineaZHSJ were annotated. Whereas the Pfam database is a large collection of protein families that rely on multiple sequence alignments and hidden Markov models. Proteins function primarily through the secondary result of the primary sequence, which are referred to as domains. The different combinations of domains produce proteins that vary in function. Therefore, the identification of protein domains is prominent for the analysis of protein function, a total of 6148 genes ofT. sanguineaZHSJ were annotated by Pfam database.

COG database alignments performed for functional annotation, classification and protein evolution analysis of predicted proteins, results of COG annotations represent four main COG classifications such as information storage and processing, metabolism, cellular processing and signaling and poorly characterized (function unknown). A total of 2859 genes were assigned to 24 types of COGs out of them carbohydrate transport and metabolism, translation ribosomal structure and biogenesis, amino acid transport and metabolism, post translational modification, protein turnover and chaperones were the top number of genes that were annotated. Further, there were 369 genes representing general functions but they were poorly characterized and 42 genes functions were unknown (Fig.5a).

Genome annotation. (a) COG annotation, the x coordinate represents the functional classification of COG and the Y coordinate represents the number of genes with this type of function. Here, carbohydrate transport metabolism function genes are high in number. (b) GO annotation, the abscissa represents the three branches of GO namely biological process, cellular component and molecular function with their further classifications. The ordinate represents the relative portion of genes. Here, metabolic processes possess the highest number of genes in biological process, cellular anatomical entity possesses highest number of genes in cellular component and catalytic activity possesses highest number of genes in molecular function. (c) KEGG annotation, the ordinate represents the name of the KEGG metabolic pathway and the abscissa is the number of genes/transcripts annotated to the pathway. KEGG metabolic pathways are divided into 7 categories: metabolism, genetic information processing, environmental information processing, cellular processes, organismal systems, human diseases and drug development. d) summary of annotation represents total 11,861 assembled unigenes were annotated against four major public databases such as Nr – 10,473 unigenes 88.3%, KEGG – 9,125 unigenes 76.9%, KOG – 4,301 unigenes 36.2% and Swiss Port – 5,224 unigenes 44.0%. Among these, 10,507 (88.6%) were successfully annotated in at least one database, while only 1,354 (11.4%) remained unannotated, indicating a high annotation success rate. The Venn diagram analysis represented that 4,209 (35.5%) unigenes were concurrently annotated across all four databases.

According to the GO database, 5688 genes ofT. sanguineaZHSJ were assigned to three major categories such as cellular component 3252 genes, molecular function 4290 genes and biological processes 2911 genes. In these categories, cellular component possesses the largest number of genes for cellular anatomical entity (2915). Whereas in molecular function catalytic activity and binding possess the highest number of genes (2912, 2479). In biological processes metabolic processes and cellular processes possess the highest number of genes (2193, 2086) (Fig.5b).

The systemic metabolic pathway of gene products fromT. sanguineaZHSJ was further analyzed by KEGG database. A total of 13,253 genes were assigned against six categories of KEEG: cellular processes possess 1273 genes among them transport and catabolism pathway related genes were the highest in number 552. Moreover, environmental information processing possesses 922 genes in these signal transduction pathway related genes 856 were the highest. Whereas genetic information processing possesses 1118 genes, among them translation pathway related genes 334 were the highest in number. Further, human diseases possess 3048 genes among them neurodegenerative disease pathway related genes 844 were highest in number. Moreover, metabolism possesses 5349 genes among them global and overview maps (special class metabolic pathway maps of KEGG) 2679 were the highest in number. Furthermore, organismal systems possess 1543 genes out of them endocrine system pathway related genes 436 were highest in number (Fig.5c). The transcriptomic unigene annotation ofT. sanguineaZHSJ has been represented in (Fig.S1) and (Fig.5d).

The Microsatellite (MISA)http://pgrc.ipk-gatersleben.de/misa/was employed to perform microsatellite mining in the whole transcriptome ofT. sanguineaZHSJ and the parameters used were (definition unit_size, min-repeats): 2–6 n3-5 4-4 5-4 6-4 interrupts (max_difference-between_2_SSRs):100. If the distance between two SSRs is shorter than 100 bp, then they are considered as one SSR. Based on the MISA results, primer3http://www.broadinstitute.org/genome_software/other/promer3.htmlwas used to design primer pairs in the flanking regions of SSRs39. Total 1,242 SSR were identified by using MISA software inT. sanguineaZHSJ transcriptome, among them the most abundant repeat motif was trinucleotide with number (n) = 707 they were AAG/CTT, ACC/CGT, AGC/CTG, AGG/CCT, ATC/ATG and CCG/CGG. Followed by dinucleotide with n = 218 they were commonly AC/GT, AG/CT and CG/CG. Then, tetranucleotide with n = 191 they were AACG/CGTT, ACGC/CGTT, ACGG/CCGT, AGCG/CGCT and ATCC/ATGG. Whereas pentanucleotide and hexanucleotide were n = 45 and n = 81 respectively (Fig.6).

Statistical plot of the proportion of SSR of different tandem repeat unit types in the total SSR. Trinucleotide SSR was the abundant repeat motif in transcriptome ofT. sanguineaZHSJ.

The whole genome sequence raw reads, FASTA files and gff annotation files ofT. sanguineaZHSJ has been deposited at the National center for biotechnology (NCBI) under the Bio project number – PRJNA1174344, and accession number – GCA_050630565.1https://identifiers.org/ncbi/insdc.gca:GCA_050630565.140.https://identifiers.org/ncbi/insdc.sra:SRP60078741. Funannotate annotation version gff3 file has been submitted to Zenodo 10.5281/zenodo.1675084842.

The genome sequence assembled by using PacBio and Illumina, were subjected to quality control and clean genomic reads were assessed by analyzing GC-depth distribution and k – mer frequency distribution by SOAP and Bowtie 2 v2.5.1. Here, GC content 50 – 60% and the sequencing depth was represented at 100 and high-quality sequencing region was selected and 17 – kmer depth was taken by base and portion of the frequency of each depth was counted. Here, at the depth of 92 the highest peak with frequency of 1.651% was represented (Fig.3). Illumina reads were assembled into 135 contigs using CANU and hifiasm v0.19.5. Assembly evaluation performed by BUSCO v5.4.5 and CEGMA v2.5. 94.3% of complete BUSCOs were included in assembled genome (Table4). Transcriptome denovo assembly was analyzed by short reads assembling program Trinity and it represented 96.37% gene coverage (Table4). Denovo prediction annotation was performed by using Funannotate v1.8.17 represented 12268 coding genes with total gene length 20258617 bp (Table4). All these evaluations represent the high-quality genome assembly and annotation ofT. sanguineaZHSJ.

This work was jointly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Number, 32101035), the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (Grant Number, ZR2021QC025), the Special Project of Central Government for Local Science and Technology Development of Shandong Province (Grant Number, YDZX2022151), Key R&D Program of Shandong Province (2024TZXD020) and Agricultural Science and Technology Innovation Project (grant number CXGC2025F09). Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province ZR2023QC061.