Inter‐ and intrapersonal affect (IIPA; mother–child warm emotional exchange and individual expressions of positive affect) supports adaptive child self‐regulation in Black and Latinx families but has yet to be assessed in relation to youth's respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA). Contextual stressors (income, internalizing symptoms) can undermine Black and Latinx children's RSA regulation. Using a self‐regulation promotion framework, this study examined associations between IIPA and children's RSA regulation using three distinct measurements, while controlling for contextual stressors. One hundred mothers (Mage= 34.48 years,SD= 6.39 years) and their children (Mage= 6.83 years,SD= 1.50 years) participated. Dyads completed a mildly stressful task where RSA and video recordings were captured continuously. Videos were later coded for IIPA. Mothers reported on income and internalizing symptoms. Relations between IIPA and the three child RSA regulation indices (i.e., suppression, instability, trajectory) were assessed. No significant relations between IIPA and RSA suppression or instability were found; however, IIPA was positively related to a gradual decrease in RSA and a slowing of RSA reactivity across the stress task in the trajectory model. Findings identify affective processes within Black and Latinx families that are advantageous for children's physiological regulation, even in the context of stress. Further, a trajectory model of youth's physiological regulation may allow for a more nuanced understanding of RSA. Collectively, findings underscore that IIPA may be advantageous for adaptive RSA regulation in Black and Latinx school‐age youth in the context of stress.

Self‐regulation is one's flexible responding to contextual demands carried out through physiological, emotional, and behavioral processes (Blair and Raver2012; Murray et al.2019). For youth, adaptive self‐regulation is positively associated with mental and physical well‐being, high academic achievement, and positive peer relationships (Mills et al.2019; Murray et al.2015; Robson et al.2020). Healthy self‐regulation is advantageous for development regardless of a child's background; however, research with youth from marginalized backgrounds has centered around risk mitigation, rather than self‐regulation promotion (Fuchs et al.2021; Hagan et al.2016). A plethora of research has identified contextual stressors that place Black and Latinx school‐age (i.e., 5‐ to 9‐year‐old; American Academy of Pediatrics2024) youth in particular at disproportionately higher risk for maladaptive outcomes (Robson et al.2020; Uhl et al.2019; Williams and Howard2020). It is critical to move beyond a focus on risk mitigation and adopt a health promotion framework to foster adaptive self‐regulatory development.

Black and Latinx families disproportionately experience contextual stressors due to marginalization and discrimination that can compromise mother and child physical and mental health (Cruz et al.2025; Santos et al.2021). In fact, work has documented higher rates of internalizing symptoms (i.e., anxious, depressive, somatic) in both Latinx parents and children when compared to their non‐Latinx counterparts (Anderson and Mayes2010; Polo et al.2024). For youth, pervasive contextual stressors can “get under the skin,” undermining adaptive physiological regulation (Blair2010; E. L. Davis et al.2020). In an attempt to move beyond a focus on risk factors that undermine self‐regulation, Murray et al. (2019) proposed theself‐regulation promotion framework, which focuses on the importance of interpersonal relationships for healthy self‐regulatory development. In particular, self‐regulation is developed through close interpersonal relationships (e.g., parent–child) where children are taught adaptive regulatory skills, supportive interactions are fostered, and co‐regulation occurs. Given the need for empirical work examining self‐regulatory promotion indices in Black and Latinx youth specifically, the present study evaluates the implications of behavioral indicators of warm, responsive parent–child relationships in relation to physiological regulation in Black and Latinx school‐age children.

Warm, responsive parent–child relationships scaffold youth's self‐regulation development. During the school‐age developmental period, youth continue to rely on parents for self‐regulation, while also increasing their autonomy (Eisenberg et al.1998; Feldman2012; Lunkenheimer et al.2017; Murray et al.2019). Parent–child interpersonal affect is one component of warm, responsive relationships. Interpersonal affect is the bidirectional exchange between parents and their children of verbal and nonverbal emotions and communication expressed during interactions (Suveg et al.2016). Even when accounting for contextual stressors, prior work has demonstrated that mutual exchanges of warmth, acceptance, and positive affect in Black and Latinx mother–child dyads are related to adaptive child physiological regulation across development (i.e., toddlers through adolescence; Connell et al.2011; George et al.2024; Johnson et al.2017; Wu and Hooper2023). Further, systematic reviews suggest that interpersonal affect exchange, at times termed affective mutuality, affective/behavioral/dyadic synchrony, or emotional attunement/reciprocity, is positively related to adaptive child self‐regulation (Birk et al.2022; M. Davis et al.2017; Leclère et al.2014).

Inherently intertwined with parent–child interpersonal affect is intrapersonal positive affect—emotion expressed at the individual level through body posture, animation, and tone of voice (Bornstein2022). Like interpersonal affect, intrapersonal positive affect has been significantly associated with adaptive child physiological regulation (George et al.2024; Prieto Tagle2024; Rousseau et al.2020). When mothers and children display external enjoyment and pleasure, it may be easier for children to regulate, contribute to broader coping repositories for children, and help establish responsive parent–child interactions. When considering Murray et al.’s (2019) self‐regulation promotion framework, interpersonal and intrapersonal positive affect are two behavioral mechanisms that support warm, responsive relationships. Despite their interconnected nature, consideration for their joint influence on child physiological regulation has yet to be explored. Thus, the present study evaluated the combined effects of these forms of positive affect expression (i.e., IIPA) on three distinct physiological measures of child self‐regulatory functioning in Black and Latinx school‐age youth.

Informed by theoretical models that consider physiological regulation a component of the broader self‐regulation construct (Blair and Ku2022), extant literature has commonly used RSA to measure child parasympathetic nervous activity, proximally representing physiological regulation (Grossman and Taylor2007). RSA is a metric of respiratory modulation of vagal control of the heart (i.e., cardiac vagal tone) and is a reflection of the interaction between the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. The neurovisceral integration model (Thayer and Lane2000) argues that cardiac vagal tone reflects neural network functioning necessary for emotion–cognition interactions, suggesting RSA may be a useful measure when quantifying behavioral activation and social engagement during stressful paradigms (Reid et al.2019). Importantly, RSA is influenced by broader contextual stressors (E. L. Davis et al.2020). Exposure to persistent and pervasive financial hardship and maternal and youth internalizing symptoms can undermine school‐age children's RSA regulation (Robson et al.2020; Uhl et al.2019; Williams and Howard2020). Given the increased risk for financial strain and internalizing symptomatology for youth from marginalized backgrounds (Cruz et al.2025; Santos et al.2021), the present study controls for the influence of these pervasive stressors when analyzing the influence of IIPA on child RSA regulation.

RSA suppressionis one of the most commonly used indicators for quantifying RSA regulation (Hale, Morrow, et al. 2023; Shaffer et al2018.). Given that RSA is reflective of parasympathetic activity (i.e., higher when in peaceful states), a reduction in RSA is expected when engaging with an environment demand. In research, suppression is calculated by taking the difference between one's resting RSA and their RSA during a stress task, with higher, negative difference scores indicating a greater decrease in RSA in response to environmental stimuli when compared to lower scores (Beauchaine2001). Empirically, toddler RSA suppression during a series of challenge tasks was positively associated with elevations in mother–toddler relationship quality (Calkins et al.2008). In a sample of adolescents aged 11–17, RSA suppression was positively associated with mother–adolescent interpersonal positive affect during a series of discussion tasks (Connell et al.2011). However, contrary to the findings of Calkins et al. (2008), toddler RSA suppression during a stranger approach paradigm was unrelated to children's intrapersonal positive affect (Brooker and Buss2010). This inconsistent pattern of effects may be explained by task type and developmental stage. Theoretically, RSA suppression reflects engagement and is expected to ebb and flow during social interactions in response to the social exchange. During nonsocial challenge tasks, RSA suppression may be unrelated to parent–child interaction quality. However, during interaction tasks, RSA suppression may relate to the quality of the exchange. Despite these proposed relations, there is a notable gap in research looking at collaborative challenge tasks. This may be especially important in school‐age samples as this developmental stage is hallmarked by continued reliance on parents for emotional support coupled with increased levels of autonomy (Eisenberg et al.1998; Feldman2012).

A second, newer quantification of RSA regulation isRSA instability. Instability is a measure of the magnitude of RSA change across a specified period of time, usually a collaborative or stressful task. Although instability is a commonly used metric in the daily‐diary emotion literature (Kockler et al.2022; Santangelo et al.2018), to date, only a few studies have used instability in the quantification of RSA (Hale et al.2024; Xu et al.2024). While other studies have used related metrics to quantify RSA (e.g., autoregressive parameters, within‐person standard deviations), instability is unique in its ability to simultaneously quantify temporal dependency and within‐person change (Bos et al.2019; Bringmann et al.2017; Jahng et al.2008). It has been hypothesized that, throughout a stress task, higher levels of RSA instability are indicative of adaptive physiological regulation given noted associations between instability and emotional and behavioral regulation (Xu et al.2024).

Theoretically, RSA ebbs and flows throughout a task (Thayer and Lane2000), suggesting that higher instability may reflect the use of physiological resources to respond to environmental demands when compared to those with lower instability. However, in a sample of infants, Somers and colleagues (2022) reported that lower infant RSA variability was related to positive affect during free play with their mothers. Similarly, Rousseau et al. (2020) quantified the magnitude of youth's RSA change across a mother–child cooperative task through assessment of unstandardized residuals and did not find significant associations between RSA variance and mother or child intrapersonal positive affect. Though prior studies did not capture instability specifically, they provide evidence to suggest that RSA variability may be more or less adaptive depending on the context of the dyadic interaction. Perhaps during collaborative tasks, greater homeostasis and less magnitude of change are more adaptive, whereas during stressful and/or conflictual tasks, greater variability is indicative of adaptive adjustment. To examine this potential explanation, we assess RSA instability in the context of a mildly stressful, parent–child task.

Static quantifications allow researchers to understand the reactivity and magnitude of change in a child's RSA, but neither suppression nor instability accounts for continuous change across time. The ability to chart changes in RSA responding across a paradigm is important given the theoretical postulations that RSA ebbs and flows in response to environmental stimuli (Thayer and Lane2000). When modeled as atrajectory, RSA can be quantified in terms of how, and in what direction, a child is physiologically responding throughout the duration of a task (Burt and Obradović2013). Trajectory modeling also has increased power to detect significant effects compared to suppression and instability, which may be especially beneficial when conducting psychological research with marginalized groups that often have smaller sample sizes (Cornejo‐Torres et al.2022; Diallo et al.2014; George et al.2014). When using such a methodology, researchers have the option to include predictor variables, which allows for the dynamic assessment of how unique indices influence the trend of physiological regulation across time (Preacher et al.2008).

In light of the benefits of trajectory modeling, researchers have adopted this approach when quantifying child RSA regulation. For example, Brooker and Buss (2010) examined relations involving a quadratic trajectory of toddler RSA regulation during a stress task and found that elevations in toddlers’ expressed intrapersonal positive affect were positively associated with increases in dynamic, quadratic RSA change across the task. More specifically, elevations in positive affect were related to a greater initial decline followed by a return to physiological homeostasis, suggesting that positive affect expression was related first to the deployment of physiological resources and then to a return to baseline levels. Then, in a sample of Black and White preschoolers, West et al. (2021) also found that child intrapersonal positive affect expression was positively associated with a nonlinear decline in RSA across a stress task, again suggesting that youth employed physiological resources nonlinearly in response to a stressful paradigm. Taken together, trajectory modeling allows for a nuanced view of influences on youth's RSA regulation above that which can be garnered from static or linear models.

Guided by the self‐regulation promotion framework, the present study examined relations between mother and child IIPA and child RSA self‐regulation while accounting for potent contextual stressors often experienced by Black and Latinx families (financial hardship, maternal and child internalizing symptoms). Child physiological regulation was assessed using three indicators of RSA: suppression, instability, and trajectory modeling. It was hypothesized that IIPA would be positively associated with RSA suppression, RSA instability, and a nonlinear change in children's RSA across a mother–child stress task.

Participants were 100 children (Mage= 6.83 years,SD= 1.50 years; 51% female, 49% male) and their mothers (Mage= 34.48 years,SD= 6.39 years). Inclusion criteria required that dyads be fluent in English and/or Spanish, the child be between the ages of 5 and 9 years, the mother identify the child as Black or Latina, and the parent report no concerns about a developmental disability for their child that would preclude completion of laboratory tasks (e.g., autism without language). Regarding ethnicity, 76.0% of mothers indicated that their child was Latinx, and 74% of mothers self‐identified as Latinx. Regarding race, parents were required to select from the following response options: Black/African‐American, White/European American, Asian, American Indian, Biracial, Other, Refuse to answer, and “I don't know.” Parents indicated that their child was Black (25.3%), White (23.2%), American Indian (1.0%), and biracial (3.0%). Mothers reported on their own race as Black (24.7%), White (22.7%), American Indian (1.0%), and biracial (1.0%). The remaining percentages included parents who selected “Other” and indicated they/their child identified both racially and ethnically as Latinx. The majority of mothers (68.0%) were born outside of the United States, with birthplaces including Mexico, Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador, Venezuela, Argentina, Costa Rica, and Colombia. Most mothers reported being employed full‐time (54.0%) and having a romantic partner (82.7%). Education levels of participating mothers varied, with the majority of mothers reporting that a high school diploma/GED was their highest level of education (45.0%). Other mothers indicated they had not attended formal schooling (13.0%), had an associate or technical degree (7.0%), had partially completed college (12.0%), had a 4‐year college degree (18.0%), and had partially or fully completed graduate school (5.0%). Mothers reported on their annual income, with $0–$5000 as the lowest range and more than $100,000 as the highest. The majority of the sample (56.4%) reported earnings below $30,000 annually.

All study procedures were in accordance with, and approved by, the University's institutional review board (IRB). Participants were recruited from the local community using flyer postings and social media initiatives. However, the majority of participants (i.e., 67.0%) came from previous participant referrals. Potential participants were screened over the phone for eligibility and, if they met criteria, were scheduled for an in‐person assessment. Assessments ranged from 1.5 to 2 h in length. Written consent from mothers and assent from children were obtained upon arrival at the laboratory. Then, electrodes connected to an electrocardiogram (ECG) system were placed on mothers and children. Following electrode placement, physiological data were collected using MindWare BioLab Software (Version 3.0.6). Dyads were instructed to watch a 5‐min video of a calming nature spring, while baseline rates of resting RSA data were collected continuously. Following the resting task, dyads were given instructions on how to complete the challenging LEGO task. The child was instructed to recreate a LEGO figure based on a provided image, whereas mothers were told they could verbally, but not physically, assist with the task. Importantly, dyads were not given all the pieces necessary to build the figure but were not told this until after the task was completed. Importantly, the task has been reliably used in similar‐aged samples to induce children's stress response (Melnick and Hinshaw2000; Rubin et al.2001). Following instructions, dyads were given 10 min to complete the task. After the task, mothers completed questionnaires with the help of a research assistant as needed. Families were compensated $100 for their participation and an additional $40 for every family they referred to the study who enrolled.

Throughout the LEGO task, video recordings were collected continuously and later coded by trained research assistants fluent in English and Spanish. Research assistants were trained to a strong reliability (i.e., intraclass correlation coefficient [ICC] > 0.90; Koo and Li2016) by the principal investigator (PI) prior to coding independently. A master coder randomly selected 25% of the videos throughout the study to maintain reliability. Behavioral observation codes were originally adapted from the NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (Owen et al.2000) and are more recently reflected in prior work (M. Davis et al.2017; Feldman2007). Although behavioral codes were all derived from the same interaction, interpersonal affect involved behaviors specifically shared between the mother and child. Conversely, intrapersonal affect captured individual expressions of affect without regard for whether the positive affect was shared or in response to something specific about the task. Behavioral observations (i.e., inter‐ and intrapersonal affect) were coded on a macro scale after watching the first 5 min of the interaction task.

Interpersonal affect (which has also been referred to as affective mutuality, affective/behavioral/dyadic synchrony, emotional attunement/reciprocity in the extant literature) was measured through a dyad‐level behavioral observation quantifying the availability and reciprocity of emotion between the child and mother. Interpersonal affect reflected the degree of emotional availability, intimacy, and reciprocal engagement within the dyad across the entire 5‐min interaction period. Dyads were assigned lower scores (e.g., 1–2) when they seemed disengaged or only engaged in positive experiences in a staged‐like quality and higher scores (e.g., 6–7) when the dyad shared emotional experiences and were behaviorally attuned throughout the task and worked together in a collaborative way. Higher scores on this code reflected felt security and intimacy within the dyad. This code demonstrated excellent interrater reliability (ICC = 0.96,p< 0.001).

Individual expressions of positive affect were coded independently for mothers and children during the dyadic LEGO task. The positive affect code captured expressed pleasure through animation, smiling, laughter, body posture, and/or tone of voice. These dimensions of positive affect were macro‐coded, yielding a single, overall score of intrapersonal affect. Positive affect was rated on a 5‐point scale, where 1 =No expression of positive emotionto 5 =Individual displayed positive affect for nearly the entire task. Scores demonstrated excellent interrater reliability for child positive affect (ICC = 0.94,p< 0.001) and good interrater reliability for mother positive affect (ICC = 0.87,p< 0.001).

RSA data were collected in 30‐s epochs with MindWare BioLab Software (Version 3.0.6) for mothers and their children during a resting baseline and LEGO task. However, in light of the study aims, only child RSA was used in the present analyses. Disposable ECG electrodes were placed on the mother's and child's right collarbone (i.e., the right clavicle area), in the cleft of the throat (i.e., below the Adam's apple), at the base of the rib areas on both the left and the right sides of the body, near the xiphoid process (i.e., lower end of the sternum), midway down the back, and on the back below the base of the skull. The ECG signal was digitized to 1000 Hz, and MindWare used a peak‐identification algorithm to create an interbeat interval (IBI; the time between heartbeats) series, also known as an R–R interval.

Physiological data were cleaned by trained research assistants using MindWare Heart Rate Variability (HRV) Software (Version 3.0.25) in 30‐s epochs. To detect artifacts and data abnormalities (e.g., severe fluctuations, inadvertent cardiac fluctuations, ectopic beats due to participants’ physical movement or breathing), an algorithm within the MindWare software was used (Berntson et al.1990). Trained research assistants also visually scanned data prior to the manual alteration of data points. If an abnormality was observed, research assistants overlayed the RSA epoch with respiration data to determine if the irregularity should be retained for analyses or altered (Quigley et al.2024). Epochs with less than 10% altered data were retained for analyses. Data for which more than 30% of the total number of epochs were deemed unusable (i.e., >10% of data required alteration in three or more epochs) were completely excluded from analyses (e.g., Creaven et al.2014; Gates et al.2015; Lunkenheimer et al.2018; Suveg et al.2019).

Following cleaning, research assistants exported RSA values that were computed in MindWare using the natural logarithm of the variance in heart rate period within the frequency bandpass related to respiration (0.24–1.04 Hz for children and 0.12–0.40 Hz for adults; Fracasso et al.1994). In total, nine youth had incomplete RSA data due to technical difficulties. The duration of the LEGO task was originally 10 min, but parent–child dyads habituated to the task after approximately 5 min (i.e., RSA values for most participants returned to baseline levels). A 5‐min task is also consistent with prior work in this broad area (Gray et al.2024; Hale, Morrow, et al. 2023). Thus, all physiological data included only the first 5 min of the interaction task. Eleven epochs of child RSA, including the final epoch from the resting task, followed by the 10 epochs during the stress task (i.e., the first 5 min), were used to model trajectories of RSA. Reliability checks were conducted by a senior graduate student on 20% of the data to ensure optimal data quality and cleaning compliance. For data to be considered reliably cleaned, RSA values needed to differ by less than or equal to one‐tenth between independent cleaners. In instances of discrepancies, the members of the physiological cleaning team met as a group to discuss. The cleaning value obtained by the majority of the group was then retained for analyses. Reliability guidelines were established through consultation with a MindWare representative and a review of the literature (Quigley et al.2024).

Two child RSA averages were computed to calculate RSA suppression. The first average was for the 10 epochs of baseline and the second for the 10 epochs of LEGO. A difference score was then computed by subtracting the baseline average from the LEGO average. A negative difference score represented a decrease in RSA from the baseline to the LEGO task (i.e., suppression), whereas a positive score indicated an increase in RSA from baseline to stress task (i.e., augmentation).

Once calculated, the RSA instability values were detrended from both linear and quadratic trends. This additional step was conducted in order to isolate instability as a measure of within‐person change, rather than reflect systematic change across time. The new, detrended values are reported across analyses.

Mothers completed the nine‐item Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ‐9; Kroenke et al.1999). Example items include “Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless” and “Thoughts that you would be better off dead or of hurting yourself in some way.” Items are answered on a 4‐point Likert scale ranging from 0 =Not at allto 3 =Nearly every day. Both English and Spanish versions of the PHQ‐9 show adequate internal consistency (Martinez et al.2023; α = 0.88 in this study). Twelve percent of mothers were in the moderate range (10–14), and 6.06% of mothers scored in the moderately severe range (15–19).

Mothers reported on their anxious symptoms using the Generalized Anxiety Disorder seven‐item scale (GAD‐7; Spitzer et al.2006). Example items include “Feeling nervous, anxious, or on edge” and “Worrying too much about different things.” Items are answered on a 4‐point Likert scale ranging from 0 =Not at allto 3 =Nearly every day. A total score was calculated (α = 0.89). Approximately 10 percent (10.1%) of mothers were in the moderate range (10–14), and 8.08% of mothers scored in the severe range (15–21).

Mothers reported on their child's internalizing symptoms using the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire's (SDQ) five‐item subscale for emotional problems (Goodman1997). Example items include “[My child has] many worries or often seems worried” and “Often unhappy, depressed, or tearful.” Items are answered using a 3‐point scale ranging from 0 =Not at allto 2 =Certainly true. This scale has been used reliably with Spanish‐speaking parents (Español‐Martín et al.2021). A total score was calculated to model overall internalizing symptoms, and internal reliability was adequate (α = 0.67). Fourteen percent of children were in the borderline symptom range, and 9% were in the clinical/severe range.

First, to model maternal internalizing symptoms, mothers’ anxious and depressive symptom scores were standardized and then combined to make a single composite score. Then, a latent variable was constructed to model IIPA using the dyad's interpersonal positive affect and the mother's and child's intrapersonal expressed positive affect as the three factor loadings. A latent variable allows for more accurate measurement of IIPA when compared to individual observed variables, as a latent construct minimizes measurement error. Latent variables also capture the shared variance between factor loadings, a necessity when working with nested, dyadic data (Kline2016; Ledermann and Kenny2017).

Then, the three indices of RSA were calculated. To model trajectories of child RSA regulation, a series of latent growth curve models were estimated usingMplusVersion 8.2 (Muthén and Muthén2017). Eleven epochs of child RSA were used, beginning with the final epoch from the child's resting task, followed by ten 30‐s epochs (i.e., the 5 min of the task) across the LEGO paradigm. The final resting epoch was used as a proxy for the child's usual resting RSA. A no‐growth model was first estimated, followed by a linear trend, a quadratic trajectory, and then finally a latent basis model (Wickrama et al.2016). Chi‐square difference tests were compared to determine optimal fit. Fit indices were also compared across models to determine the best‐fitting trajectory: the comparative fit index (CFI), Tucker–Lewis index (TLI), root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), and standardized root mean square residual (SRMR). For the CFI and TLI, values closer to 1 demonstrate better fit, whereas values closer to 0 and less than 0.08 suggest a sound fit for RMSEA and SRMR (Bentler1990; Hu and Bentler1999).

Finally, three structural equation models were carried out. Across all models, IIPA served as the independent variable with income, child age, and internalizing symptoms (mother and child) as covariates. In the first model, RSA suppression was the dependent variable. In the second, instability was the outcome, and for the third, indicators of the RSA trajectory were used. Missing data were handled using full information maximum likelihood (FIML; Muthén and Muthén2017).

As for the models with RSA suppression and instability as the outcome variables, with six predictors (i.e., IIPA, income, child age, maternal depressive symptoms, maternal anxiety symptoms, child internalizing symptoms), a power estimate was conducted using G‐Power 3.1 (Faul et al.2009). With a medium‐sized effect (f2= 0.15), a power of 0.80, an alpha level of 0.05, and two‐tailed statistical tests, the estimated sample size to detect effects was 92. When compared to other types of models (e.g., repeated‐measures ANOVA and dependentt‐tests), latent growth modeling has been shown to have greater power for detecting small‐ and medium‐sized effects (Fan and Fan2005). Previous simulation studies have considered multiple facets when determining the power of a latent growth model, such as the number of measurements, sample size, and effect size (Diallo et al.2014; Fan and Fan2005). For 91 participants, 10 timepoints of measurement for each participant are sufficient to capture quadratic change (Diallo et al.2014). Thus, for the present study with 11 epochs of data per child and a sample size of 91 with complete RSA data, resulting in 1001 unique RSA datapoints, the present study had sufficient power for detecting medium‐sized RSA change effects using latent growth modeling.

See Table1for means, standard deviations, and correlations between study variables.

Descriptive statistics and correlations for demographics and study variables.

Note:Family annual income was coded with 1 = $0–$5000, 2 = $5001–$10,000, 3 = $10,001–$15,000, 4 = $15,001–$20,000, 5 = $20,001–$25,000, 6 = $25,001–$30,000, 7 = $30,001–$35,000, 8 = $35,001–$40,000, 9 = $40,001–$50,000, 10 = $50,000–$60,000, 11 = $60,001–$70,000, 12 = $70,001–$80,000, 13 = $80,001–$90,000, 14 = $90,001–$100,000, and 15 = $100,001+. Child gender was coded with 1 = boy and 2 = girl.

Abbreviations: EP, emotion problems; GAD, Generalized Anxiety Disorder; PHQ, Patient Health Questionnaire; RSA, respiratory sinus arrhythmia; SDQ, Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire.

All three manifest variables significantly loaded on the latent construct for IIPA (interpersonal affect:β= 0.60,SE= 0.20,p= 0.003; mother intrapersonal positive affect:β= 0.67,SE= 0.14,p< 0.001; child intrapersonal positive affect:β= 0.79,SE= 0.16,p< 0.001). Model fit was not assessed, as the latent variable was just identified.

On average, children displayed a drop in RSA from baseline to the LEGO task (M= −0.69,SD= 0.71). In this multiple linear regression, maternal and child internalizing symptoms alongside income were entered as covariates. IIPA was not significantly related to child RSA suppression but was associated in the expected direction (β= 0.17,SE= 0.10,p= 0.070). Income (β= −0.07,SE= 0.03,p= 0.006) and child age (β= −0.12,SE= 0.06,p= 0.035) significantly related to less RSA suppression. See Figure1for all regression weights.

Model of standardized regression coefficients for IIPA relating to child RSA suppression.

Children exhibited an overall change in RSA values across the LEGO task (i.e., RSA instabilityM= 0.73,SD= 0.08). Income and internalizing symptoms were again entered as covariates. Similar to RSA suppression, IIPA was not significantly associated with RSA instability, but the association was in the expected direction (β= 0.06,SE= 0.04,p= 0.124). Figure2provides a pictorial representation.

Model of standardized regression coefficients for IIPA relating to child RSA instability.

A series of latent growth curve models were calculated to examine the ideal trajectory for child RSA regulation across the LEGO task. When examining the chi‐square difference scores, results suggested that the linear model was an improvement over the no‐growth model, and the quadratic model was statistically improved compared to the linear model. The chi‐square was not significantly different for the latent basis model compared to the quadratic model. Next, examination of fit indices occurred (see Table2). The no‐growth and linear model fits were inferior to the quadratic and latent basis. The RMSEA and SRMR were the same across the quadratic and latent basis models. The CFI and TLI differed by one one‐hundredth, with the quadratic model reporting 0.96 for both fit indices, while the latent basis was 0.97. Analytic literature proposes that any CFI or TLI value at, or above, 0.95 indicates sound model fit (Bentler 1990; Hu and Bentler1999). Based on fit alone, the quadratic and latent basis models fit similarly well. With fit indices suggesting similar fit, and chi‐square model comparisons and analytic literature recommending the most parsimonious model (Wickrama et al.2016), the quadratic trajectory was selected to model child RSA regulation.

The estimated means of the intercept, slope, and quadratic terms were statistically significant. The intercept (M= 6.17,SD= 0.13,p< 0.001) represented the average resting RSA value at the last epoch of baseline. The negative slope (M= −0.14,SD= 0.04,p< 0.001) indicated an overall downward linear trend in RSA, suggesting general physiological suppression from baseline across the LEGO task. The positive quadratic term (M= 0.10,SD= 0.001,p< 0.001) indicated an overall acceleration of the trajectory (see Figure3).

IIPA and the RSA intercept were unrelated, suggesting IIPA was not significantly related to the child's resting RSA (β= −0.14,SE= 0.16,p= 0.383). IIPA was significantly related to the linear slope (β= 0.56,SE= 0.20,p= 0.004) such that more IIPA resulted in less RSA suppression across the stress task. Age was related to the downward linear slope—children showed greater decrease (i.e., suppression) with age (β= −0.30,SE= 0.10,p= 0.006). IIPA was negatively associated with the quadratic function (β= −0.55,SE= 0.22,p= 0.011), suggesting that as IIPA increased, children exhibited overall deceleration. Deceleration implies that children employed physiological resources and then returned to recovery slower when compared to those engaged in less IIPA. Age was positively related to the quadratic function (β= 0.29,SE= 0.12,p= 0.013), with children demonstrating greater use of physiological resources followed by a steeper return to homeostasis with age. See Figure4and Table3for regression coefficients and Figure5for a graphical depiction of the RSA trajectory at varying levels of IIPA (−1SD, mean, +1SD).

Model of IIPA relating to the trajectory of child RSA regulation.

Unstandardized regression coefficients relating to child RSA trajectory terms.

Note:Significant (p< 0.050) regression paths are italicized.

Abbreviation: IIPA, inter‐ and intrapersonal affect.

Graph of RSA trajectory at varying levels of IIPA.

Guided by a self‐regulation promotion framework (Murray et al.2019), the current study examined IIPA in Black and Latinx parent–child dyads in relation to three indicators of children's RSA regulation: suppression, instability, and a trajectory model. Results did not support hypotheses regarding relations between IIPA and youth's RSA suppression or instability. However, results showed a significant association between IIPA and children's RSA regulation when modeled as a trajectory. Relations between IIPA and trajectory indicators highlight the benefits of examining self‐regulation promotion indices in relation to distinct facets of RSA regulation within racially and ethnically minoritized families. Rather than using a composite score to represent physiological regulation, associations with trajectory indicators provide insight into what regulatory aspects (starting point, linear change across time, rate of change) IIPA differentially influences. Further, trajectory modeling aligns with the neurovisceral integration model (Thayer and Lane2000), which suggests that RSA ebbs and flows during social interactions. Specifically, trajectories allow for examination into at what point children are suppressing RSA (i.e., either initially or across time), and how IIPA uniquely relates to the identified regulation pattern. The level of granularity allotted through trajectory modeling allows for the examination not only of “what” influences RSA regulation but also of “how” IIPA is associated with children's RSA regulation.

No support was found for the relation between IIPA and RSA suppression, though the trend was in the hypothesized direction (i.e., more IIPA was associated with greater suppression). Prior work suggests that children employ physiological resources to respond to environmental demands and engage in social interactions (Byrd et al.2022; Cui et al.2015). This means that generally, adaptive RSA is reflected in a drop, or suppression, when moving from rest to a stress task (Beauchaine2001). However, there is a growing body of work that suggests that RSA regulation may be influenced by the degree of perceived social support; in the context of high social support, RSA suppression may not be needed (Hastings and Kahle2019; Shahrestani et al.2015; X. Zhang et al.2020). Although children generally displayed RSA suppression in response to a stressful task, perhaps the perceived social support reduced the degree of physiological resources needed by children and thus mitigated the hypothesized association between IIPA and child RSA suppression. Additionally, child age was negatively related to suppression. Older children may have found the task less demanding, thus requiring fewer physiological resources to regulate. Additionally, less suppression with age may be a reflection of developmental advancements in physiological regulation as children age (Eisenberg et al.1998; Feldman2012; Lunkenheimer et al.2017; Murray et al.2019). Importantly, the overall positive trend aligns with theoretical postulations such that when compared to lower levels of positive social exchange, increased social engagement coincided with youth's greater RSA suppression.

The association between IIPA and RSA instability was also nonsignificant, but again, in the expected positive direction. Theoretically, adaptive RSA functioning is thought to be characterized by fluctuations in the use of physiological resources (i.e., instability) across a task (Thayer and Lane2000; Xu et al.2024). Prior work found that instability was positively related to other indices of child self‐regulation (Xu et al.2024). Albeit nonsignificant, the positive association between IIPA and child RSA instability in the present study aligns with theoretical postulations and prior work. However, it is peculiar, and worth noting, that internalizing symptoms were also significantly and positively related to youth's RSA instability. Prior work found that RSA instability during a stress task was related to emotional inhibition for Chinese school‐age youth (Xu et al.2024). Emotional inhibition during the school‐age developmental period has been associated with internalizing symptoms (Feng et al.2011; Viana et al.2021), so perhaps in this way, the findings are consistent with broader work. However, Xu et al. (2024) hypothesized that perhaps emotional inhibition is adaptive in the context of Chinese cultural values regarding respect and emotional restraint. Nevertheless, given the limited work examining RSA instability in youth in relation to broader socioemotional and psychological adjustment, there is a need to further examine RSA instability in relation to indices of child adjustment across contexts.

In support of the hypotheses, IIPA was related to the linear slope and quadratic term of the RSA trajectory. Conceptually, increasing stress requires greater RSA regulation to adaptively respond to one's environment, resulting in RSA depletion across task engagement (Ritz et al.2020). Although RSA suppression can speak to the differences in average RSA during rest and social engagement, the linear slope of the trajectory highlights the overall trend in RSA across the LEGO task. Results from the present study suggest that with increasing mother–child expression and exchange of warm, positive affect, children required less RSA regulation during the LEGO task. It is plausible that for youth who were more positively and emotionally engaged with their mothers, the LEGO task was perceived as less stressful, resulting in the need for fewer physiological resources. Mother–child interactions hallmarked by warm, positive exchange scaffold children's self‐regulation broadly, including physiological regulation (Feldman2012; Lunkenheimer et al.2017).

IIPA was also significantly related to the RSA trajectory's quadratic term. Results indicated a negative association between the two variables, suggesting that at higher levels of IIPA, children demonstrated a reduced rate of change (i.e., deceleration) across the LEGO task. Stated another way, children with high IIPA employed physiological resources at a slower rate initially and then returned to physiological homeostasis more slowly than youth with less IIPA (Brooker and Buss2010). The identification of deceleration in the context of IIPA is consistent with the idea that, in supportive contexts, children may not need to employ high levels of physiological regulation (Brooker and Buss2010). Such findings further dovetail those of prior work that identified an inverted U‐shaped quadratic trend for children during a resting task in the context of high levels of family support (R. Zhang and Wang2025). The U‐shaped quadratic trend suggests that in the context of support, children initially show an increase in RSA when faced with an environmental challenge simultaneously with social support. The presence of social support seems to buffer the need to employ high levels of physiological regulation. This explanation of the impact of social support on the dynamic RSA trajectory may also help explain the somewhat perplexing pattern noted for child age. Age was negatively related to the slope and positively related to the quadratic term, indicating older children showed an overall greater linear decline and a faster return to homeostasis than younger children. This may demonstrate an increased ability to respond to environmental cues while not remaining in an activated state. Alternatively, perhaps older children are relying less on mothers for emotional support and regulation. Thus, as children exercise greater autonomy, the benefits of IIPA for RSA regulation may be dampened by an urge to respond to environmental cues alone. Future work is needed to better isolate the impact of age on dynamic RSA trajectories.

Findings provide unique insights into the value of trajectory modeling for RSA regulation in relation to self‐regulation promotion indicators (i.e., IIPA). Through trajectory modeling, the present study demonstrated that children initially suppressed, murr then gradually returned to homeostasis (see Figure1). Building upon prior work (Brooker and Buss2010), findings suggest that children immediately employed physiological resources to engage with the task, then gradually returned to homeostasis. Results also imply that children do not use as many physiological resources, nor do they employ them as quickly in high‐IIPA contexts as they do in less positive interactions with their mothers. The granularity allotted when analyzing children's RSA regulation as a trajectory allows for a visualization of how IIPA uniquely relates to the trend and speed of physiological change across the task. In doing so, researchers are able to parse apart the specific physiological regulation components influenced by dyadic self‐regulation promotion indicators and better delineate how mother–child affective interactions are differentially relating to components of physiological regulation. Psychological and health research with racially and ethnically minoritized families also often involves small sample sizes (Cornejo‐Torres et al.2022; George et al.2014). Trajectory modeling has more power to detect significance than single scores, such as suppression and instability, given the inclusion of multiple datapoints to quantify the trend (Diallo et al.2014). Statistical advantages from trajectory modeling help maximize valuable data within Black and Latinx populations and may illuminate significant relations that otherwise might remain nonsignificant due to lack of power.

Findings should be considered within the context of limitations. Given sample size constraints, Black and Latinx families could not be examined separately. With unique cultural experiences, future work with larger sample sizes should examine potential variations in relations between IIPA and child RSA regulation across the two groups. Second, the paradigm used in the present study was designed to be mildly stressful and to reflect typical parent–child interactions during the school‐age period. Future work may seek to examine physiological regulation in the context of increasingly challenging tasks. Third, although both behavioral and physiological data were collected within the same 5 min of the interaction task, IIPA was captured at a global scale across the task, whereas RSA data were captured via 30‐s epochs during the 5‐min interaction. Future work should consider capturing multimodal variables at the same timescale to reduce differential effects due to time. Fourth, while our conceptualization of IIPA clearly captured affect expression and dyadic exchange of warmth between parents and children, we did not capture how parents may teach self‐regulatory skills to their child during the task. This teaching is the third prong of warm, responsive relationships as posited by Murray et al. (2019) and thus provides an avenue for behavioral observation in future studies. Finally, the present study adopted a structural equation modeling approach to handle nested data. Future studies may seek to adopt a multilevel approach to assess for similarities and differences between results.

Guided by a self‐regulation promotion framework, the current study used a self‐regulation promotion framework to examine relations between IIPA and physiological regulation in Black and Latinx parent–child dyads. Associations between IIPA and youth's RSA suppression and instability were nonsignificant but in the expected directions. IIPA was significantly, and differentially, related to indicators of children's RSA regulation when using trajectory modeling. Results suggest that children utilized fewer physiological resources and employed those resources at a slower rate than those dyads with increasing IIPA while controlling for income and internalizing symptoms. The present findings also help fill gaps in the current understanding of self‐regulation promotion indicators during the school‐age period, a developmental stage ripe with transitions and increased regulatory demands alongside continued reliance on parents. Results provide further support for the idea that supportive relationships can buffer the physiological impacts of stress. Further, results suggest that trajectory modeling of children's RSA provides a granular view of adaptive youth physiological regulation.