To assess the feasibility and acceptability of a new integrated behaviour therapy of contingency management and problem-solving therapy (CM-PST) in a fully remote format for young adults with alcohol use disorder (AUD).

Both online and in-person recruitment in Chicagoland, USA.

20 young adults aged 18–24 with mild, moderate or severe AUD participated in the study.

The CM-PST intervention included 8 sessions over 12 weeks, focusing on problem-solving skills, goal setting, stress management and behaviour change to support alcohol abstinence. Participants used digital materials, tracked weekly goals, submitted two times per day breathalyser tests for incentives and completed homework assignments.

In this study, participants were assessed before and after the intervention using mixed methods to evaluate feasibility based on recruitment rates, retention rates of 85% and high adherence to the PST sessions defined as attendance and remaining for the full duration of each session, and acceptability based on participant feedback of ≥3 on Client Counselling Satisfaction Scale.

A total of 20 participants completed the study. The mean age of the study participants was 21.35 (SD=2.18), ranging from 18 to 24 and 55% of participants were women. Adherence to the PST sessions, which include attending all eight PST sessions and remaining for the full duration of each session, was 100.0%, indicating strong engagement. Participant feedback highlighted the influence of CM on behaviour and decision-making and the effectiveness of PST in addressing life challenges.

This study’s results indicate that the CM-PST intervention is feasible and acceptable among participants, although the benchmark of 85% expected retention rate was unmet. Future studies could explore strategies to improve retention rates.

This study included participants from diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds, enhancing the representativeness of perspectives across different groups.

The qualitative component used semistructured interviews and an established content analysis approach, which allowed for systematic and flexible exploration of young adults’ in-depth perspectives on the integrated contingency management and problem-solving therapy intervention. This approach enabled the identification of key themes grounded in participants’ lived experiences, providing rich contextual understanding that complemented and deepened the interpretation of the quantitative findings.

The sample size was relatively small, which may limit the breadth of perspectives captured and the generalisability of findings.

All participants were either currently enrolled in college or had completed college, which may further limit the generalisability of the findings to individuals with different educational backgrounds.

Innovative and practical behaviour-change interventions targeting young adults with AUD are critical given the increasing prevalence and significant adverse lifetime health implications. One recommended AUD treatment called contingency management (CM) is a behavioural therapy that offers rewards for positive behavioural change.9,11CM treatment promotes positive lifestyle and behavioural change in AUD sufferers (eg, abstinence) by providing positive reinforcers when treatment aims are met and by withdrawing reinforcement when undesired behaviours occur (eg, drinking). For instance, abstinence may be rewarded with vouchers for retail goods (positive reinforcers), whereas drinking may result in the loss of these vouchers (negative reinforcers).12 13While CM increased abstinence across various substance use disorders,14this specific CM model used in this study included two times per day remote breathalyser submissions and allowed real-time objective monitoring of alcohol use and helped participants stay motivated by connecting their behaviour to direct reinforcement. By introducing this novel CM model, the current study extends prior work and explores its feasibility and acceptability in a population that is often underserved by traditional treatment models.

Problem-solving therapy (PST), on the other hand, helps individuals to develop practical skills to identify and manage the external stressors underlying substance use behaviours.15 16PST is an evidence-based brief psychotherapy treatment for various health issues among young adults as well as individuals of all ages.17,19Derived from cognitive-behavioural intervention (CBT),16PST places specific emphasis on practical coping strategies and executive functioning.20It is effective in mitigating AUD like CBT but is particularly beneficial for managing everyday stressors among young adult individuals experiencing AUD.21By integrating CM with PST, the intervention targets both external motivation (via CM) and internal coping mechanisms (via PST) and allows a more sustainable approach to behaviour change. This novel approach endeavours to provide a comprehensive and tailored intervention strategy for young adults struggling with AUD.

The primary objectives of this pilot single-arm clinical trial are twofold: (1) to evaluate the feasibility of implementing a combined CM and PST intervention (CM-PST) in a fully remote format, and (2) to assess the acceptability of this intervention among participants. Feasibility was assessed in terms of recruitment and retention rates, intervention delivery and adherence to PST sessions defined as attendance and remaining for the full duration of each session, while acceptability was gauged through participant feedback and satisfaction measures.

Understanding the feasibility and acceptability of this intervention is crucial for informing the design and implementation of larger-scale trials aimed at evaluating its effectiveness in promoting sustained alcohol abstinence. Ultimately, the findings from this pilot study have the potential to contribute meaningful insights into the development of more effective and accessible interventions for young adults with AUD, thereby addressing a critical gap in current treatment approaches.

A single-arm clinical trial was conducted to examine the feasibility and acceptability of the CM-PST intervention using a mixed methods design. Feasibility and acceptability were assessed against the established benchmarks as outlined in the following criteria. Feasibility was assessed through recruitment rates, with the goal of 20 participants enrolled in the newly invented CM-PST, participant retention relative to our benchmark of 85% expected retention at 12 weeks22and proportion of adherence to the PST sessions which include attending all eight PST sessions and remaining for the full duration of each session, relative to our benchmark of 90% expected adherence to the sessions.22,24Acceptability was evaluated through participant feedback via a questionnaire, semistructured interview and engagement metrics postintervention. The study protocol was registered to ClinicalTrials.gov (Identifier:NCT05778734) on 9 March 2023. As seen in the online supplemental protocol,online supplemental figures 1 and 2showed the CONSORT (Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) flow of participant recruitment and the visual summary of study protocol.

Participants were recruited from July 2023 to April 2024 via web-based advertisements (eg, Craigslist, Facebook, Instagram and online bulletin board), and flyers posted at high-traffic metropolitan and college campus areas–common areas, libraries, dorms, student health centres and lecture halls, along with nearby businesses, at churches and community centres and web-based services that help match those interested in research participation with available studies, such as ResearchMatch.org, UI Health Research Registry, The New Normal and Center for Clinical and Translational Science. A total of 128 individuals aged 18–24 expressed interest and completed the online screening survey, with 48 (37.5%) successfully passing the initial online screening and receiving invitations to participate in the study, with 20 total electing to participate. Written consent was received from all participants involved. Individuals who met the following criteria were included: (1) young adult aged between 18 and 24 years, (2) being able to speak English, (3) currently consuming alcohol ≥1 day/week as well as meeting the criteria for (past year) AUD on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) and diagnosed with AUD (mild, moderate or severe) using Alcohol Use Disorder and Associated Disabilities Interview Schedule-5 (AUDADIS-5), (4) completing written informed consent, and (5) being able to visit baseline screening. Exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) being treated in the past 6 months for AUD or substance use, (2) current utilisation of medications for AUD treatment (eg, naltrexone), (3) lifetime DSM-5 diagnosis of any psychotic disorder, including bipolar disorder or schizophrenia, (4) recent utilisation of psychoactive drugs, verified via positive drug toxicology results, (5) self-reported pregnancy or intention to become pregnant.

The CM-PST intervention was fully delivered remotely: PST sessions were conducted via Zoom, and the CM component involved behavioural monitoring using Soberlink breathalyser device. Intervention sessions were led by trained counsellors (a registered nurse or licensed psychologist) who were experts in delivering behavioural interventions, including PST. The CM-PST intervention included eight individual PST sessions delivered via Zoom over 3 months. The first four sessions were provided weekly, followed by the remaining four sessions biweekly. The first session lasted approximately 45 min, with involvement of the counsellor delivering insight into the alcohol use effects on both physical and mental health. Additionally, the first session also introduced participants to the CM-PST approach and explained the expectations for the intervention and their role.

Each of the following sessions lasted about an hour. During the sessions, participants and counsellors focused on setting personal goals, developing action planning and practising coping skills to manage various stress and challenges related to school, family, relationships or work. During these sessions, participants and counsellors used a booklet for CM-PST intervention to collaboratively explore issues in the participant’s daily life. The counsellor then taught structured approaches to resolving these problems. Participants were assigned the behaviour goal of alcohol abstinence, measured via two times per day remote breathalyser submissions.

With regard to the CM component, incentives were contingent on a negative breathalyser reading and self-reported abstinence from alcohol since the prior session. Incentives were provided to encourage alcohol abstinence, starting with a US$10 gift card and increasing by US$5 for each subsequent measurement point in which no alcohol use was detected or reported, up to a maximum of US$25. However, no gift cards were provided on days when participants tested positive or reported alcohol use, and the reward amount was reset to US$10. Homework assignments prior to session attendance (ie, relaxation, walking and listening to music) were organised by the counsellor, with the booklet serving as a practical tool for monitoring progress.

Prospective participants were invited to teleorientation after a positive screen (score of 8 or higher) on the AUDIT survey. During teleorientation, the study staff conducted the structured interview using AUDADIS-5 to diagnose and determine AUD severity status. Participants who met the criteria for AUD severity (ie, past year mild, moderate or severe AUD) during the interview proceeded to the next phase of the study, where the study staff carefully explained informed consent and answered any questions participants had prior to obtaining informed consent. In addition, the study staff demonstrated the use of the Soberlink SL2 breathalyser and how participants will submit two times per day remote breathalyser test results. After teleorientation, participants completed baseline measures and then completed follow-up postintervention assessments at 3 months.

Participant retention was assessed throughout the study by monitoring the proportion of the sample enrolled and retained at 3 months relative to our benchmark of 85% expected retention goal. Reasons for study withdrawal were documented.

Participant adherence to the PST sessions was measured by documented attendance of all eight PST sessions and remaining for the full duration of each session. The intervention intensity was evaluated based on the frequency and duration of participants’ attendance at PST sessions. Participants were considered to meet adherence criteria if they remained for the entire duration of each session and completed greater than or equal to 90% of the PST sessions.

We assessed acceptability of CM-PST by mean item score on the Client Counselling Satisfaction Scale (CCSS)25Questionnaire, versus our benchmark of ≥3. The CCSS25is adapted from the Genetic Counselling Satisfaction Scale, which was found to be reliable (Cronbach’s alpha=0.80).26It consisted of a 6-item and assessed participants’ satisfaction with counselling to examine intervention acceptability. Participants rated six statements describing the degree to which the intervention was acceptable using a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The mean item score is calculated with scores greater than or equal to 3, indicating that the intervention is acceptable. To assess acceptability, we combined the 3 months participants’ CCSS scores and qualitative satisfaction data from semistructured interviews. The postintervention semistructured interview explored participants’ experiences with the CM-PST intervention, focusing on its impact on behaviour, decision-making and problem-solving abilities. Participants shared insights into the helpful and challenging aspects of the intervention, and how the intervention could be improved and offered additional reflections on their overall experience (table 3).

Participants were asked to submit the breathalyser test results two times a day, shortly after they wake up and before they go to bed based on times that research staff randomly assigned to them. Soberlink SL2 breathalyser allows participants’ photo to be taken automatically, which was compared with a baseline image obtained at the beginning of the intervention phase to verify identity. The PI and research staff monitored the test results and validated that the participant’s picture captured matched a reference picture. Text messages were sent to participants as reminders when a test result was collected, and the test result was obtained up to 15 min before the scheduled testing time and 1 hour after the scheduled testing time. If a participant missed a scheduled breathalyser submission, the entry was recorded as missing data. Comparing postintervention BAC levels with baseline levels helped assess the CM-PST intervention effectiveness. Reduction in BAC levels indicates progress in reducing alcohol consumption and improving overall health.

Descriptive statistics were conducted to summarise the study participants’ demographic characteristics and their alcohol-related behaviours. The mean, SD and frequency distributions were used to describe participants’ age, gender, race/ethnicity, education, alcohol use severity and frequency, amount of alcohol consumed and BAC levels. In addition, participant retention and adherence rates were calculated as percentages of the total recruited sample.

Postintervention qualitative interviews were performed via Zoom video and audio-recording. Audio recordings were transcribed verbatim and then were content analysed consistent with the methodology used in our previous study.36Content analysis was carried out by the first and second authors employing a directed deductive approach.37Following the development of the initial codebook, the first author conducted the primary analysis by reviewing postintervention transcripts, while the second author performed a secondary analysis, identifying any coding discrepancies by employing distinct colour highlighting. Preliminary codes were derived from the main categories addressed in the semistructured interview guide (eg, what aspects of the intervention did you find challenging) and were categorised under one main theme associated with participants’ feedback on the feasibility and acceptability of CM-PST intervention.

The first two authors had a regular meeting to review all codes and categories, ensuring their consistent application across the transcripts. Any disparities were deliberated on and resolved by mutual consensus of coding agreement.

Adverse events were carefully monitored to ensure the safety of participants and to assess the benefits and risks of the CM-PST intervention. Notably, there were no adverse events reported throughout the entirety of this study.

Prior to the pilot feasibility study, we conducted semistructured focus group interviews in November 2022 with 19 young adults. The purpose of the focus groups was to gather feedback on the CM-PST intervention’s feasibility, acceptability and logistical demands. Participants reported that two times per week in-person urine drug screening, as initially proposed, would be burdensome and intrusive, citing concerns about scheduling and travel. Based on this feedback, we revised the study design to implement remote BAC monitoring using Soberlink breathalysers. The focus groups also informed the importance of incentives and practicality of problem-solving techniques to enhance participant engagement.36Although not originally framed as formal patient and public involvement, the focus group study made a significant contribution to developing a participant-centred and feasible study design.

Table 1presents the demographic characteristics of the study participants. A total of 28 participants were recruited, and 20 participants completed all study procedures included in data analysis. The mean age of the study participants was 21.35 (SD=2.18), ranging from 18 to 24 and 55% of participants were women. Regarding race/ethnicity, 60% of participants identified themselves as Asian, followed by Hispanic (20%) and African American and white (10% respectively). More than half (85%) of the participants were college students who were currently enrolled in a 4-year undergraduate programme.

As for participants’ retention, a total of 28 participants were initially recruited and 71.43% (20/28) completed all the study procedures. The main reason for attrition was the participants’ schedule and time conflicts. Also, all completed participants attended all eight sessions of PST and remained for the full duration of each session. Although a few participants reported alcohol consumption during the study period due to social drinking, adherence to the PST sessions was 100%, indicating strong engagement. Furthermore, the mean CCSS score for satisfaction with the intervention was 4.23 (SD=0.78), with 95% of participants reporting a score of 3 or higher, indicating the acceptability of the CM-PST intervention.

Table 2represents the alcohol-related characteristics of study participants. At the beginning of the study, the alcohol use severity for each participant was evaluated using AUDADIS-5 scores. 65% of participants showed severe AUD for the past year and 75% showed severe AUD for their lifetime. Additionally, we measured the level of alcohol use problem with AUDIT score, and while more than half (60%) of the participants indicated moderate or severe alcohol use problem at baseline, more than half (55%) of the participants indicated no or low risk of alcohol problem at 3 months postintervention measure. Furthermore, most of the participants (85%) reported drinking alcohol more than once and consumed more than 1 glass of liquor within 3 months at baseline. The average BAC results decreased over the study, with 90% of the participants having 0.000 at the baseline but 100% of the participants having 0.000 post 3 months intervention. Participant feedback emphasised the impact of CM on the decision-making process and behaviour and the effectiveness of PST in addressing life problems as well.

Notes: alcohol use severity at baseline (AUDADIS-5); Level of alcohol use problem (AUDIT); BAC level (Soberlink Breathalyser).

AUD, alcohol use disorder; AUDADIS-5, Alcohol Use Disorder and Associated Disabilities Interview Schedule-5; AUDIT, Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test; BAC, blood alcohol concentration level.

Table 3provides details of the results. Participants provided valuable insights into various aspects of the intervention. They highlighted the effectiveness of CM, noting that the reward system kept them motivated and helped reduce alcohol consumption. PST was found to have practical benefits in addressing life challenges and improving communication with loved ones. While all intervention components were perceived as helpful, participants pointed out specific tools, such as the breathalyser, and noted logistical challenges like remembering to use it consistently. The intervention’s duration and session lengths were well received, with participants expressing satisfaction with the 12-week design.

Adherence to the PST sessions was 100%. The study exceeded the adherence goal of 90%, with all 20 participants who remained in the study attending all eight PST sessions and remaining for the full duration of each session. This indicates strong engagement and commitment to the PST sessions.

Despite not meeting the 85% retention benchmark, the CM-PST intervention demonstrated feasibility in a fully remote format. The ability to recruit participants and achieve high adherence and satisfaction rates suggests that CM-PST can be effectively integrated into a variety of settings. Our study results are consistent with previous research suggesting that the combination of CM with other therapeutic approaches, such as cognitive-behavioural therapy, has been revealed to be effective and feasible in various settings.14Notably, this is the first to demonstrate that CM is feasible and effective in combination with PST, indicating its potential to support the young adult population struggling with AUD.

The significant reduction in severity of alcohol use problems postintervention highlights the potential effectiveness of the CM-PST intervention. The decrease in average BAC at postintervention measurement indicates that the intervention has an effective impact on alcohol use problems. Participant feedback underscores the importance of both CM-PST in influencing behaviour and addressing life challenges. Future research should explore long-term outcomes and optimise strategies to maintain reductions in alcohol consumption.

Qualitative feedback underscores the motivational impact of CM and the practical benefits of PST. However, logistical challenges with breathalyser and time management were noted. Overall, the intervention demonstrates strong potential for integration into a variety of settings and clinical practice, with future studies needed to address retention strategies and optimise logistical aspects.

The findings of our study should be interpreted with several limitations in mind. First, the sample size was relatively small (N=20), which limits the generalisability of the study findings. Second, the age range of participants was restricted to young adults’ population (18–24 years), either currently in college or completed college/graduate school. This further limits the relevance of the findings to broader populations, particularly those outside this specific age and educational demographic.

Additionally, the primary reason for participant attrition was busy schedules and time conflicts, which may have influenced the retention rate and could be addressed in future studies. In regard to BAC monitoring, the device we used (Soberlink) typically suggests a schedule of three tests daily.35In alignment with this standard, the current study initially implemented three BAC tests per day; however, considering that most participants were students balancing academic responsibilities or employment and BAC monitoring is ideally recommended 2–4 times per day,35the research team, in consultation with the Soberlink team and based on participants’ feedback, adjusted the BAC monitoring windows to two tests per day. While this reduced testing frequency fits better with participants’ schedules, it is important to note that participants’ alcohol consumption between tests cannot be entirely ruled out, considering that BAC decreases approximately 0.015% per hour in adults.35Lastly, the self-reported nature of qualitative feedback and CCSS may be subject to response biases. Future research with larger, more diverse samples and strategies to improve retention could provide more robust and generalisable results.

Nevertheless, the study results indicate that the CM-PST intervention is feasible and acceptable among participants, although the benchmark for retention was unmet. The retention rate of 71.43% is still considered good,24given the external factors influencing attrition. Exceeding the adherence goal of 90% with a 100% adherence rate of PST sessions highlights the intervention’s potential for strong engagement. High satisfaction scores further demonstrate the acceptability of the intervention. Future studies could explore strategies to improve retention rates and further evaluate the long-term outcomes and scalability of the combined CM-PST intervention.

This study tested the feasibility and acceptability of the newly invented CM-PST intervention for young adults with AUD. The study results indicate that the CM-PST intervention is feasible and acceptable among participants. The main themes explored during the interview were the impact of CM on the decision-making process and behaviour, the effectiveness of PST in addressing life challenges, helpful aspects of the intervention and their impact, challenges faced during the intervention process and temporal dynamics of intervention engagement. Future studies could explore strategies to improve retention rates.

We would like to acknowledge Mary Wickramasekera for her valuable support in providing intervention sessions for participants in this study.