Age is one of the most important study variables in demographic research. Accurate information on respondents’ ages and the population’s age structure is critically important. Misreporting of age can lead to incorrect statistical estimates and may mislead policymakers when formulating effective policies. Therefore, understanding the quality of age data is important before conducting any analysis.

Age statements are commonly affected by two types of errors: age heaping, which is the tendency to round ages to specific digits (usually 0 or 5), and systematic exaggeration or underestimation of age. Age heaping, also known as digit preference, often occurs when individuals do not know their exact age and either report a rounded number or ask enumerators to record an approximate age they consider suitable. Age heaping and misreporting are critical issues in many developing countries [1]. Researchers’ findings have shown that age heaping and digit preference are present in many Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) [2–5]. Similarly, age misreporting is commonly observed in other surveys and national censuses across developing countries [4,6–10], often leading to distortions in age distributions. Understanding patterns in reported ages is essential for assessing the quality of age data.

The debate about age misreporting among demographers is not a new one. A century ago, an American demographer, George Chandler Whipple (1866–1924), gave an index to measure the tendency for human age misreporting. Whipple introduces the index as a ratio of the number of people reporting their age as a multiple of 5 by one-fifth of the total sample/population size in the age range of 23–62 years [11]. It assumes a linear distribution of ages in a 5-year age range. Younger ages (0–22) and older ages (63 and above) are excluded as the linearity assumption is not plausible for these ages. Later, other techniques [12,13] have been developed and used to measure age misreporting in surveys and censuses for age distributions. However, the Whipple index remains the most well-known among all other indices due to its underlying properties and simple calculation.

Demographers have also been trying to introduce new indices to measure the accuracy of age reporting. Whipple index follows the assumption of rectangular distribution, which assumes an equal number of persons in each 10-year age group. It identifies the preference (avoidance) of terminal digits of an age ending at ‘0’ and ‘5’. Whipple used the range 23–62 (both inclusive) years of age for the calculation of the quality index for age data. This age range can be changed, but the rectangular distribution and linearity assumptions must be achieved. The attractive benefit of the Whipple index is that it is valid for a single year of age distribution. However, the Whipple index only measures age heaping at two digits, multiples of 5 (ending with 0 or 5), and fails to express age misreporting at the other 8 digits.

Original Whipple’s index (WI) is calculated as a ratio of the people reporting their ages as a multiple of 5 (terminal digit 0 or 5) and the persons in the age range 23 and 62.

This modification provides a meaning to distinguish between the ages ending with terminal digits 0 and 5, based on the property of rectangular distribution and linearity assumption over 10 years, like the originalWI.

When there is no digit preference/avoidance, these digit-specific modified Whipple indices are equal to 1 [15].

The third modification is suggested by Spoorenberg [16]. He felt the extensions proposed by Noumbissi to all ten digits are not practical for spatial, temporal, and spatiotemporal comparisons. He introduced a summary index based on the modified Whipple index proposed by Noumbissi and named it the Total Modified Whipple Index (Wtot).

whereWiis the digit specified modified Whipple index for each of the ten digits (0–9) developed by Noumbissi.

If all reported ages end in 0 or 5, thenW0=W5=5and all otherWi=0. Hence,Wtotreaches the maximum value of 16. This index can be used as a general measure of the quality of age reporting in complement to Noumbissi’s previous development [16].

Since Spoorenberg’s total modified Whipple index (Wtot) is derived from Noumbissi’s modification, it inherits these shortcomings and may not provide a reliable summary measure of age misreporting across all terminal digits. A need exists for a summary index that accurately captures age misreporting or heaping across the entire specified data range (23–62 years) without the aforementioned mathematical inconsistencies. To address these limitations of existing indices, this research proposes a re-modification of the Total Modified Whipple Index. The new index is constructed in the logic of the original Whipple index, applying its structure systematically to each terminal digit using the mathematically consistent framework of the Rogers Whipple Indices (WIi). In doing so, this research aims to contribute to the ongoing development of demographic quality measures by presenting the Robust Modified Whipple Index (RMWI) as a more reliable and comprehensive tool for assessing age misreporting.

This section introduces a new measure to assess the quality of age data: the Robust Modified Whipple Index (RMWI). In the next section, we also proposed a criterion for interpretingRMWIvalues to evaluate the accuracy of reported age data.

If all reported ages are heaped at a multiple of 10, i.e., end at digit 0, thenWI0= 10and all otherWIi= 0,and hence,RMWI = 18.

The analysis in this study focuses on the age range of 23–62 years, a commonly used span in demographic research that helps reduce distortions from age misreporting, especially at younger and older ages. This range effectively captures the core adult population, where age heaping is typically most evident, making it a suitable base for evaluating digit preference or avoidance. However, the proposed Robust Modified Whipple Index (RMWI) is flexible and can be applied to any rectangular age distribution where each terminal digit (0–9) has an equal probability. For example, alternative ranges such as 15–64 or 20–79 can be used depending on the research objectives and the quality of the available data.

To smooth the interpretation of theRMWIvalue and provide a standardized assessment of age reporting quality, a criterion is proposed that parallels the widely used United Nations (UN) standards for the original Whipple Index. The United Nations proposed the following (Table 1) criteria to assess the quality of age reporting based on the Whipple Index [17].

If all ages are correctly reported, i.e.,WI0= WI1= WI2= … = WI9= 1,RMWI = 0.

If all reported ages are heaped at a multiple of 10, i.e., end at digit 0,WI0= 10and all otherWIi= 0,RMWI = 18. Similarly, if all reported ages ended in a single digit, i.e., any oneWIi= 10and all otherWIi= 0, RMWI = 18.

If any two digits are reported only (say 0 and 5), thenWI0= WI1= 5and all otherWIi= 0, RMWI = 16.

Hence, the value ofRMWIranges between 0 and 18. A value of “0” represents the perfection of data. As the value ofRMWIdeviates from 0, it approaches the imperfection of the reported ages, implying that the ages are misreported. These theoretical bounds of theRMWI(ranging from 0 to 18) represent benchmarks for perfect accuracy and extreme misreporting, respectively. Based on the index’s structure and its sensitivity to varying patterns of digit preference, the following ranges are proposed to classify the quality of age data based onRMWI(Table 2).

The proposed classification inTable 2offers a practical scale for assessing the quality of age reporting using theRMWIindex. ARMWIvalue between 0.00 and 0.19 indicates perfect accuracy of age reporting, reflecting negligible digit preference, with less than 1% of individuals misreporting their age. Values from 0.20 to 0.99 suggest fairly accurate data, indicating 1% to 4.99% age misreporting likely due to weak digit preference. A range of 1.00 to 1.99 signals moderate age misreporting (5% to 9.99%), indicating clear evidence of age misreporting. Values between 2.00 and 2.99 represent poor or rough data quality, pointing to widespread age misreporting. Finally, aRMWIvalue exceeding 3.00 suggests very poor data quality, where at least 15% of individuals are likely misreporting their ages. The percentage ranges ofRMWIare derived from the mathematical structure and its sensitivity to departures from uniformity of terminal digits. A higherRMWIreflects a greater deviation from expected digit uniformity, suggesting more significant age misreporting. This interpretive framework adds practical value to theRMWIby enabling comparisons across datasets and populations. By incorporating all ten terminal digits with equal weight and offering a robust summary measure, theRMWIand its associated criterion provide a more comprehensive and statistically consistent approach than earlier modifications.

The following sections illustrate the practical application of theRMWIand this criterion using real-world and simulated datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in identifying and quantifying age misreporting.

To test the proposed index,RMWI, we applied it to the Standard Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) datasets from three countries: India, Turkey, and Pakistan. A comparison with existing indies was carried out to enhance the analysis. Standard DHS surveys collect primary data using four types of model questionnaires. Among these questionnaires, a household questionnaire is used to collect data on the characteristics of the household for all the usual residents of the household. This is the main questionnaire that includes all respondents who are used to get information for other types of questionnaires. In this household schedule, information is available on age, sex, education, relationship to household head, residence, and other details. Reported age data from individuals from this household questionnaire is used for this research. The sample size used for this study is given inTable 3[18]. More details about the DHS surveys can be found at the DHS website (www.dhsprogram.com).

Among the three selected countries for analysis, the quality of age reporting is considered poor in India and Pakistan [2], and average in Turkey. Appendix Tables A1, and A2 give the digit-specific Whipple indexes (WIi) and digit-specific modified Whipple indexes (Wi) for India, Turkey, and Pakistan respectively.

Fig 1shows the digit preference (avoidance) using the digit-specific Whipple indexesWIi(Roger’s indexes) and modified Whipple indexesWi(Noumbissi’s indexes). Technically, if all digits are correctly reported, then the value of all digit-specific indexes must be 1. If the value of an index for any digit is greater than 1, it is the preferred digit by people telling their age at the time of data collection. This may cause heaping at those digits. If the value of the index is less than 1, this shows the avoidance of that digit.

Data Source: Standard DHS of India (2005–2021), Turkey (1993–2018) and Pakistan (1990–2018) [18], Figures based on the Author’s calculations of digit-specific Whipple indexes.

The accuracy of the total index (calculated for all ages) depends on the accuracy of digit-specific indexes. In this section, we compare two digit-specific indexes used to calculate the total modified Whipple index (Wtot) and the proposedRMWIindex.

If no preference (avoidance) of any specific digit is present, then the digit specified index for any single terminal digit must be equal to 1, corollary, sum of all ten indexes must be equal to 10. Statistically, for any population where age is reported correctly, then the probability of each terminal digit of age must be equal to 0.1, and∑i=09Pi=1for all terminal digits i = 0, 1, 2, …, 9. Practically, some digits are preferred (Pi> 0.1), and some are avoided (Pi< 0.1), however, the sum of all digit probabilities must be 1, and corollary, the sum of all digit indexes (DIs) must be 10. Therefore, in any population following a rectangular distribution and assuming the linearity assumption, the following results can be obtained for individual terminal digit probability (Pi) and digit index (DIi).

Digit-specified indexes calculated in tables Appendix A1 and A2 showed that in all thirteen datasets of three countries, few digits are preferred (DIi> 1) and others are avoided digits (DIi< 1). This is expected in all countries with age misreporting. As a result, the probability of individual terminal digits is greater than 0.1 (preferred) or less than 0.1 (avoided). To compare the age misreporting indices, look deeply at Appendix A1 and A2. In the calculation of digit specified indexes, two methods,W(modified Whipple i.e. Noumbissi’s indexes), andWI(original Whipple), are used. Apparently, all digit-specified indexes calculated by the two methods look similar. However, only theWImethod has an equal probability of selection of individual terminal digit i = 0, 1, 2, …, 9. In theWmethod, terminal digits 1, 2, 3, and 4 have some added probability than the remaining six digits. These four terminal digits are overestimated as the probability of selection of each of these terminal digits exceeds 0.1 (see equations7e–10e). As a result, for theWmethod, the sum of probabilities exceeds 1 and the sum of digit indexes exceeds 10 (see the last column of tables Appendix A1 and A2). Statistically, the sum of all ten terminal digit indexes must be ‘10’ in any method. This is not plausible in theWmethod due to over selection of terminal digits 1, 2, 3, and 4. Therefore, this method fails to give a robust index value for individual terminal digits. Only theWImethod is based on the mathematical formulation of the selection of equal probability for all possible terminal digits of human age (0, 1, 2, …, 9). Hence, in the digit-specified indexes, onlyWImethods give a robust index for all terminal digits. Summary indexWtotbased on the individual digit specified indexes with an unequal probability of selection of each terminal digit, is non-robust. In theWImethod, all terminal digits have an equal probability of being included, and hence all digit-specified indexes have equal weightage for any terminal digits. Therefore, the newly proposed summary indexRMWIis based on theWImethod, is robust and based on a mathematical formulation. Bar charts presented inFig 2give the side by side comparison of digit-specific Whipple indices from Noumbissi’s method (Wi) and the Whipple method (WIi) using Turkey (2013–2018) DHS data. Clearly, terminal digit 1, 2, 3 and 4 gives overestimation in both datasets.

Data Source: Standard DHS of Turkey (2013 and 2018) (ICF, 1985–2023), Figures based on the Author’s calculations of digit-specific indexes.

To strengthen and support our claim, we include the raw datasets from the Tukey demographic and health surveys (TDHS) in Appendix Table A4 for ages 21–64. We calculate new digit indexes using equations5eto14ewith the expanded age range of 21–64 years. We named these indexes asWi[21–64]fori = 0, 1, 2, …, 9. Denominators of the digit indexes ‘1, 2, 3, and 4’ ranges beyond the range 23–62 [equations:7e,8e,9e, and10e] change their digit index values.Table 4gives three different types of digits specified indexes. The first part ofTable 4shows the digit-specific Modified Whipple indexWi’s (Noumbissi’s method) based on the age range of 23–62 years (calculated in the previous section). The second part gives the new type of digit-specified index based on the age range of 21–64 calculated using the digit-specific Modified Whipple indexWi[21–64](Noumbissi’s method). The third part gives the digit-specific Whipple indexWIi’s (calculated in the previous section). The last column of the table shows the sum of all digit indexes for all ten digits. In all six survey datasets, results for digit-specific Modified Whipple indexes showed that digit ‘3’ is a more preferred digit than digit ‘5’ (see columnsW3andW5). However, when we use a complete range of denominators to calculate the digit-specific Modified Whipple indexW3[61–64]for terminal digit ‘3’, the results are reversed. Digit 5 is more preferred than digit ‘3’ [see columnW3[61–64]andW5[61–64]]. This is all due to the overestimation of digit 3 in Noumbissi’s method. Additionally, digit ‘2’ is pretended as a preferred digit in five datasets, while originally the digit ‘2’ was avoided in a few survey years. Digits 1, 2, 3, and 4 are overestimated in the digit-specific Modified Whipple index method. The pattern and rank of terminal digits calculated using the age range (21–64) are quite similar to the digit-specific Whipple index. Therefore, the digit-specific Whipple indexes give robust results as compared to the digit-specific Modified Whipple indexesWi’s. The sum of all ten digits for any method must be equal to 10. The sum of digit indexesWi’s are greater than 10 due to the overestimation of digits 1, 2, 3, and 4. The sum digit indexesWi[21–64]are very near to 10, while the sum of digit indexesWIi’sare exactly equal to 10. Additionally, in raw datasets of Turkey, the sum of all ages with the terminal digit ‘5’ is more than the terminal digit ‘3’ (see Appendix Table A4).

Comparably, all three indices give the same patterns over the years and can be used for spatial, temporal, and demographic comparisons within nations and globally. The original Whipple index is a good choice to check the quality of age data when we are interested in checking the heaping at digit 0 or 5 only. The other two indices will be used to check the overall quality of reported ages. However, digit-specific modified indexes (Noumbissi’s indexes) give overestimated values for digits 1, 2, 3, and 4. This indicated a misestimation of preference for the digits 1, 2, 3, and 4. For example, Noumbissi’s index for digit 3 in the Turkish dataset showed that it is more reported than digit 5. Which is not the actual case. Noumbissi’s indexes calculated for digits 1, 2, 3, and 4 give the wrong representation of the original reported digit due to the inaccuracy of equations (seeequations 8–10or 8e–10e). TheWtotbased on these inconsistent equations did not provide reliable and accurate information about the quality of age data for individual digits. The newRMWIindex is based on mathematical equations (equations 16–26) with the same methodology proposed in the original Whipple index and by Roger et al. This modification gives more reliable and robust results based on mathematical models as compared to the previous proposal by Spoorenberg.

Although the comparison figures ofWtotandRMWIboth give the same pattern (Fig 3). However,Wtot, based on Noumbissi’s version, is impractical for comparison and doesn’t give a summary value for any dataset. It is also based on unrealistic and non-mathematical formulations and, therefore, not robust.RMWIis based on the Whipple index, and the whole data range is thus preferred overWtot. RMWIgives more precise, robust, and accurate results as compared toWtot.

To evaluate the performance of the proposed modification, we applied it to several simulated datasets of different sizes. All series are randomly generated, and there is no observed heaping at the digits 0 and 5.Fig 4gives the digit-specified Whipple and modified Whipple indexes for all ten digits for different series, whileFig 5presents a side-by-side comparison of digit-specific Whipple indices from Noumbissi’s method (Wi) and the Whipple method (WIi), clearly illustrating the overestimation issue in Wi and the balanced distribution inWIi. For ease of presentation, we comparedRMWIwithWtotandWI,respectively (Table 6). In 1stcomparison ofRMWIandWtot, consider series S1, whereWI0= 1.229is most preferred followed byWI9, WI8, WI3, WI2, WI1, WI7, WI5, WI6,andWI4= 0.723(most avoided digit) whileW3= 1.264is most preferred followed byW0, W2, W7, W8, W9, W1, W5, W6and W4= 0.843(most avoided). Digit 3 ranked up from place 4thto 1st, and digit 2 ranked up from place 5thto 2nddue to over-estimation of digits 2 and 3 inWtotor simply an over-estimation in Noumbissi’s indexes. This type of over-estimation in Noumbissi’s indexes makesWtotpenniless, andWtotremains incapable of accessing the quality of age data. Hence,RMWIgives a more accurate and robust estimate for the quality of age distribution.

This study introduces the Robust Modified Whipple Index (RMWI), a new measure for assessing the quality of age data.RMWIaddresses the limitations of earlier indices by incorporating all ten terminal digits and applying a mathematically consistent framework. The proposedRMWIwas applied to DHS datasets from Pakistan, India and Turkey, to evaluate the misreporting of age data. A comparison with existing summary indicesWIandWtotwas carried out. The results revealed that theRMWIconsistently captures age heaping across all terminal digits and provides a more nuanced view of misreporting than existing indices. The index demonstrated a visible variation in age data quality across surveys. The 1stwave of Pakistan DHS, i.e., PDHS 1990–91, showed the highestRMWIvalue, indicating the poorest age reporting. In contrast, the PDHS 2017–18, the most recent wave, showed notable improvement, suggesting progress in data collection practices or increased respondent awareness over time. The comparative results from India and Turkey further validate the utility of theRMWI, as it accurately reflected expected patterns of digit preference and misreporting present in previous studies [2]. TheRMWIresults also aligned well with simulated datasets. In side by side comparison of digit indexes,Fig 5revealed the overestimation of terminal digitsW1,W2,W3andW4, reinforcing theRMWIrobustness and sensitivity.

In the overall summary of all three indices, theWImeasures heaping at ages ending in digits 0 and 5, ignores distortions that occur at other terminal digits. This narrow scope underestimates the true extent of age misreporting. TheWtotis based on Noumbissi’s indexes, includes all ten digits but suffers from mathematical inconsistencies. Denominators for some digits (1, 2, 3 and 4) falling outside the selected age range lead to overestimation of these indexes and unreliable results of the summary index.RMWIimproves uponWtotby using Rogers’ digit-specific Whipple Indexes (WIi), each calculated with a consistent denominator (ages 23–62). This method yields more accurate digit preference and avoidance patterns and better reflects real-world and simulated data, as seen in the applications to India, Pakistan, and Turkey.

To support interpretation, a new criterion classifiesRMWIvalues into quality of age reporting categories: 0.00–0.19: Perfect (< 1% error), 0.20–0.99: Fairly accurate, 1.00–1.99: Moderate, 2.00–2.99: Poor and ≥3.00: Very poor (≥ 15% error). These thresholds correspond to estimated levels of age misreporting and offer a practical tool for comparing datasets. The inclusion of an approximate percentage of people reporting incorrect age associated with each quality category further enhances the practical utility of the criterion.

Hence, by taking the digit-specific indexes for all ten terminal digits based on Regar’s Whipple method, theRMWIprovides a more accurate summary measure of the overall quality of age reporting compared to bothWIandWtot. The two main advantages of the proposedRMWIoverWIandWtotmake it more useful in various aspects.

The originalWIis limited to capture heaping at a multiple of five (digits 0 and 5), whereasRMWIcovers all terminal digits.

RMWIoffers a more robust and mathematically consistent approach thanWtot.

Therefore, to assess the overall quality of age distribution,RMWIis a better choice thanWIandWtot. The proposed index is fully applicable for spatial, temporal, and sociodemographic comparisons in assessing the quality of age data. Its standardized calculation and interpretive criterion allow for meaningful comparisons of age data quality across different geographic regions, over time, and among various population subgroups. In this study, theRMWIwas applied to datasets from two South Asian countries and Turkey. Future research should test its applicability across a broader geographic scope, including sub-Saharan Africa, to further demonstrate its robustness and generalizability across diverse demographic settings. Quality of age reporting can also be compared by other demographic characteristics such as gender, education, or socioeconomic status. Finally, the proposed index is simple to calculate, fairly constructed on mathematical formulation, and fully based on all age digits. It is practically compatible with the original Whipple’s index and the total modified Whipple index and provides a more robust measure of the overall quality of age reporting.

The proposed index is not only applicable to age data collected during interviews, surveys or censuses, but it is equally applicable for assessing the digit preference and quality of age reporting in human mortality data. Ongoing demographic and health transitions in the Global South call for better and more comprehensive demographic data covering the entire age span, including working and old age. Therefore, precise identification of age-reporting problems is crucial for producing reliable population exposures and demographic rates in the region. Further research is needed to develop plausible and transparent adjustment methods to address distortions in survey or census based measures.

Afza Rasul is grateful to the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan for awarding a stipend to visit the Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research (MPIDR) for Ph.D. Research under the Faculty Development Program for Pakistani Universities and to the MPIDR for welcoming as a guest researcher and providing a research platform.