Emergency department (ED) visits have gradually increased throughout recent years, contributing to the widespread problem of ED overcrowding. The purpose of this study was to develop a rapid rule-out strategy for patients with acute chest pain that integrates clinical characteristics and Heart-type fatty acid binding protein (H-FABP) to improve ED patient care. H-FABP point-of-care test results of 130 patients were integrated into a modified HEART score, with a score ≤ 3 points indicating rule-out of acute coronary syndrome (ACS). Diagnostic performance was assessed with comparative analyses between the Ex-ACS protocol, the conventional HEART score, and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 0/1-h algorithm. In this study cohort, eight patients (6.2%) were diagnosed with NSTEMI and none were misclassified as rule-out by the novel protocol. The Ex-ACS protocol ruled out ACS in 63 patients (48.4%) with a median time of 16 min, notably faster than the ESC 0/1-h algorithm (123 min). The Ex-ACS protocol demonstrated a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 51.6%, surpassing the traditional HEART score which exhibited a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 46.3%. The Ex-ACS Protocol offers a promising strategy for rapid ACS exclusion, potentially improving patient flow in EDs.

Emergency department (ED) overcrowding represents a significant global issue that is associated with an increased incidence of unexpected cardiac arrest and mortality1–4. Furthermore, it leads to deficits in patient care, including delayed initiation of treatment, less attention given to patients in pain and increased administration of incorrect medication5–7. This problem is due to multiple factors, including an increasing number of elderly patients presenting, seasonal illnesses, an increasing prevalence of severe and complex health issues, the inappropriate use of emergency services and insufficient healthcare infrastructure8,9. Consequently, methods for the expeditious identification and discharge of patients without critical illnesses appear to be advantageous, given the average length of stay of approximately three hours and 28 min in Germany10.

Among the numerous challenges faced by healthcare professionals, the efficient management of ED visits for acute chest pain, a symptom accounting for 5.0 to 10.0% of all ED visits, has been identified as a significant contributor to overburdening of staff and the healthcare system11,12. It is estimated that only 5.1 to 15.7% of patients presenting with acute chest pain have an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) as the underlying cause of their symptoms, despite the high occurrence of chest pain. Consequently, a significant proportion of patients (57.4–86.0%) could be discharged. Among these patients, the majority (51.7–59.0%) are diagnosed with “non-specific chest pain”11,13. Therefore, it is prudent to develop strategies that can accelerate the diagnostic steps for a large number of patients in order to identify true emergencies and discharge non-emergent cases more quickly.

According to the 2023 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndrome, the rule-out of NSTEMI (non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction) using a single high-sensitivity troponin measurement is only recommended when the patient presents more than three hours after symptom onset and the high-sensitivity troponin is very low18. If these criteria are not met, at least a second measurement at 1–2 h is required to rule-out ACS using the ESC 0/1 h–0/2 h algorithm.

Heart-type fatty acid binding protein (H-FABP) is found in high concentrations within cardiomyocytes14. As a marker of myocardial damage, it has emerged as a potential tool for the rapid assessment of patients presenting with chest pain15,16. Its sensitivity for detecting the early stages of ACS, combined with its rapid assay turnaround time, may offer a promising adjunct to traditional diagnostic protocols. The HEART score is an established tool for stratifying the risk of ACS17. It facilitates clinical decision-making based on a combination of patient history, electrocardiogram (ECG) findings, age, risk factors, and troponin levels.

The objective of this study is to assess the efficacy of a novel rapid rule-out strategy that integrates the H-FABP test into a modified HEART score. The rapid kinetics of H-FABP renders it a promising marker for early triage. By relying on a single-timepoint biomarker measurement at presentation, we aimed to accelerate clinical decision-making and avoid the need for serial biomarker testing in low- to intermediate-risk patients.

The study was carried out according to the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice guidelines. The Ethics Committee of the province of Salzburg, Austria, evaluated and approved the research design before data collection began (EC No: 1061/2022).

Enrolled participants were recruited from all patients ≥ 18 of years of age who presented at the ED of the University Hospital of Salzburg with a primary complaint of acute chest pain. The inclusion period was from November 2022 to October 2023.

Patients with suspected non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome (NSTE-ACS) or non-ischemic cause for their complaints (such as musculoskeletal chest pain, pleurisy, pneumothorax or pulmonary embolism) were included in the study. Patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) or very high risk NSTE-ACS were excluded from further analyses. Furthermore, patients who could not provide written informed consent, were incapacitated or under 18 years old were excluded from the study.

STEMI, NSTEMI and NSTE-ACS were defined according to the current guidelines of the ESC18.

The first blood samples were taken on average within 7.1 min of the patient arriving at the emergency department. After routine blood sampling, the H-FABP point-of-care test (POCT) was conducted as per manufacturer instructions (CLEARTEST®Cardio rapid test, REF C3 213190-10; Servoprax GmbH, Wesel, Germany; data on file). Informed consent was obtained from all participants. In brief, whole blood samples were collected from patients in an EDTA tube. Subsequently, a volume of 100 µl from the sample was promptly applied to the designated field of the test cassette utilizing the microvette provided within the test kit. After that, the buffer solution was added. The outcome was determined precisely after a period of 10 min. A test displaying a positive control line along with a positive H-FABP line was classified as positive.

The modified HEART score was then calculated using the test result and labelled “HEART1” (shown in Fig.1). H-FABP was used as a dichotomous variable in the modified HEART score, consistent with the binary output of the POCT and the categorical scoring format of the original HEART score. A positive test was assigned a score of two points, while a negative test was assigned a score of zero points. The completion time of HEART1 was recorded and utilized for the calculation of the duration of the “Ex-ACS protocol”. The medical personnel responsible for the patient’s care were blinded to the results of the POCT.

The modified HEART score for the calculation of HEART1.1Risk factors for atherosclerotic diseases included hypercholesterolaemia, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cigarette smoking, a positive family history of CAD or obesity (BMI > 30).

HEART2 was determined using the results of the conventional high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT) assay from the local laboratory. The “Conventional HEART score” represents the documented time taken to calculate HEART2. Finally, HEART3 was calculated when a second hs-cTnT laboratory test was required to rule-out ACS in patients with early symptom onset (less than 3 h), as specified by the latest ESC guidelines18. The ESC 0/1-h algorithm was applied according to the latest ESC guidelines (which involved assessing low clinical likelihood by the treating physician and a 0 h/1 h Δ in hs-cTnT < 20%)18.

Moreover, the subsequent clinical progression was documented in terms of whether the patients were admitted to the hospital or discharged. The recruited participants’ diagnosis and follow-up after hospital release were examined and incorporated into the statistical analysis.

A statistical analysis was conducted using the R programming language (version 4.2.1., R Core Team (2013), R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria;http://www.R-project.org/, accessed on 12. October 2023) in conjunction with the packages “Hmisc”, “glmnet”, “polycor”, “readxl”, ”CombiROC”, “ggplot2”, “Verification”, “Rcmdr”, “pastecs”, “ggm”, “RItools”, “Rcpp”, “QuantPsyc”, “openxlsx” and “pROC” and SPSS (version 22.0, SPSS Inc, USA). GraphPad Prism (Version 5.01, GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) was utilized to produce the figures. The data distribution underwent a thorough examination, employing both visual analysis and the Shapiro-Wilk test. Metric features were reported as median ± interquartile range (IQR) since the data were not normally distributed. The Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn’s post hoc test were utilized to compare the medians of unpaired data, while the Wilcoxon signed rank test was employed for paired data (for the variable “time to diagnosis” for example). The analysis of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves was conducted with the objective of evaluating the area under the curve (AUC) of the different variables for exclusion. As suggested by Six et al.17, ACS rule-out was established when the HEART score equaled ≤ 3 points. These predetermined threshold values served as the basis for the computation of specificity, sensitivity, negative predictive value (NPV), and positive predictive value (PPV). In order to evaluate the predictive capability of each variable for exclusion, a univariate binary logistic regression analysis was conducted. To ensure standardization, continuous variables were first transformed into z-scores. Furthermore, a stepwise backward logistic regression was employed to determine the most predictive variable. P-values less than 0.05 were regarded as statistically significant.

The study encompassed a cohort of 130 patients who presented to the ED with a primary complaint of acute chest pain.

Baseline characteristics are depicted in Table1. The mean age of the enrolled patients was 63 ± 19 years. Of these, 46.2% were female (n= 60) and 53.8% were male (n= 70). A significant portion of patients (46.9%) was categorized as “urgent” based on the Manchester Triage System (MTS), and 7.7% of patients were taken directly to the ED by an attending emergency physician. The leading cardiovascular risk factor was found to be hypertension, with a prevalence of 62.0%. This was followed by a positive family history for cardiovascular disease (38.0%) and hyperlipidaemia (32.0%). The median baseline hs-cTnT level was at 5.5 ng/l (see Table1).

Baselines characteristics of investigated patients. Abbreviations: bmi = body mass index, CRP = C-reactive protein, hs-cTnT = high sensitive troponin T, NT-proBNP = N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide, IQR = interquartile range.

ROC curves were created to evaluate the rule-out of ACS using the Ex-ACS protocol (HEART1), the conventional HEART score (HEART2), and the ESC 0/1-h algorithm. The comparison between the results of the Ex-ACS protocol and the conventional HEART score can be seen in Supplementary Fig.1. The area under the curve (AUC) for Ex-ACS was 0.900 (95% CI: 0.782-1), whereas the conventional HEART score achieved a comparable AUC of 0.926 (95% CI: 0.8413-1). There was no statistically significant difference between the two AUCs when DeLong’s test was calculated (p= 0.1424) (Table2).

Timing of different exclusion strategies in the study population.

Furthermore, the ESC 0/1-h algorithm had an AUC of 0.842 (95% CI: 0.697–0.988), which was similar to the two previously assessed approaches (see Table3).

The sensitivity, specificity, NPV and PPV for ACS rule-out were calculated for both the Ex-ACS protocol and the conventional HEART score, by defining a “positive” test as a score > 3 and a “negative” test as a score ≤ 3 (see Table4). For the Ex-ACS protocol, sensitivity and NPV were both 100%, as all 8 patients with NSTEMI were correctly classified as having scores > 3, and none were misclassified as rule-out. The specificity was 51.6%, and the PPV was 11.9% (8 out of 67 patients with scores > 3 had NSTEMI). Similarly, for the conventional HEART score, sensitivity and NPV were also 100%, with a slightly lower specificity of 46.3% and a PPV of 11.0% (8 out of 73 patients with scores > 3 had NSTEMI).

AUC of the respective protocols Ex-ACS, conventional HEART score and ESC 0/1-h algorithm.

In the study cohort, the proportion of patients diagnosed with NSTEMI based on laboratory determination of hs-cTnT was 6.2% (n= 8). The remaining 93.8% of patients (n= 122) were classified as rule-out cases.

Using the Ex-ACS protocol, 63 patients (51.6%) could be classified as rule-out within a median time of 16 min. A significantly longer median rule-out time of 123 min (p< 0.0001) was required with the ESC 0/1-h algorithm. Thus, compared to the ESC 0/1-h algorithm, the Ex-ACS protocol achieved a median reduction in rule-out time of 107 min.

Compared to the conventional HEART score, the Ex-ACS protocol facilitated a significantly faster rule-out process and enabled the exclusion of seven additional patients. Specifically, the median rule-out time was 16 min for the Ex-ACS protocol versus 67 min for the HEART score (p< 0.0001; see Table2; Fig.2).

Sensitivity, specifity, NPV and PPV of the respective protocols Ex-ACS and conventional HEART score.

NPV = negative predictive value; PPV = positive predictive value.

Boxplots of time to ACS exclusion with the respective protocols Ex-ACS, conventional HEART score and ESC 0/1-h algorithm.

A univariate binary logistic regression was performed to analyse the predictivity for rule-out of baseline covariates (see Sup. Table 1). Here, the standardized HEART2 score showed the strongest inverse predictive value for rule-out (B: -2.747, SE: 0.772,p< 0.001). In contrast, the highest positive regression coefficient for exclusion of ACS (B: 1.877, SE: 0.862,p= 0.029) was observed for stable hs-cTnT values (dichotomized as Δhs-cTnT < 20%).

The new Ex-ACS protocol (HEART1) demonstrated a slightly lower inverse predictivity for excluding ACS compared to the HEART2 score (B: -2.160, SE: 0.627,p= 0.001), as shown in Supplementary Table 1.

The variables " ACS probability”, “HEART1”, “HEART2” and “MTS category” were included in the regression model of the stepwise, backward logistic regression analysis. The variables “ECG changes”, “hs-cTnT”, “below20 (Δhs-cTnT < 20%)” and “Result of H-FABP POCT” were excluded to prevent multicollinearity, as they are already incorporated into the HEART score calculations. Of the variables included, HEART2 was the best predictor of exclusion determined by stepwise regression analysis (B: -2.661, SE: 0.855,p= 0.0019; AIC = 32.29, Nagelkerke R²=0.47).

The Ex-ACS protocol using H-FABP testing to calculate a modified HEART score in patients presenting with acute chest pain has demonstrated promising results. It significantly reduced the time to rule-out ACS, without compromising diagnostic accuracy. Hence, ROC analysis showed no significant difference between the three analyzed approaches regarding their accuracy for ACS rule-out. These findings are consistent with the growing body of evidence, suggesting the efficacy of integrating biomarkers with clinical risk scores in the emergency setting to improve the efficiency and safety of patient care19–21.

The Ex-ACS protocol’s diagnostic accuracy is comparable to traditional methods. These results align with previous studies, identifying H-FABP as a promising biomarker for early detection of myocardial injury22–24. Both the Ex-ACS protocol and the conventional HEART score demonstrated a sensitivity and NPV of 100%, correctly identifying all NSTEMI patients and ruling out none incorrectly. However, the PPVs remained modest—11.9% for the Ex-ACS protocol and 11.0% for the conventional HEART score—consistent with the low overall prevalence of NSTEMI (6.2%) in this study cohort. These results should be interpreted cautiously, particularly given the small number of ACS cases, which may affect the robustness of predictive estimates.

To address the issue of ED overcrowding, it is crucial to quickly identify patients who are at low risk of serious conditions and can be safely discharged, thereby improving patient flow and resource allocation in the ED. Implementation of the Ex-ACS protocol could alleviate ED crowding by improving the speed and accuracy of ACS rule-out and improving patient flow by eliminating unnecessary waiting times.

In the literature to date, H-FABP has not been found to be a reliable biomarker for ruling out ACS, either alone or in combination with other biomarkers15,25–28. Presently, only one study has investigated the utility of H-FABP POCTs in conjunction with clinical scores for an ACS rule-out strategy. In their study of 303 patients, Willemsen et al. compared various ACS rule-out strategies29. Two of the five clinical decision rules (CDRs) integrated H-FABP tests, with CDR 1 being similar to the Ex-ACS protocol. It combined H-FABP test results with clinical predictors such as dyspnoea, ST-segment changes, and chest pain characteristics. The rule-out properties exhibited a lower sensitivity (87.5% vs. 100%) and a lower NPV (97.2% vs. 100%) with comparable specificity (52.0% vs. 51.6%) and slightly higher PPV (17.7% vs. 11.9%) than the Ex-ACS protocol. In comparison with the Ex-ACS protocol, the study by Willemsen et al. utilized a lower rapid test cut-off for H-FABP (4ng/ml vs. 7ng/ml), and did not incorporate patient age or cardiovascular risk factors. Furthermore, the larger cohort size and higher prevalence of ACS (10.6% vs. 6.2%) likely resulted in an increased likelihood of false-negative classifications in comparison to the Ex-ACS protocol.

The comparison between HEART1 and HEART2 highlights the efficiency of the Ex-ACS protocol. HEART1 demonstrated a notable advantage over HEART2 in terms of reducing the time required to rule-out ACS. This was attributed to the use of a H-FABP POCT in the HEART1 protocol. In contrast, HEART2 relied on the outcomes of hs-cTnT assays conducted at a local laboratory, which inherently takes longer due to the nature of laboratory processing times. Of note, the Ex-ACS protocol also resulted in the exclusion of seven additional patients.

The potential use of the Ex-ACS protocol in the pre-hospital setting could revolutionize the initial management of patients with suspected ACS. By enabling rapid and reliable rule-out of ACS, the number of unnecessary presentations to EDs could be reduced. The ARTICA study has already shown that the incidence of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) at one year is low after pre-hospital rule-out of ACS using troponin POCT in low-risk patients30.

Current ESC guidelines emphasize the importance of serial hs-cTn testing for reliable rule-out in most patients, particularly those presenting within three hours of symptom onset. A one-time measurement is only considered safe in late presentation and very low high-sensitivity troponin values. Recognizing this limitation, the Ex-ACS protocol was designed to leverage the earlier release kinetics of H-FABP, enabling a single-test rule-out strategy. The objective of this study was to provide a clinical decision-support tool for time-sensitive ED settings, with the aim of reducing reliance on serial sampling and facilitating faster, yet safe, patient disposition.

Integrating H-FABP levels into a modified HEART score significantly reduced the time to rule-out ACS. This approach could improve the efficiency of emergency care without compromising diagnostic accuracy, potentially minimizing unnecessary hospital admissions and improving resource utilization.

Despite the promising results, this study has limitations that need to be taken into account. The recruitment of the study from a single hospital emergency department with 130 patients may limit the generalizability of the results. In particular, the small sample size increases the potential for statistical uncertainty. Another limitation of this study is the small number of confirmed NSTEMI cases (n= 8), which may affect the statistical power of subgroup analyses and increases the risk of overestimating diagnostic metrics. While the results suggest strong discriminatory performance of the Ex-ACS protocol, larger multicenter studies are needed to validate these findings and confirm the generalizability of rule-out thresholds.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The authors want to thank all participants and study personnel who were involved in this study.