Leucine-rich repeat-containing 15 (LRRC15) is a transmembrane protein that is highly expressed in the synovium of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Brevilin A (BrA), an active compound isolated fromCentipeda minima, exerts potent anti-inflammatory effects. However, the anti-RA effect of BrA and its underlying mechanism of action of BrA have not been fully elucidated.

Transcriptome analysis was performed to explore biomarkers of RA. An lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced RAW264.7 macrophage model, a TNF-α-stimulated RA fibroblast-like synoviocytes (RA-FLSs) model, as well as a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rat model were used to explore the anti-RA effects of BrA. Moreover, inhibition or overexpression of LRRC15 was performed to explore the role of LRRC15 signaling in the anti-RA effects of BrA.

Transcriptome analysis of patients with RA revealed that LRRC15 expression was significantly upregulated in the synovial tissue of RA patients. BrA significantly downregulated the expression of inflammation-related markers in cell models, and inhibited their proliferation and migration; Moreover, it significantly reduced joint swelling and cartilage damage in CIA rats. Further mechanistic studies suggest that inhibition of LRRC15 inhibits cell proliferation and migration; and overexpression of LRRC15 increases the protein levels of STAT3’s downstream metastasis-related markers.

Our findings suggest that BrA, a novel LRRC15 inhibitor, has promising anti-RA activity and potently inhibits LRRC15/STAT3 signaling pathway both in vivo and in vitro. This study not only supports the development of BrA as a novel therapeutic agent for RA treatment, but also paves the way for the development of other LRRC15-targeting therapeutic strategies.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13075-025-03629-1.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a long-term autoimmune disease that predominantly affects the joints. It is a prevalent condition that affects approximately 1% of the global population [1]. The precise pathogenesis of RA is still unknown. Currently, it is believed to involve a combination of immunological, environmental and genetic factors. The pathological process of RA is typically divided into four stages: synovitis, pannus formation, cartilage damage, and bone erosion. During these stages, fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs), which are located in the synovium, proliferate abnormally in an inflammatory environment and exhibit tumor-like invasiveness and migration. This is the major cause of cartilage damage in the joints. Additionally, FLSs release various adhesion molecules and inflammatory cytokines, which contribute to bone erosion and cartilage destruction. The migration of FLSs to unaffected cartilage also drives the progression of RA polyarthritis [2]. Without timely medical intervention, RA can cause significant disability and profoundly affects the quality of life of patients.

LRRC15 is a transmembrane protein that is highly expressed in the synovium of patients with RA [3]. Studies have reported that LRRC15 is activated in many types of cancer, including glioblastoma, sarcomas, ovarian cancer, etc [4]. The aberrant expression of LRRC15 is primarily found in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which are related to cancer metastasis and immune response [5]. Targeting LRRC15 for drug development has emerged as a feasible strategy. The LRRC15-targeting drug ABBV-085 has been shown to inhibit tumor growth in clinical practice [6]. However, further investigations are needed to elucidate the relationship between LRRC15 and the progression of RA, and to explore whether LRRC15 signaling is involved in the anti-RA effects of BrA.

Currently, the first-line treatment options for RA include disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), glucocorticoids, and other immunosuppressive medications. The aims of these drugs are to reduce inflammation, relieve pain, slow the progression of the disease, and improve joint function. Nevertheless, these drugs have various side effects, such as nauseaand potential damage to liver and kidney tissue. Hence, there is an urgent demand for the development of more effective and low-toxicity drugs for the treatment of RA.

Centipeda minimais a traditional Chinese herbal medicine frequently used to treat joint diseases. BrA is an active compound present inCentipeda minimathat has been known to have several pharmacological activities, including antitumor, anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressive, and anti-liver fibrosis effects [7]. The inhibitory effect of BrA on the JAK/STAT3 pathway in various tumors has led to its recognition as a potent STAT3 inhibitor [8,9]. BrA also exhibits excellent anti-inflammatory effects. It effectively alleviates LPS-induced lung damage, inflammatory infiltration, and the production of proinflammatory cytokines in LPS-induced acute lung injury [10]. In a DMM-induced osteoarthritis (OA) mouse model, BrA is reported to regulate the SIRT1/Nrf2/GPX4 signaling pathway to inhibit the production of MMP1 and MMP3 and alleviate joint damage in mice [11]. In this study, whether BrA exerts an anti-RA effect and its underlying molecular mechanism of action were investigated. We used an in vivo collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model and in vitro TNF-α-induced FLS and LPS-induced RAW264.7 cell models to analyze the anti-RA effects of BrA and explore its underlying molecular mechanisms.

BrA was purchased from Chengdu Desite Biotechnology Co. Ltd. (Sichuan, China; purity > 98%). LPS, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and Griess reagent were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Antibodies against COX-2, GAPDH and β-actin were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA); antibodies against iNOS, MMP9 and LRRC15 were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA); and antibodies against MMP2, STAT3 and phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). The pEX1-LRRC15 overexpression plasmid and LRRC15-siRNA were obtained from Suzhou GenePharma Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Suzhou, China). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits were obtained from Hangzhou MultiSciences (Lianke) Biotech Co., Ltd. (Hangzhou, China). TRizol, the Evo M-MLV RT Premix kit, SYBR Green Premix kit were purchased from Accurate Biology (Guangzhou, China). Recombinant Human TNF-α was obtained from PeproTech Inc. (Rocky Hill, NJ, USA). A hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining kit was obtained from Servicebio Technology Co., Ltd (Wuhan, China). Bovine type II collagen for CIA rat induction, incomplete Freund’s adjuvant (IFA) and complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA) were purchased from Chondrex, Inc (Woodinville, WA, USA). Multimer anti-rabbit/mouse IgG HRP for immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining was purchased from Wuhan BOSTER Bioengineering Co., Ltd (Wuhan, China).

Human RA-FLSs and mouse RAW264.7 macrophages were purchased from Guangzhou Jennio Biotech Co., Ltd, and National Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures (Shanghai, China), respectively. Cells were cultured in a humidified environment at 37℃ with 5% CO2,they were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, USA), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco, USA).

The cytotoxicity of BrA to RA-FLSs and RAW264.7 cells was determined by the MTT assay. RA-FLSs (5 × 10³ cells/well) or RAW264.7 (8 × 10³ cells/well) were inoculated into 96-well plates. Cells were then treated with various concentrations of BrA (0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 and 32 µM) for 24 h. Then, the MTT solution (20 µL) was added to each well. After a 4-h incubation at 37℃, 150 µL of DMSO was added. Subsequently, the absorbance of each well was determined by utilizing a microplate spectrophotometer at 570 nm (BD Biosciences, USA).

RAW264.7 cells were seeded in 12-well plates (1.5 × 106cells/well), incubated with LPS (1 µg/mL), or with both LPS and BrA (1, 2 and 4 µM) for 24 h. Then, Griess reagent was added to the cell supernatant after centrifugation to detect the NO level. The absorbance at 540 nm was measured using a microplate spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA).

The adhesion ability of RA-FLSs was analyzed using a cell adhesion detection kit (BestBio Science, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, the RA-FLSs (1 × 105cells/well) were inoculated into a 96-well plate pre-coated with Matrigel. Thirty minutes later, the non-adherent cells were discarded, and the absorbance of each well at 450 nm was detected. The cell adhesion rate was analyzed based on the absorbance.

Total protein of each sample was extracted and quantified, and equal amounts of the protein samples were subsequently transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. The PVDF membranes were blocked in TBST for 2 h. After blocking, the membranes were incubated overnight with primary antibodies specific to the target protein. After washing, the membranes were incubated with the secondary antibodies. Finally, protein signals were determined using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) detection reagents (Genebase Bioscience Co., Ltd, Guangzhou, China), and the gray values of the bands were quantified using Image J software V1.44.

Total RNA of RA-FLSs was extracted and reverse transcribed into cDNA using the TRizol and the Evo M-MLV RT Premix Kit. Finally, the mRNA expression level was determined using the SYBR Green Premix Kit in a QuantStudioTM 5 Real-time PCR system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Co., Ltd, MA, USA). Gene expression was normalized toGAPDHin each sample, and the results were analyzed via the 2−ΔΔCTmethod.

The levels of IL-6 and IL-1β released from LPS-induced RAW264.7 cells were detected using commercial ELISA kits according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, the cell culture supernatants were collected and incubated with the ELISA reagents. The absorbance was then measured to quantify the levels of cytokines.

According to our previous study [12], BrA at the indicated concentrations (1, 2 and 4 µM) was added to treat RA-FLSs for 24 h. Cells were seeded into 96-well plates (5 × 10³ cells/well) and stained with EdU for 12 h according to the experimental protocol (Beyotime Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China),after that,the EdU-positive cells were observed by fluorescence microscopy (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) and counted using Image J software V1.44.

The migration of RA-FLSs was analyzed using a wound healing assay. RA-FLSs were seeded into a 6-well plate (2 × 105cells per well) and cultured until the cell density exceeded 90%. Scratches were created via the use of a 10 µL pipette tip. TNF-α (20 ng/mL) and different concentrations of BrA (1, 2 and 4 µM) were added to the wells. At 0, 12, 24 h, the scratch width was photographed with an inverted microscope (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) and analyzed via ImageJ software V1.44. After 24 h of migration, the cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde and stained with crystal violet.

Negative control (NC) siRNA and LRRC15-siRNA were synthesized by Suzhou GenePharma Co., Ltd. (Suzhou, China). siRNA-NC or siRNA-LRRC15 was transfected into RA-FLSs using Lipofectamine 3000 transfection reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, L3000015). Cells were seeded in a 6-well plate and transfected with 100 nM siRNA in 4 µL of Lipofectamine 3000 for 24 h. The transfection medium was discarded, and the cells were cultured in serum-free medium with or without 20 ng/mL TNF-α. Cells were harvested after incubation for an additional 36 h. The siRNA sequence targeting human LRRC15 was GCACAUCACUGAACUCAAUTT.

The LRRC15 plasmid was transfected into RA-FLSs using Lipofectamine 3000 following the manufacturer’s instructions and preformed as previously described [13]. Briefly, RA-FLSs was plated in 6-well plates and transfected with plasmids for 48 h before functional assays were carried out.

Male Wistar rats (6 weeks old, 160 g ± 20 g) were purchased from the Laboratory Animal Center of Southern Medical University [SCXK(GZ)2021-0041, Guangzhou, China] and housed in the animal laboratory at the International Institute for Translational Chinese Medicine [SYXK(GZ)2019 − 0144], Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine (Guangzhou, China), and followed the WMA Statement on animal use in biomedical research. The registration number of ethical approval is 20,220,605.

Rats were randomly divided into five groups: control, CIA model, BrA-low dose (1.5 mg/kg, ip), BrA-high dose (3 mg/kg, ip), and positive control indomethacin (Indo) (2 mg/kg, ig) groups. Except for rats in the control group, others were used to establish a CIA model. Briefly, initial immunization involved an emulsion of CFA and bovine type II collagen at a 1:1 ratio. Rats in the five groups were given 0.2 mL of the CFA-containing emulsion by intradermal injection at the base of the tail. After 7 days, for the second immunization, IFA and bovine type II collagen were emulsified and injected in the same way as the first injection. Beginning on day 10, the rats in the treatment groups were treated with BrA or Indo. The rats in the control and CIA model groups received equivalent volumes of solvent. The body weight, hind paw volume, and arthritic indices were monitored every 3 days, and the scoring criteria and details for the arthritic indices were recorded as previously described [14]. All rats were subsequently sacrificed, and the blood, hindfoot, and synovial tissues of the knee joints were collected for subsequent analyses.

The ankle joints of each group were decalcified after fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde and subsequently embedded in paraffin. Synovial tissue was directly embedded in paraffin after fixation. All samples were sectioned into 4 μm slices, and stained with H&E to evaluate the condition of inflammatory cell infiltration and synovial hyperplasia. Histological-synovitis scores (HSS) and standardized microscopic arthritis scoring of histological (SMASH) were used to quantitatively assess the histological Sections [15,16]. IHC staining was performed using anti-LRRC15 (1:200) or anti-pSTAT3 (1:200) antibodies at 4℃ for overnight. After incubation with the HRP-conjugated secondary antibody polymer for 2 h, the images were visualized with a histopathology slide scanner (Leica, Germany).

X-rays can capture images of internal body structure. To assess the in vivo effects of BrA on joint inflammation and damage, X-ray images were performed with a SkyScan 1276 instrument (Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany) with the following parameters: 75 mA of current and 65 kV of voltage.

Specimens of ankle joints were scanned using a Bruker Micro-CT SkyScan 1276 system (Kontich, Belgium) at 85 kV, 200 uA, Al 1 mm filter, 10.133345 μm voxel size and 384 ms integration time. Images were analyzed with CT Analyzer software 1.20.3.0. The resulting reconstructed images were subsequently conducted by NRecon software 1.7.4.2.

The Sharp/van der Heijde modified Sharp score (mTSS) [17] was used to score structural damage in the joint by two experienced observers who were blinded to clinical data. Subjects with joint erosion > 0 or joint space narrowing > 0 were considered to have radiographic joint damage.

Data were shown as Mean ± SD. Data analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, US). A T-test was used to compare the two groups. When three or more groups were compared, ANOVA tests with Tukey’s multiple comparisons tests to used to calculate adjustedPvalues.P< 0.05 was considered statistically significant in all tests.

Analyses of RNA-seq data from RA patients in the GEO database (Fig.1A) revealed that LRRC15 expression was significantly upregulated (Fig.1B). To explore the role of LRRC15, we analyzed whether LRRC15 participated in the deterioration of RA by knocking down LRRC15 with siRNA (Fig.1C-E) or overexpressing LRRC15 (Fig.1H). Results showed that knockdown of LRRC15 significantly inhibited the adhesion (Fig.1E), proliferation (Fig.1F) and migration (Fig.1G) of RA-FLSs. In contrast, overexpression of LRRC15 in RA-FLS significantly increased the mRNA levels of two metastasis markers includingMMP9(Fig.1I) andMMP2(Fig.1J). These results suggest that LRRC15 promotes the proliferation and migration of RA-FLSs, and participates in the deterioration of RA.

BrA is an active compound inCentipeda minimathat has been known to have potent anti-tumor effects. Here, we determined whether it had anti-RA effects. Inflammation is the most prominent symptom of RA. First, to assess the in vitro anti-inflammatory effects of BrA, we screened the appropriate concentration of BrA and measured NO release in LPS-induced RAW264.7 cells. Results showed that 1, 2 and 4 µM of BrA (cell cytotoxicity < 15%, Fig.2A) inhibited the NO production in a dose dependent manner (Fig.2B). BrA also significantly inhibited the secretion of the inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β and TNF-α after BrA treatment (Fig.2E-F). Moreover, the expression of the inflammatory markers COX-2 and iNOS was upregulated by LPS stimulation in RAW264.7 cells, and downregulated after treated with BrA (Fig.2C-D). Similarly, 1, 2 and 4 µM of BrA (cell cytotoxicity < 15%, Fig.2G) also dose-dependently decreased the protein levels of COX-2 and iNOS in the TNF-α-stimulated RA-FLSs model (Fig.2H-I). These results suggest that BrA exerts potent anti-inflammatory effects.

BrA significantly inhibited the inflammatory response in RAW264.7 cells and RA-FLSs.(A, G)The cell viability of BrA in RAW264.7(A)and RA-FLSs(G)were determined by using the MTT assay.(B)Measurement of NO production in the supernatant of RAW264.7 cells using the Griess reagent.(C, H)The protein levels of iNOS and COX2 in RAW264.7 cells(C)and RA-FLSs(H)were determined by Western blotting; and the quantitative results(D, I)were shown in the right panel.(E, F)The levels of IL-1β(E)and TNF-α(F)in supernatant of RAW264.7 cells were determined by the ELISA assay. Data are shown as Mean ± SD from three individual experiments.**P< 0.01vs.The corresponding control.#P< 0.05,##P< 0.01vs.LPS or TNF-α group.

Studies have demonstrated that FLSs in the synovial lining develop aggressive phenotypes and produce pathogenic mediators, which results in the occurrence and progression of disease, and plays a major role in the pathophysiology of RA [18]. Activated RA-FLSs have “tumor-like” characteristics, such as promotion of inflammation, resistance to cell death, vigorous proliferation, enhanced migration, and invasion ability to joint cartilage and bone [19]. Herein, we assessed the proliferation, migration and adhesion of RA-FLSs using EdU assay, migration assay and cell adhesion assay, respectively. The results of the EdU assay revealed that BrA inhibited the TNF-α-enhanced RA-FLSs proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. (Fig.3A). MMP-2 and MMP-9, two members of the MMP family, promoted the formation and invasion of pannus during RA progression [20]. As shown in Fig.3B-C, we found that the protein levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9 were dramatically increased in the TNF-α-induced model group when compared to the control group. However, BrA significantly decreased the protein levels of these two markers. Additionally, cell adhesion assay revealed that BrA significantly suppressed TNF-α-induced RA-FLSs adhesion (Fig.3D). Furthermore, BrA also effectively attenuated the enhanced migration caused by TNF-α in RA-FLSs (Fig.3E-F).

BrA suppressed RA-FLSs proliferation and migration.(A)The proliferation of RA-FLSs was determined using the EdU assay. Representative images were shown in the left panel, and the numberof EdU-positive cells was shown in the right panel.(B-C)The protein levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in TNF-α-induced RA-FLSs were determined using Western blotting(B), and the quantitative results were shown in the right panel(C).(D)Cell adhesion of RA-FLSs after treated with BrA for 30 min was determined using a cell adhesion kit.(E-F)RA-FLSs migration ability was determined using wound healing assay after 24-h treatment, and photographed by microscopy. Data are shown as Mean ± SD from three individual experiments.*P< 0.05,**P< 0.01vs.The corresponding control.#P< 0.05,##P< 0.01vs.TNF-α group.

Next, we established a CIA rat model to determine the anti-RA therapeutic effect of BrA. Compared with control group, a significant decrease in body weight was observed in the model group; whereas, the body weights of the rats in the BrA- or Indo-treated groups was lower than that of the rats in the model group (Fig.4A). After immunizations for CIA modeling, the rats in all groups except for those in the control group displayed significant swelling of the paw (Figs.4C-D). Following treatment with different concentrations of BrA, we found that the degree of feet swelling was significantly reduced in rats (Fig.4C-D). In accordance with the paw swelling results, the arthritis scores also tended to decrease after the rats received BrA treatment (Fig.4B). X-ray imaging and micro-CT revealed significant bone erosion in the ankles of CIA rats, an effect that was attenuated by the administration of BrA or Indo, respectively (Fig.4E-F, Supplemental Fig.1A). In addition, H&E staining (Fig.4G) and HSS scoring (Supplementary Fig.1B-C) of the synovial membrane revealed that BrA strongly alleviated synovial hyperplasia and monocyte infiltration and suppressed the angiogenesis. The mitigating effect of BrA on collagen-induced subchondral bone loss, inflammation in cartilage and synovium was subsequently evaluated by H&E staining of knee joints (Fig.4H, Supplementary Fig.1C). The results showed that BrA ameliorated the arthritis symptoms in CIA rats by inhibiting joint inflammation and bone erosion.

To investigate whether BrA affects RA-FLSs via LRRC15, we examined the impact of BrA on LRRC15 expression. BrA significantly reduced the protein levels of LRRC15 in TNF-α-induced RA-FLSs (Fig.5A). Recent studies have shown that LRRC15 expression in fibroblasts is linked to JAK/STAT3 pathway activation [5]. Another study suggested that microglia-derived LRRC15 can activate the JAK/STAT3 pathway by binding to CD248 on the surface of progenitor cells, thereby influencing astrogenesis [21]. It follows that JAK/STAT3 pathway activation has been well documented to play an important role in the progression of RA. Thus, we evaluated the protein levels of phosphorylated STAT3, and found that BrA significantly inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation without affecting total STAT3 protein levels (Fig.5B). Moreover, IHC staining of the synovial tissues from rats confirmed these findings (Fig.5C). Collectively, these results suggest that BrA has anti-RA effects via suppressing the LRRC15/STAT3 signaling pathway.

RA is a chronic and systemic autoimmune disease that is characterized by persistent inflammation of the synovial joints, resulting in cartilage destruction, bone erosion, and progressive joint deformity. Despite significant advancements in understanding this disease, the pathogenesis of RA remains unknown. Current studies indicate that a complex interplay of environmental, genetic and immunological factors contributes to the initiation and progression of RA [22]. This multifactorial nature, combined with the involvement of multiple immune pathways, makes the identification of a singular cause or mechanism that drives the disease more complicated. One of the major challenges in the management of RA is the inability to achieve complete remission with conventional drug therapies. Traditional DMARDs such as methotrexate, sulfasalazine, and leflunomide, as well as NSAIDs and corticosteroids, are commonly prescribed to alleviate symptoms and slow the demonstrated that LRRC15 is highly expressed progression of the disease. Although these treatments can improve the quality of life of patients and reduce inflammation, they often fail to stop disease progression completely, leading to long-term joint damage and disability [23].

In recent years, natural compounds derived from plants and other natural sources have drawn increasing attention for their potential in the treatment of RA. BrA, a sesquiterpene lactone isolated fromCentipeda minima, exhibits diverse pharmacological activities, including antitumor [24], anti-hepatic fibrosis [25] and anti-OA [11] effects. In addition, BrA is reported to have a broad inhibitory effect on acute and chronic inflammation; it can not only reduce the inflammatory status of the wound but also inhibit bacterial wound infection [26]. Recent studies have also highlighted the therapeutic potential of BrA in joint disorders. In models of OA, BrA inhibits osteoclast differentiation via mTOR and ERK signaling [27] or by modulating the SIRT1/Nrf2/GPX4 axis, thereby alleviating OA symptoms [11]. These findings support the role of BrA as a promising therapeutic candidate for the treatment of RA; However, the molecular mechanisms underlying RA pathogenesis remain to be fully elucidated. Here, it is found that BrA significantly reduced inflammatory response, inhibited cell proliferation and cell migration of RA-FLSs (Figs.2and3). Moreover, in CIA mice, BrA can significantly reduce the joint swelling and cartilage damage. More importantly, no toxicity was observed after BrA treatment (Fig.4A), suggesting that BrA has the potential to be an antiarthritic drug with no toxicity. In the future, the BrA content in the serum of animal models will be measured to further investigate its in vivo pharmacokinetics and biological activity. A thorough understanding of the anti-RA efficacy of BrA and its in vivo biological processes can facilitate its future clinical application for RA treatment.

FLSs are of vital importance for joint destruction in RA, and aggressive FLSs as well as pannus formation are crucial for progressive destruction. RA-FLSs also secrete various proinflammatory cytokines and MMPs, which activate local FLS and induce FLS hyperplasia and migration [28]. Recent studies have reported that LRRC15 can interacts with CD248 to activate the JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway and influences astrogenesis, inducing anxiety-like behaviors such as exploration disorders and social disorders [21]. JAK/STAT3 pathway activity has been shown to be critical in promoting inflammation and mediating the cellular responses that contribute to disease progression [29]. Persistent activation of the JAK/STAT3 pathway was shown to be an important symptom in maintaining chronic inflammation in RA patients. However, whether LRRC15 contributes to RA pathogenesis by influencing STAT3 activity requires further studies. Here, it is found that LRRC15 expression is obviously upregulated in RA patients’ synovial tissues (Fig.1B) and in TNF-α-induced RA-FLSs model (Fig.1C). Moreover, inhibition of LRRC15 decreased the protein level of STAT3, resulting in the significant inhibition of cell proliferation and migration. Future studies will be performed to screen Chinese medicinal plants, such asCentipeda minima, for LRRC15-targeted compounds and elucidate their molecular mechanisms of anti-RA action.

In summary, we demonstrated that LRRC15 is highly expressed in RA, and is contributes to the migration and proliferation of RA-FLSs. BrA significantly ameliorated arthritis symptoms in CIA rats by reducing joint cartilage damage and synovial inflammation, while it also inhibited the proliferation, adhesion and migration of RA-FLSs. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that BrA significantly inhibited the LRRC15/STAT3 signaling pathway. Moreover, overexpression of LRRC15 diminished the anti-RA effects of BrA. Our results indicate that BrA exerts anti-RA effects both in vitro and in vivo, primarily due to the inhibition of the LRRC15/STAT3 signaling pathway. Our findings not only provide molecular-level justification for the clinical application of BrA, but also suggest its potential as a complementary or alternative therapeutic agent for RA management.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Supplementary Figure 1: BrA alleviated the joint pathological features in CIA rats. (A) The radiological score of joint. (B) Evaluation of histological synovitis scores (HSS) and (C) standardized microscopic arthritis scoring (SMASH). Data are shown as Mean ± SD,n= 3.**P< 0.01,vs.CTL group.#P< 0.05,##P< 0.01vs.Model group.