To investigate quantitative changes in iris blood flow after first-eye and second-eye cataract surgeries, and their correlation with increased pain in the second eye.

In this prospective study, 88 eyes of 44 participants who underwent uneventful cataract surgery were followed up at enrolment, 1 day before, and 1 day, 1 week and 1 month after each eye surgery. Iris blood flow was quantified by a swept-source optical coherence tomography angiography and intraoperative pain was evaluated. Participants were divided into three groups according to time intervals between two eye surgeries: ≥1 to <2 weeks (short interval), ≥2 to ≤4 weeks (medium interval) and greater than 4 weeks (long interval).

The second eye experienced two significant increases in iris blood flow following cataract surgery: one after the first eye and the other after its own, with the latter being significantly higher than the increase observed in the operated eye after the first surgery (p<0.05). Additionally, the second eye showed higher iris blood flow density in the short interval group compared with the long and medium at specific time points (p<0.05). The bilateral pain index difference positively correlated with second eye iris blood flow density (p<0.05) and was significantly greater in the short interval group than the long interval group (p<0.05).

Iris blood flow increased in the second-operated eye post surgery compared with the first eye, which may correlate to second-eye pain. However, due to the variability in individual pain perception, a larger sample size is needed to prospectively validate our findings to improve their generalisability.

The cataract surgery of the second eye often causes more pain than the first. However, the exact mechanism remains unclear. This study aimed to investigate the correlation between eye pain and iris blood flow.

The second-operated eye in cataract surgery showed significant iris blood flow increases, particularly with shorter intersurgery intervals, correlating strongly with second-eye pain.

This study may provide insights into the mechanism behind increased pain in the second-eye cataract surgery and assist in determining the optimal timing for surgery in patients with bilateral cataracts.

Cataract is one of the most common ocular diseases worldwide and phacoemulsification surgery is the most commonly used.1An interesting phenomenon is that patients having cataract surgery in the second eye under topical anaesthesia often experience increased pain compared with the surgery in the first eye.2 3Such increased pain not only affects patients experience and satisfaction, but may also lead to poor intraoperative cooperation, which increases the risk of intraoperative or postoperative complications.

The phenomenon of increased pain in second-eye cataract surgery was previously thought to be related to psychological pain thresholds, but the exact mechanism remained unknown.4Recent studies have revealed that the inflammatory mechanisms may play a critical role in the increased pain during second-eye cataract extraction.5 6Our existing studies found that the aqueous humour level of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), a pain-related inflammatory chemokine, was significantly increased in patients undergoing cataract surgery in the second eye compared with those undergoing surgery in the first eye.7Rich in blood vessels, the iris is closely associated with the intraocular inflammation, and its blood flow quantitative analysis data changed accordingly in eyes with diabetic retinopathy and retinal vein occlusion.8Thus, we speculated that iris blood flow may also vary in bilateral cataract surgery, which may further underlie the second-eye pain and could be a non-invasive marker.

Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) is a new blood flow imaging technique, which can suggest functional vascularity in penetrating living tissues rapidly and non-invasively.9The ultra-widefield swept-source OCTA can integrate imaging and quantification of iris blood flow into one, enabling observation of its numerical changes after binocular cataract surgery. Although OCTA has played an important role in fundus research in recent years,10 11few studies have observed iris blood flow by OCTA.

Thus, the aim of the present study was to investigate the pattern of iris blood flow change after bilateral cataract surgery using an ultrawide-field swept-source OCT angiography and to analyse its correlation with the increased pain in second-eye cataract surgery.

This prospective longitudinal bilateral self-control study was conducted at the Eye and Ear, Nose, Throat (EENT) Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China, and adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. The study was registered atwww.clinicaltrials.gov(accession numberNCT02182921). Investigators explained the study procedures to all participants and obtained written informed consent preoperatively.

Patients with bilateral age-related cataract (nuclear opalescence (NO) 3–4 grades, according to the Lens Opacities Classification System III (LOCS III)) who were scheduled for cataract surgery at the EENT Hospital of Fudan University were enrolled between September 2023 and April 2024. The exclusion criteria included: presence of any other oculopathy, such as corneal diseases, strabismus, zonular weakness, uveitis, glaucoma or severe fundus pathologies; prior intraocular procedures or trauma; severe intraoperative or postoperative complications; systemic diseases, such as diabetes, coagulation system diseases or circulatory system disorders.

Both eyes of all patients underwent comprehensive preoperative examinations during the morning hours, which included visual acuity, intraocular pressure (IOP), slit lamp examination, IOLMaster 700 (Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Oberkochen, Germany), corneal topography (Pentacam HR Premium; Oculus Optikgeräte GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany), funduscopy, B-scan ultrasonography and OCT (Zeiss Cirrus HD-OCT 5000; Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany). LOCS III NO grades were recorded. Ultra-widefield swept-source OCTA (BM-400K BMizar; TowardPi Medical Technology, Beijing, China) was performed in both eyes when both eyes were unoperated at enrolment and at 1 day before each eye surgery.

An experienced surgeon (XZ) performed all surgeries following a standard procedure. A 2.6 mm temporal clear corneal incision was made, followed by a 5.5 mm continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis, hydrodissection and phacoemulsification. After removal of the cortex, the IOL was inserted into the capsular bag. The incision was hydrated after thorough removal of the viscoelastic. All eyes received routine postoperative anti-inflammatory treatments, including topical levofloxacin (Cravit; Santen Pharmaceutical), prednisolone acetate (Allergan) and pranoprofen (Pranopulin; Senju Pharmaceutical) eyedrops four times a day for 1 month. The operated eye and date of operation were recorded, respectively.

The iris OCTA images were acquired carefully through a 16×6 mm2scan using the ultra-widefield swept-source OCTA.13In the anterior segment OCTA mode, patients were instructed to open their eyes wide to fully expose the iris and hold for approximately 10 s. During this process, the technicians made sure that the shot was always in clear focus. If the image clearly showed the whole iris vessels (from the edge of the pupil to the root of the iris), its quality was considered good and the image with automatic score less than 8/10 was discarded as having poor quality. Also, images with obvious vessel overlap or artefacts would be discarded.

The iris images were further divided into structural images (figure 1A) and blood flow images (figure 1B). In this study, we adapted the Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) grid, originally designed for macular region segmentation, to the iris by adjusting its parameters. Specifically, we set the ring number to 4 and the division number to 4, enabling the system to automatically divide the iris into three concentric rings of equal width: the inside region, the intermediate region and the outside region. The iris blood flow density values of the above regions, as well as of the overall region, were recorded.

Patients with unclear OCTA image of the iris for further quantification and analysis or missing follow-up were excluded from analysis. Patients were divided into three groups according to the time intervals between the two eye surgeries: ≥1 to <2 weeks (short interval), ≥2 to <4 weeks (medium interval) and 4 weeks or greater (long interval).

All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS V.20.0. Continuous data were presented as mean±SD. A paired t-test was used for the comparison between two non-independent groups. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) combined with post hoc Tukey test was used to compare continuous data among three or more independent groups. The repeated measures ANOVA combined with the post hoc least significant difference (LSD) test was used to compare differences among different follow-up times in each group and differences between different groups at each follow-up time. Categorical variables were compared using the χ2test. Spearman’s correlation analyses were used to analyse relationships between discontinuous variables. P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

No patients or members of the public were directly involved in this study. There are no plans to involve patients or the public in the dissemination of the results.

The characteristics of all included eyes are shown intable 1. Totally, 88 eyes of 44 participants were analysed. Between the first-operated and second-operated eye, no statistically significant differences were found in NO grades, axial length, keratometry (K) value, anterior chamber depth (ACD), white to white (WTW), preoperative IOP and postoperative CDVA (paired t-test, all p values>0.05). Among three different time-interval groups, no statistically significant differences were found in operated eye, sex, age, NO grades, axial length, K value, ACD, WTW, preoperative IOP and postoperative CDVA (one-way ANOVA for age, NO grades, axial length, K value, ACD, WTW, preoperative IOP and postoperative CDVA, χ2tests for number of eyes, operated eye and sex, all p values>0.05).

Differences between the first-operated and second-operated eye were analysed by paired t-test; categorical variables between three time-interval groups were analysed by χ2 test.

Continuous data between three time-interval groups were analysed by one-way analysis of variance.

P value of the differences between the first eye and second eye.

ACD, anterior chamber depth; CDVA, corrected distance visual acuity; D, diopters; K, corneal curvature (keratometry value); Post, postoperative; Pre, preoperative; WTW, white to white.

The iris blood flow density at different time points for all the eyes is shown infigure 2A. Regarding the first-operated eye, an initial increase in iris blood flow density within 1 week after its own surgery was observed, followed by a gradual decrease back to the baseline level at 1 month after its own surgery, with no significant changes noted after the second eye surgery. In contrast to the first-operated eye, the iris blood flow density of the second-operated eye increased slightly 1 week after the first eye surgery and then decreased to the baseline level at 1 month after the first eye surgery. After its own surgery, the value exhibited a more substantial elevation, followed by a gradual decline over time.

Across all eyes included in the study, baseline iris blood flow density showed no significant difference between the first-operated eye and the second-operated one. Nevertheless, the iris blood flow density observed in the second-operated eye was notably higher than that in the first eye at 1 day and 1 week after its own surgery, respectively (figure 2A, repeated measures ANOVA with post hoc LSD test, both p values<0.01).

Moreover, the quantification model schematic of the iris blood flow in a patient’s first and second eye at each time after respective surgeries is also shown infigure 2B.

Figure 3revealed the increase in value of iris blood flow density at different iris regions in the first and second eyes at 1 day before their own surgery, and 1 day, and 1 week after their own surgery compared with their baseline when both eyes were unoperated, respectively. In the first eye, at 1 day after its own surgery, the increase value of iris blood flow density in the outside region was significantly higher than that in the inside region (figure 3A, the repeated measures ANOVA with post hoc LSD test, p=0.002, outside region vs inside region: 5.36±4.85 vs 2.18±4.12). Regarding 1 day before and 1 week after the first eye surgery, no such significant differences were found among the regions (figure 3A, the repeated measures ANOVA with post hoc LSD test, both p values>0.05). In the second eye, regardless of the time-point, no statistically significant differences were observed in the increase in iris blood flow density among different iris regions (figure 3B, repeated measures ANOVA, all p values>0.05).

Figure 4Ademonstrated the iris blood flow density in the second eye of the three different interval groups over time. The baseline level of iris blood flow density showed no difference among the three interval groups. However, after the first eye surgery, the extent of variations in iris blood flow density differed. At 1 day before second eye surgery, significantly higher iris blood flow density in the second-operated eye was identified in the short interval group compared with that in the long interval group (the repeated measures ANOVA combined with post hoc LSD test, p=0.02). At 1 day after second eye surgery, iris blood flow density in the short interval group was substantially higher than in the other two groups (the repeated measures ANOVA combined with post hoc LSD test, both p values<0.05), and its difference with the long interval group remained statistically significant at 1 week after second eye surgery (the repeated measures ANOVA combined with post hoc LSD test, p=0.0042). At 1 month after second eye surgery, the iris blood flow density among the three groups no longer showed a statistically significant difference (the repeated measures ANOVA combined with post hoc LSD test, p>0.05).

The pain index of the second-operated eye was significantly higher than that of the first-operated eye (the first-operated eye vs the second-operated eye: 1.48±0.95 vs 3.80±1.42, paired t-test, p<0.001, 95% CI of the difference: –2.64 to –2.00). The difference in bilateral pain index was positively correlated with the iris blood flow density in the second-operated eye at 1 day before surgery, and 1 day and 1 week after its surgery (figure 4B, Spearman’s correlation analysis, r=0.331, p=0.028; r=0.577, p<0.001; r=0.467, p=0.001, respectively). The difference in bilateral pain index of the short interval group was significantly higher than that of the long interval group (short interval, medium interval and long interval: 3.00±0.96 (95% CI: 2.45 to 3.55)) vs 2.33±1.18 (95% CI: 1.68 to 2.98) vs 1.87±0.74 (95% CI: 1.46 to 2.28), one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey test, p=0.012).

Topical anaesthetic and phacoemulsification are widely used in cataract surgery, benefiting both surgeons and patients. However, a significant number of patients report experiencing more pain during the second-eye cataract surgery, even when the same procedure is performed by the same surgeon, and the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In the present study, we employed an ultrawide-field swept-source OCTA to investigate the pattern of changes in iris blood flow before and after cataract surgery. We found that iris blood flow density in the second-operated eye increased more than in the first eye within 1 week after its own surgery, especially with a short interval between bilateral surgeries. Our analyses suggested that increased pain in the second eye was correlated with elevated iris blood flow density, which may help uncover the mechanism underlying this pain.

Our results showed that iris blood flow density was significantly higher in the second-operated eye compared with the first, at corresponding time points post surgery. We also observed a slight increase in iris blood flow density in the second eye after the first eye surgery. Previous studies have focused on changes in iris blood flow. Cuiet al’s study showed a decrease in iris blood flow after corneal surgery, of which the cause may be the ischaemia and hypoxia of the eye due to the negative pressure of the surgery.14Another study found reactive iris congestion following reduced ocular perfusion.15Iris vessels are under a strong influence from the sympathetic nerves and can respond to inflammation. Former studies suggested that there may be a sympathetic ophthalmic type of uveitis in the contralateral eye after first-eye cataract surgery, as manifested by elevated levels of multiple inflammatory cytokines, such as MCP-1, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and interleukin-1β (IL-1β).7 16Combined with prior research, our results may imply that the increased blood flow in the iris of the second eye may be attributed to a subclinical sympathetic ocular response as well as elevated inflammatory factors in the ocular microcirculation after the first-eye cataract surgery. Meanwhile, the slight increase in iris blood flow density of the second eye after the first eye surgery may indicate that inflammatory mediators diffuse through the vasculature, causing microinflammation and immune activation. This, in turn, could lead to a more pronounced inflammatory response and higher iris blood flow density after the second eye surgery.

Moreover, in the first-operated eye, the increase in iris blood flow density in the outside region was significantly higher than that in the inside region. Based on the anatomy and physiology of the iris vasculature, we speculate that the greater arterial circle of iris may be the primary area of response. While in the second eye, no differences were found in terms of increased iris blood flow in different regions, which may be due to congestion of the entire iris.

The time interval between cataract surgeries of the two eyes varies the changes of iris blood flow and further affects pain in second-eye surgery. Patients often prefer to receive the second eye surgery as soon as possible. However, our study found that when the two eyes-operated time interval was relatively short, the iris blood flow density in the second-operated eye at 1 day postoperatively was significantly higher compared with that when the time interval was relatively long. This phenomenon may be attributed to the short interval between the surgeries of the first and second eyes, which likely maintained an active vascular response in the second eye, resulting in a more pronounced reaction to the stimulus of the second surgery. These findings support the clinical view that too short an interval between bilateral cataract surgeries should be avoided to reduce the risk of complications.

More importantly, we demonstrated that the pain score was also significantly higher in the second-eye surgery compared with the first-eye surgery in this study, which is consistent with the clinical experience and existing studies.2 3 17Meanwhile, changes in iris blood flow were correlated with increased pain in second-eye cataract surgery. Prior research often addressed increased pain in second-eye cataract surgery from a subjective psychological perspective with inflammatory mechanisms.18Our study found a possible correlation between iris blood flow and the increased pain in the second eye, and that iris blood flow at 1 day before surgery may potentially predict intraoperative pain of the second-eye cataract surgery. Therefore, the observation of iris blood flow density may help assess the status of intraocular microinflammation non-invasively, to predict intraoperative pain in the patient’s second eye and to help doctors take preventive measures to improve patient comfort and satisfaction during surgery.

However, this study also has certain limitations. The relatively small sample size may affect the generalisability of the findings. In addition, while the quantification of iris blood flow was objective, the assessment of pain relied on patients’ subjective reports. Despite the use of a standardised VAS and the control of anti-inflammatory and analgesic medication use during follow-up, individual variability in pain perception may still introduce potential confounding. Furthermore, although we scheduled measurements at similar morning time points whenever possible, iris blood flow may still be influenced by circadian rhythms and individual physiological characteristics, including cardiac frequency, systemic arterial pressure and pupil diameter. Overall, this study provides preliminary evidence for the association between iris blood flow and postoperative pain, which paves the way for further exploration of the mechanisms involved. Future research could consider investigating the underlying mechanisms at the molecular level by incorporating aqueous cytokine analysis or systemic inflammatory markers.

In conclusion, with the ultra-widefield swept-source OCTA of iris, we described the pattern of changes in iris blood flow before and after bilateral cataract surgeries and revealed its correlation with increased pain in second-eye surgery. Our study may shed light on the possible mechanism underlying the increased pain in second-eye surgery and further help choose the appropriate surgical timing for patients with bilateral cataract.