Citizen science (CS), a collaboration between people and scientists, is a viable approach utilizing citizens experiences in COVID-19 pandemic to manage future response. This study aimed to understand concepts, experiences, approaches, and sustainability issues of CS among citizens in five South and Southeast Asian countries. A qualitative study was carried out in Nepal, Bangladesh, India, Philippines, and Indonesia from October 2022 to March 2023. A total of 130 participants took part in four focus group discussions per country. Content analysis was done on narrative responses of participants for extraction of themes. Participants associated CS with the term “participation”. Additionally, CS was related to “social responsibility” and “capacity building”. During the COVID-19 pandemic, community participation was expressed by participants as a compliance measure with guidelines, helping to create awareness, and providing support (food, sanitizers, money, etc.) to fellow citizens. These experiences were related to CS and valued for personal achievement, satisfaction, and happiness with a chance to build social capital. Some participants expressed lack of confidence and language barriers as notable concerns while sharing their opinions with stakeholders (policymakers and researchers). Sustainability of CS activities was associated with creation of an organizations or networks, securing budget, incentivise participation, and assisting transportation. Participants considered CS as a community participation mechanism as a potentially viable and efficient manage future pandemics and public health crises.

Globally, the COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the economy of South and Southeast Asian countries by inhibiting socio-economic activities across regions [1,2]. Community engagement considered as a fundamental concept in the effective response and management of past epidemics [3–7]. It primarily relied on gathering participants viewpoints, experiences, shared concerns in understanding the context. It paves a way to design interventions which would be more feasible, effective, and sustainable. Citizen science (CS) comprehensively strengthens the community engagement process as a scientific approach. Vast literature is available on application of CS in domain such as ecology, environmental sciences, geology biodiversity, history/philosophy, communication, and computers/information systems [8,9]. Its role and potential benefits are explored in managing chronic diseases, vector borne diseases, rare diseases, and in healthcare settings [6,10]. CS was also used in COVID-19 with active and voluntary participation of people for efficient data collection in diverse geographical settings like Americas, Europe, and Asia [11]. Broadly, participation of citizens is viewed as an activity either to increase scientific knowledge or democratize science. Typological analysis for applications of CS has also shown a significant variation in its understanding, interpretation, and implementation. It can be considered as an activity for producing knowledge, people participation, education and learning, scientific enquiry, community-based monitoring, improving business, and assessing policy outcomes and their impacts [12,13]. For the purpose of this study, we defined CS as a practice of public participation and collaboration in all aspects of scientific research to increase knowledge, and build trust between citizens, policymakers, and researchers [14].

CS activities are largely divided into problem definition, data curation, modelling, interpretation, and communication [15]. Its role and potential benefits in managing chronic diseases, vector borne diseases, rare diseases, and in healthcare settings are increasingly being explored [6,9,10]. Currently, CS in healthcare is mostly used for data gathering processes using mobile phones and technology. For instance, it was used during the COVID-19 pandemic for quick data collection and in diverse geographical settings through active and voluntary participation of people. Its use is still limited in the co-creation of interventions, participatory modelling, data visualization, and communication [11,14]. Its limited application in healthcare, despite eagerness among citizens, could be related to the existence of a knowledge-sharing gap between citizens and researchers [15]. Given that the majority of research has been done in high-income countries, this study focused on low- and middle-income countries (LMIC). Engagement of people gives an insight through their perceptions, experiences, and possible concerns on implementation of interventions. Systematic analysis of their inputs/narratives helps in designing sustainable interventions. In our previously published mixed-method paper, the qualitative component focused mainly on potential use of digital and analogue form. It showed that actual application of digital tools substantiated the potential of digital CS in pandemic preparedness and control [16]. Current study focused on five countries where in-depth thematic analysis of extensive illustrative quotes was done. It gave a regional context with emphasis on lived experiences of participants. Their detailed feedbacks were based on experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic to enable policymakers and researchers in the region to improve CS engagement. The specific objectives of the study were to (i) assess awareness, relatability, and knowledge to CS; (ii) assess the level of readiness in communities to participate; and (iii) identify factors (barriers and facilitators) that influence participation in related activities.

Prior ethical approval was sought first from the United Nations University Institute, Macau (202206/01), and subsequently from ethical/regulatory committee of each country. Country specific approvals were sought from Kementerian Agama Republik Indonesia for Indonesia (B.473/In.25/LP2M/KP.01.2/07/2022), Nepal Health Research Council for Nepal (288/2022P/308), Rural Development Academy for Bangladesh (47.64.1088.014.31.206.04.448), Research Ethics Review Committee of Tarlac State University for Philippines (2022–024FCCANLAS), and Institute Ethics Committee of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Government Medical College for India (IEC/021/2022). After going through the PIS in local language, written informed consent was taken from participants by the study teams. Country-specific data are securely stored with the country team and no personal information of participants was shared while carrying out the analysis.

A sequential mixed-method study was carried out in Nepal, Bangladesh, India, Philippines, and Indonesia from October 2022 to June 2023, where its qualitative segment was carried out between January 2023 to June 2023 [16]. Current study focuses on the qualitative segment of the study based on participants’ experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic. It was done in Kathmandu city in Nepal, Bogura in Bangladesh, Una district of Himachal Pradesh in India, Tarlac city in Philippines, and Jakarta in Indonesia.

For comprehensive assessment, participants were purposively sampled across four strata for better representation of population. It included youths (18–24 years of age), marginalized and indigenous communities (people living with HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria; ethically/socio-economic marginalized), community health workers (last mile health workers as a direct link between people and local health services), and general population (age > 24 years, non-marginalized/non-indigenous). Participants less than 18 years of age and due to inability to express their concerns, people with severe mental health conditions, or not conversant in English or the local languages were excluded.

In each country, the community-based organizations (CBOs) were purposively selected; Rural Development Foundation in Nepal, Rural Development Agency in Bangladesh, Health Applications in India, Wireless Access to Health in Philippines, and Climate Institute in Indonesia. They were already working with health care delivery system, self-help groups, and community representatives. They had a good rapport with the rural population along with indigenous and marginalized people, and community work in pandemic/outbreaks. CBOs staff selected the participants from their operational/working areas. Based on inclusion criteria, participants were selected from respective and representative sites of their working areas. The participants were sampled from a pool of people who participated in a survey and gave consent to be re-contacted for FGD (57.2% of 2912 survey participants), as part of this mixed-method study [16]. The survey was carried out to assess participants’ awareness, knowledge, and readiness to participate in pandemic related CS activities.

Data collection was done by the CBOs staff and were educated (graduate/post-graduate) with experience in healthcare and good working rapport with the local population. In each country, the data collection team consisted of four to six staff who identified and recruited study participants, out of which one to two staff carried out the in-person FGDs. Venues to conduct FGDs were selected by the staff to ensure convenience, privacy, and accessibility for study participants. Participants were contacted and gathered at places near their residences, such as community halls, health centres, or the office of local CBOs. As participants were familiar with these venues and the study team was from the local area, participants felt comfortable expressing their concerns freely during the discussions. In each country, four focus group discussions (FGDs) were conducted with six to eight participants per discussion for reaching to thematic saturation, i.e., no new themes are emerged from the narratives. The country teams were trained to conduct group discussions using a semi-structured guide. The guide was based on the precaution adoption process model (PAPM) and the theory of planned behaviour (TPB) [17,18]. The PAPM is used in behavioural studies where it proposes factors associated with decision-making process for an action/inaction. Whereas, TPB helps to explain effect of individual’s attitude and belief on intention to act and actual behaviour. Questions were framed to gather participants’ perceptions, beliefs, experiences, and concerns affecting their intention and participating behaviour in CS related activities. FGDs discussed about understanding of concept, their experiences in pandemics/outbreaks, expected nature of engagement, expected role, motivational/discouraging reasons, advantages and disadvantages, facilitators and barriers, and required resources to participate in CS related activities (S1 Text). The country teams reviewed all study materials in local languages for clarity and understandability. Participant information sheet (PIS), informed consent form, and FGD questions were translated from English to local languages (Nepali, Bangla, Hindi, Bahasa Indonesia, and Filipino) by the country teams. As the study population was more sensitive, such as the marginalized/indigenous group, the study team decided at the study design stage not to collect any demographics information. It was based on CBOs advice which was based on their past experiences while interacting with the local people. Before the conduct of FGDs, participants were shown a video and infographics in the local languages explaining the meaning of CS, levels of participation, and importance and ways of citizen engagement in various stages (pre-pandemic, alert, pandemic, and transition) pandemic preparedness and response. The levels of participation in study were; consultation by scientist, participation in planning and implementation, working closely with scientists, and empowered to define problem and implement solutions (S1 Fig).

Audio recordings of the FGDs were transcribed in verbatim and translated from local languages to English. Data was analyzed manually by study teams without the use of analytical software. Microsoft Excel was used to collate and organize findings for coordination between study team members. Content analysis was done using inductive thematic analysis process by trained project staff, supervised by the site investigators. Firstly, participant narratives were selected reflecting diverse viewpoints and underlying patterns. Secondly, keywords were extracted reflecting participant’s narratives. Then, codes, short words, were assigned as codes to capture core message of narratives. The initial level of coding was done by the team to observe, compare, and identify similarities and differences in the data. Subsequently, second level of pattern coding was done by the country teams. Lastly, development of themes was done by organizing codes into meaningful groups offering insight to study objectives [19]. The findings were shared with respective country teams in virtual workshops to validate analysis and coding. Triangulation of patterns was done wherein subthemes and themes were refined and grouped based on similar patterns and meaning, after obtaining consensus from teams to ensure face and content validity. It was done till saturation was obtained, i.e., no further refinement for better clarity was possible by country teams during workshops. Domains of group discussion are then summarized by the themes, subthemes, and illustrative quotes from the participants.

Across all countries, while referring to CS, the participants collectively associated it with the term “research”. Although participants were mostly (90.8%) unaware of the term but they were able to discuss their perceived concept. It was related to capacity building activity for learning and empowering themselves in the field of research. It was considered as an engagement process with an opportunity to participate in generating and analyzing data for effective implementation of pandemic control measures. It was also viewed as a social responsibility, especially in India. Distinctively, in Bangladesh, it was perceived as a way create awareness about pandemic response by the government.

When participants were asked about their lived experiences during the pandemic for nature of their engagement in pandemic response, most (72.1%) of the participants (especially in India and Philippines) stated their participation by adhering to government guidelines in terms of following COVID-19 appropriate behaviour like wearing masks, maintaining physical distancing, and hand sanitization. They complied with digital interventions especially downloading mobile-based applications to give personal information to assist the authorities in tracing the spread of infection. Largely (57.7%) in India, participants said that they proactively came forward to help fellow citizens to support by providing food, medicine, masks, and sanitizers. They also worked as a part of a team with the local health authorities in organizing community-based awareness activities to provide knowledge about disease, its control measures, and importance of vaccination to reduce disease transmission.

After reflecting on their experiences, participants were asked about their views on possible role(s) in future pandemics. Across all countries, based on their lived experiences, most (82.7%) considered their likely participation for assisting/providing food, masks, and sanitizers along with creating awareness about pandemic in communities. Participants also stated that as citizens, their role can be to ensure compliance by fellow citizens to government guidelines. Some (20.0%) stated that they can even contribute, based on their skill sets (e.g., computer skills for data entry), by doing some work to assist pandemic preparedness and response.

While speaking about advantages, across all countries, participants expressed that CS is a people-centric approach that can be used to understand reality on the ground, gather people to encourage exchange opinions, and identify people-led solutions. Potentially, CS can build the capacity of people by generating knowledge and creating awareness about their health and pandemic control measures. The disadvantages of CS were largely linked to individual level factors such as lack of capacity or unwillingness to share opinions that will likely cause ineffective participation. Based on their COVID-19 experience, participants expressed a potential risk of infection to themselves and their families while gathering people in CS activities.

Participants expressed individual-level features as a potential facilitating factor for their participation. In India, CS activities are expected to instil a sense of achievement, satisfaction, and happiness. In Philippines, potential chances to gain new knowledge and build social networks were considered to be facilitators. Whereas, in India and Nepal, majority (69.2%) of the participants expressed their participation as a sense of social duty and service during a pandemic.

Similar to facilitators, individual-related factors were also considered as barriers to CS activities. Nature of concerns varied across countries, such as the lack of information in Bangladesh, Indonesia, and Philippines; lack of education, confidence, and individual level conflicts in India and Nepal; while lack of time to participate was expressed as a barrier across all countries. Participants also mentioned that the nature of facilitation can have an impact on the level of participation. In Nepal, participants said that they tend to feel demotivated if other participants choose not to participate, while one is making an effort. Also, factors like unengaged organizers/facilitators and lack of transportation assistance can pose barriers to participate.

When asked about factors to consider when interacting with stakeholders such as policymakers and researchers, most (67.1%) factors were related to individual characteristics, effective communication, and provision of feedback. Active participation and a strong sense of collectiveness were raised as important factors. In India and Indonesia, contextual awareness of stakeholders and their ability to correctly understand participants were shared as likely factors. Participants expressed their lack of confidence while sharing opinions with stakeholders due to differences in their level of education and language which can result misunderstandings. In Indonesia, participants expressed concerns about use of their feedbacks, as they shared their opinions, data, and information in various activities like surveys but they do not know about their utilization.

When asked to express potential sustainability factors, the importance of local mechanisms to sustain people’s participation in CS activities was mentioned in Indonesia. The need for support of health system, provision of incentives (monetary and non-monetary), and transportation assistance, especially to women, were delineated in India and Bangladesh. Contextually, in India and Nepal, cultural factors were expected to play a vital role in the sustainability. In India, introduction of CS in formal education system as a distinct identity was also suggested as a sustainability factor to teach its concepts and applications. A participant from India suggested that the use of a scientific approach to monitor and evaluate CS activities for concurrent refinements can further enhance its sustainability. A formal structure such as the establishment of an organization or network and creation of infrastructures (centres) along with budgetary support were considered as resources needed for sustainability.

Current study showed that participants were not aware of the term citizen science but were aware and relate themselves with participatory activities. Based on their pandemic experience they expressed their readiness to participate in CS related activities. They expressed social culture and individual’s motivation and attitude as facilitating while lack of incentive/support as a limiting factor. Current study captured COVID-19 lived experiences and qualitatively explored the potential application of CS approach to encourage people’s participation in pandemic preparedness and response. We attempted to address contextual sensitiveness associated with LMICs, particularly South and Southeast Asian countries as well as population representativeness by including diverse groups such as youth, marginalized and indigenous groups along with the general population and community health workers. This adds value to the current literature which mainly focus on participants who have the capacity and accessibility to participate in such studies, thus leaving out hard-to-reach populations [19]. In our previous study, qualitative quotes were also used to triangulate the main quantitative findings on perceived factors influencing participation using digital as compared to analogue method. Moreover, it was done in nine countries with largely quantitative analysis focusing awareness, readiness and feasibility of citizen science. It primarily assessed the stage of readiness of participants in each country. It gave a general overview for policymakers and researchers that what to focus if they want to move people to readiness levels [16]. In current paper, analysis is focused on five countries of region where an in-depth thematic analysis on extensive illustrative quotes based on their lived experiences was done. It gave practical recommendations with contextualized insights which are actionable for policymakers and researchers in the region to improve citizen science engagement for future pandemics. The lived experiences presented in this study explored the barriers and facilitators through the lens of the participants’ COVID-19 experiences, as well as participants’ concerns while interacting with stakeholders (researchers and policy makers).

Thematic analysis showed that CS was not a commonly known term among the participants, but after being shown the infographics, it was expressed as a social concept, especially in India and Nepal. Across all countries, participant expressed that participation was related to individual level factors. Findings from this study resonated with the literature, where issues like self-esteem and self-efficacy along with health status were observed to be related with participation [20,21]. Current study expressed that individual viewpoint towards activity, considering a social responsibility, risk for being infected, and nature of pandemic also influence their readiness to participate. Subjective norms, cognitive ability of participants, experience of disaster, and perception of risk were delineated as individual-level factors for participation [22]. Current study showed that lack of awareness/education, time, and transportation, and distant geographical locations limit their participation. Evidence has shown that level of participation is affected by availability of service, geographic location, and socio-economic status of community [23]. Current study showed that people adhered to government guidelines like following COVID-19 appropriate behaviour and sharing personal data on mobile phone applications. Although, issues related to data security and internet availability were raised as concerns. A study showed that community engagement in emergencies was observed to be improved with accessibility to internet. It showed an improvement in sustenance of availability of health care services [23]. Current study showed participation in CS activities can be sustained by establishing formal organization support, management application, and securing funds. Evidence also showed that enhanced community participation is affected by an established management system, capacity building, and experiences and vulnerability of disaster [24]. Current study summates that COVID-19 experiences gave rationale and ways to raise resources to conduct CS activities for meaningful and effective participation.

CS makes public participation in science more democratized while involving researchers makes it more rational and objective [25]. Current study showed that people being the recipients of policies and programs, ready to have their voices included. It also showed that to provide local resonance with the CS approach, it is vital to consider the contextual settings while studying the values, norms, and culture. Individual capacity in terms of baseline knowledge and skill, awareness, and cognition needs to be mapped to tailor engagement efforts. It is also evident from current analysis that people are ready to participate but they need to be informed and their fears (infection, miscommunication, and being misunderstood by stakeholders) needs to be addressed. Efforts need to be targeted to make people comfortable and respected without any language barriers. Measures need to be in place to identify/foresee potential conflicts between people and train for conflict resolution strategies to improve participation. A formal feedback structure should also be available to inform the public about the utility of their participation and the inclusion of their opinions in formulating interventions and policies. It is evident that feedback increases the level of motivation and it should be specific with reasons or criterion-based [26].

Current study has its strengths in terms of in-depth examination with a structured inquiry. It had an optimal sample size with rich narratives/quotes from representative population (youth, marginalized and indigenous, and general) along with community health workers. It covered both provider and beneficiary perspectives with their lived experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic. It provided relatable responses towards pandemic preparedness and control. Similar and dissimilar views of participants were analyzed across five countries. Although generalization of qualitative information poses one of the limitations along with management of voluminous data [27]. Another limitation is lack of participants’ demographic information to support contextual findings. Nonetheless, it has helped to make the participants feel more at ease and willing to share. Instead, we included the study site and population group in the findings to provide the relevant context to the findings. Our findings can be triangulated with the quantitative segment of our mixed-method study [16]. Country-specific teams led by site researchers had maintained rigor for data collection, and thematic analysis of quotes made analysis more systematic and contextual. Relatability to CS was facilitated by its introduction at the start with a video and infographics in local languages.

In-depth analysis suggested that people are ready to participate with stakeholders such as policymakers and researchers, considering their social duty driven by attitude and culture. Based on their experiences during COVID-19, participation in CS activities viewed as an opportunity to learn new knowledge and scientific skills while working with researchers with some individual level discomforts. Its sustainability can be achieved by establishing organizational system with direct incentives to citizens/participants. Based on current experience, it is recommended that inclusion of optimal and diverse set of participants representing service providers and affected sections of society, especially marginalized and indigenous groups, gives valuable insights. Current methodology can be applied to explore the application of CS in other disease outbreaks/epidemics.

Authors would like to thank citizens who participated in study along with members of community-based organizations.

Consent for publication:As participants provided their informed consent to participate in this study.

Informed consent was also obtained from the individual(s) for the publication of potentially identifiable data included in this article.