The diffusion tensor imaging along perivascular spaces index (DTI-ALPS), which measures diffusivity in the perivascular spaces along the medullary veins, has gained popularity and controversy as a surrogate marker of glymphatic clearance. The goal of this work is to automatically estimate DTI-ALPS in a large population-based sample, evaluate the correlates of the signal observed in the context of aging and dementia biomarkers, and evaluate its clinical usefulness.

We identified 2715 participants aged 30 + years in the population-based Mayo Clinic Study of Aging with diffusion MRI. We calculated DTI-ALPS through a modified pipeline of previously published methods. We evaluated DTI-ALPS using different protocols and scanners and reported ICC for agreement. We examined the predictors of longitudinal DTI-ALPS with demographics (age, sex), vascular risk, clinical data (diagnosis, global cognition), and imaging markers (white matter hyperintensity (WMH), global amyloid load from PIB-PET, and temporal meta-ROI Tau-PET SUVR) in a subset of participants aged 50 + years using Pearson correlations, ANCOVA with adjustments for age and sex, and linear mixed effect models. We also compared the utility of DTI-ALPS with WMH for prediction of cognitive decline.

With modifications to the automated DTI-ALPS pipeline, consistent measurements can be made from data obtained with different protocols on different scanners. DTI-ALPS was negatively correlated with age, vascular risk, and WMH burden and was positively correlated with cognitive scores and higher in females. In the longitudinal models, WMH explained the greatest variability in decline of DTI-ALPS. The age and sex adjusted associations with AD biomarkers (amyloid and tau) were minimal. DTI-ALPS had a significant interaction with WMH on the rate of cognitive decline.

DTI-ALPS can be reliably automated in large samples. The computed DTI-ALPS was associated with vascular dysfunction (vascular risk and WMH) and may provide additional complementary information about cognitive decline. The low associations with AD biomarkers suggest that DTI-ALPS may be a poor surrogate of AD.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13195-025-01842-3.

The glymphatic clearance system is characterized by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) acting as a waste clearance system in the brain [1]. It has been proposed that CSF flows from the periarterial space through the interstitial fluid (ISF) to the perivascular spaces (PVS), flushing neurotoxins such as amyloid beta protein (Aβ) [1,2]. Impairment of the glymphatic system has been implicated as one of the mechanisms underlying the abnormal accumulation of Aβ and tau causal to Alzheimer’s disease dementia [3]. While measuring signal changes with time from intrathecal injection of gadolinium contrast agent has been used to quantify glymphatic clearance [4], it cannot be routinely utilized due to associated clinical risk [5]. Thus, measurement of glymphatic clearance using contrast-free imaging is of great interest for both understanding disease mechanisms and clinical purposes.

Recently, measuring lateral diffusivity of water molecules distal to the ventricles using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI-ALPS) [6] has been proposed as an indirect measure of glymphatic function [7]. The method described there used two spherical regions of interest (ROIs) placed slightly distal to the top of the lateral ventricles, where the medullary veins run left-right. Smaller studies have shown correlations with age, sex, glymphatic function, and cognitive impairment [8–10]. Because manual placement of ROIs limits utilization of the method, an automated pipeline using image registration in FSL has been proposed [11–15]. While automating the placement of ROI increases the speed of DTI-ALPS computation, a manual visual assessment of the ROI is still advised.

Our overall goal was to evaluate DTI-ALPS in a large population-based sample to understand the association of the signal observed within the context of aging and dementia biomarkers. To allow for large scale implementation, we modified the method proposed [16] by excluding voxels with primary diffusion directions misaligned with the corticospinal and association tracts forming the conceptual basis of DTI-ALPS. After obtaining DTI-ALPS measures in the sample, we consider the signal in three ways: (1) We compare the numerator and denominator signals separately by different scanner and vendor to understand the source of the signal and to see if these values are combinable. (2) We utilize longitudinal DTI-ALPS data to understand differences in mechanisms driving the source of the signal while accounting for demographic variables (age, sex), and vascular (white matter hyperintensities (WMH), PVS) and Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers (amyloid and tau-PET). (3) We investigate the clinical utility of DTI-ALPS in predicting cognitive decline and compare its performance with WMH, a traditional marker of small vessel disease (SVD).

We identified 2715 participants aged > 30 years with cross-sectional diffusion MRI (dMRI) from the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging (MCSA) [17,18]. The collection of all baseline scans per participant is termed the cross-sectional group. The MCSA cohort is a population-based sample of Olmsted County, Minnesota for studying various aspects of aging. These participants were recruited into the MCSA using an age and sex stratified design. Several subsets of these participants were used for additional analyses. The first subset, termed the crossover group, consisted of 81 participants who had pairs of dMRI acquired on a GE scanner and a Siemens scanner within two days of each other. This helped investigate the differences between DTI-ALPS measurements when dMRI data was acquired with different protocols. The second subset had 1175 participants aged > 50 years (CU and MCI) with at least two diffusion MRI scans, baseline FLAIR MRI, and vascular risk profile estimates, which were used for longitudinal analysis predicting DTI-ALPS. For comparing baseline DTI-ALPS with cognition we included a third subset of 1000 participants that were > 50 years of age (CU and MCI) at baseline with at least two z-scores (termed as the Cognition group).

Age and sex were obtained at the time of the clinical visit. The midlife and late-life vascular risk factors hypertension, hyperlipidemia, cardiac arrhythmias, coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, diabetes mellitus, and stroke were nurse abstracted from the medical records of participants using Rochester Epidemiology Project [19]. We derived a composite measure, cardiometabolic condition (CMC), defined as a summation of these seven measures based on the presence of the condition [20]. CMC scores range from 0 to 7. Clinical diagnosis was made using consensus criteria while global cognitive z-scores were calculated from combining z-scores from four domains (executive function, language, memory, and visuospatial performance) as described previously [20].

In a fourth subset of 704 participants, we have the automated PVS masks computed in the participants’ T1 spaces from the Siemens scanner [21] (termed as the PVS group). After registering the DTI-ALPS regions to the participant’s T1 spaces, we counted the number of PVS voxels in the DTI-ALPS regions divided by the total number of voxels in the regions. We also compared the DTI-ALPS values to the fraction of PVS voxels in the entire image of non-zero voxel values which was also computed as a percentage of total volume at risk based on the segmentation of the participant’s T1 image. Since the DTI-ALPS regions are located in the frontal and parietal regions, we computed the fraction of volume of PVS in the frontal and parietal regions.

All MRI images were obtained from 3T GE and Siemens scanners using previously published protocols [22]. All scans were acquired headfirst-supine with no angulation (“obliquing”) used in order to avoid difficult to correct eddy interactions between the imaging gradients and the main field. The GE images had 2.7 mm resolution across slices, field of view 350 × 350 × 159 mm, 68 ms echo time, and 10,200 ms repetition time. The diffusion weightings were 5 b = 0 volumes followed by 41 b = 1000 s/mm2directions evenly spread over a spherical shellThe Siemens images had 2.0 mm isotropic voxels, field of view 232 × 232 × 162 mm, 71 ms echo time and 3400 ms repetition time. The Siemens scans used a multiband acceleration factor of 3 and acquired 3 shells (13 at b = 0, 6 at b = 500, 48 at b = 1000, and 60 at b = 2000 s/mm2, evenly interspersed in time).

After denoising [23] the images, head motion and eddy current distortion were corrected using FSL’s eddy program [24–26]. We corrected for Gibbs ringing [27] and then skull stripped the images [28]. The noise bias was removed [29] using the noise image from denoising. Diffusion tensors were estimated using nonlinear least squares fitting and used to calculate Fractional Anisotropy (FA) and Mean Diffusivity (MD) images in DIPY [30].

whereare the diffusivities of water molecules along the right-left (RL), anterior-posterior (AP), and superior-inferior (SI) axes. DTI-ALPS is the ratio of diffusivity parallel with the medullary veins in the projection and association areas to diffusivity perpendicular to the veins and dominant fibers in those areas. Figure1presents the DTI-ALPS regions of interest (ROIs). These are spheres of 5- mm radius placed in an axial plane next to the lateral ventricles. DTI-ALPS was determined in the left and right hemispheres and averaged to get a single number for each participant.

The DTI-ALPS ROIs are placed next to the lateral ventricles in the template image. We observed that the template-participant registration sometimes places the ROIs partially within the ventricles. Also, the nominal spheres for the superior longitudinal fascicle (SLF)s may encroach on the more distal subcortical fibers where the diffusivity is primarily pointed in the x direction. The original DTI-ALPS methodology included such voxels, perhaps thinking that their contribution would be small since they tend to be hypointense in the FA images. However, the values used in the DTI-ALPS formula arediffusivities, which are not diminished where FA is small and are larger where CSF is present, thus creating conflict with the supposed mechanism of the DTI-ALPS model. Lastly, we use the median instead of the mean to exclude the effect of extraneous voxels (outliers) in the ROI diffusivity estimates (Fig.1).

Although the median is robust against up to 50% contamination by outliers, it does not label which the voxels that are outliers. To illustrate its effect, we can use the primary eigenvectors (V1) of the diffusion tensors as a proxy to measure the fraction of outliers in each of the DTI-ALPS ROIs. For example, in the superior corona radiata (SCR) (or projection fibers) the dominant diffusivity is in the SI direction and, hence, voxels where thecomponent of the diffusion tensor’s primary eigenvectorimage are smaller than theorcomponents are outside the SCR and should be considered as outliers for that participant.

We exclude the measured outlier voxels based on the above formulae from the spherical ROIs before computing the median of the chosen region for computing DTI-ALPS. The histograms of the outliers highlight that outlier voxels are more common in the association fibers, possibly due to the structure of the fibers and spherical nature of the ROIs (Fig.1C). Further, Fig.1D shows that the dominant direction in the included voxels isin the projection fibers andin the association fibers. The exclusion results were visually examined in random examples to verify the method was working as expected, as shown in Fig.1B.

The GE dMRI scans had a singleshell whereas the Siemens scans had three, revealing a problem with the DTI model. This model assumes monoexponential signal decay which is violated in most parenchymal voxels since they include multiple diffusion environments. The apparent diffusivities estimated by DTI will therefore depend on thevalues of the input data (Fig. 2), except in homogeneous voxels such as pure CSF. Both GE and Siemens acquisitions included 0 and 1000 s/mm^2, thus using only the b = 0 and 1000 s/mm^2 shells from the Siemens data is expected to make the DTI estimates better match the GE estimates at the cost of a reduction in SNR. To measure the effect ofvalue on DTI-ALPS we compared DTI-ALPS values in the previously established crossover data (group), and for the Siemens data estimated DTI-ALPS both with the full data and only the= 0 and 1000volumes. We used the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) to measure agreement of values between scanners. We also performed sensitivity analysis limited to scans from GE scanners.

The amyloid and tau ligands were imaged using PET/CT scanners [12]. The amyloid imaging was performed using Pittsburg compound B (PIB) and tau was acquired using AV1451. The amyloid and tau SUVR were estimated using established methods [31]. The amyloid SUVR values were calculated as a weighted median average of values from prefrontal, orbitofrontal, parietal, temporal, anterior cingulate, posterior cingulate and precuneus regions, which were scaled by the cerebellar crus grey matter. Tau PET SUVR was also calculated as a weighted median average of values in entorhinal, fusiform, parahippocampal, amygdala, inferior temporal and middle temporal areas, which were also scaled by the cerebellar crus grey matter.

The WMH volume fraction was calculated using T2 FLAIR and MPRAGE sequences. This is a fully automated pipeline described in [32], which is an improved version of the semi-automated pipeline in [33]. WMH masks were segmented based on location and intensity to grey matter and neighboring white matter voxels, and masks with single voxels were removed. The WMH to total intracranial volume (TIV) % was calculated to remove differences based on head sizes.

To evaluate if the differences observed in DTI-ALPS are reflective of PVS in the brain, we estimated automated PVS on T1/T2/FLAIR scans from 704 participants acquired on Siemens scanners using multimodal segmentation methods published previously [21].

The characteristics of the participants and the various subsets were summarized with means and standard deviations (SD) for continuous variables and counts and percentages for the categorical variables. Log transformations were done for amyloid, tau, and WMH measures due to skewness. We plotted the relationship between DTI-ALPS with age by various predictors of interest and included a smoother spline to illustrate general trends over time. ANCOVA models accomplished the comparison between baseline DTI-ALPS to various groups while adjusting for age and sex. Next, linear mixed effect models (LME) were computed separately to evaluate the predictors of longitudinal DTI-ALPS with vascular risk factors, imaging markers of AD and WMH, and their interaction with time while adjusting for age and sex. Lastly, we included a model with all predictors; age, sex, and all two-way interactions with time in an LME model that utilized backward elimination selection to derive the final parsimonious model.

Further, we performed additional LME analyses to identify the utility of white matter measures for the prediction of cognitive decline with baseline DTI-ALPS, mean diffusivity in white matter (MD) (used as a surrogate for white matter integrity), and the two-way interactions with time as predictors while adjusting for age, sex, and cycle number (i.e. number of times a participant has seen the cognitive tests to account for practice effects). The models were first run separately for DTI-ALPS and MD and then as a model containing both predictors with the two-way interactions with time and an interaction with DTI-ALPS and MD. We ran Pearson correlations between DTI-ALPS, MD, and WMH to check the strength of the association between these measures.

To test the power of DTI-ALPS for prediction of cognitive decline above and beyond vascular risk/burden, we compared the performance of DTI-ALPS with WMH and CMC in a multivariable LME model, age, sex, cycle number (accounting for learning effects), interactions of vascular risk/burden with time, and two-way interactions among the vascular risk burdens. A backward elimination selection was used to derive the final parsimonious model. All models report the fixed effect model R2and semi-partial total effect.

Sensitivity analyses were evaluated in a subset of participants with GE scans, which showed similar results to the full cohort.

We report the Pearson correlations and the slope from linear regression models between PVS volume/voxel fraction and DTI-ALPS.

Supplemental Fig.1shows the measured ICC agreement between the vendors was 0.9 and provides confirmation that GE and Siemens data can be combined after extracting matchedvalues. Therefore, with the strong agreement, we decided to combine the GE and Siemens data sets for the rest of the analysis.

We investigated the source of the signal as diffusivity along different directions and found varying behaviors as a function of age (Fig.2). We observed that while diffusivity along the x-axis (approximately the medullary veins) remains roughly constant, diffusivity perpendicular to the medullary veins (as along the y-axis in projection fibers; a DTI-ALPS denominator effect) increases with age, causing DTI-ALPS to decrease with age. We also plot ALPS-MD, the mean diffusivity of water molecules, in the DTI-ALPS regions. The denominator has two terms: one is the median of the ROI in the y projection fibers (Y PROJ), and the other is the median of the ROI in the z association fibers (Z ASSOC). Here we take the average of the left and right ROIs in each hemisphere to calculate the diffusivity in Y PROJ and Z ASSOC. Similar calculation was done for the ROIs in the numerator, x projection fibers (X PROJ) and x association fibers (X ASSOC). The mean of the median ROI values in the LSCR (or left projection fibers) and RSCR (or right projection fibers) is called as Y PROJ and was seen to increase the most with age. This can be observed from the coefficients of the linear regression with age for X PROJ (-6.41 × 10− 8mm2/s·yr), X ASSOC (1.99 × 10− 6mm2/s·yr), Y PROJ (4.48 × 10− 6mm2/s·yr), and Z ASSOC (2.02 × 10− 6mm2/s·yr), which was the highest for Y PROJ. We also conducted additional regional analyses to confirm that the placement of the ROIs in the suggested ROIs has biological value against placement of ROIs in different locations across major tracts (Supplemental Fig.2).

As shown in Fig.3, DTI-ALPS was negatively associated with age, higher in females, lower in those with abnormal CMC (≥ 2) until around age of 80, and lower for abnormal WMH (≥ 0.98). An optimal WMH cut-point was derived using Youden’s index, which was based on Fazekas visual grading [34]. DTI-ALPS was higher for PIB+ (PIB Centiloid ≥ 25) for those younger than 75 and then decreased in the older ages in comparison to PIB-.

As depicted in Fig.4, DTI-ALPS was significantly different at baseline between participants with high WMH burden (W+) and those with low WMH (W-) (p< 0.001) after accounting for age and sex. There were no significant differences for amyloid, tau, and cognitive impairment after adjusting for age and sex.

Figure5illustrates the results of DTI-ALPS vs. automated PVS. We observed poor correlation between PVS in DTI-ALPS regions and DTI-ALPS scores as well as with PVS in the whole brain. We evaluated the associations between frontal and parietal PVS and DTI-ALPS and confirmed regional lower correlations.

Table1summarizes the characteristics of the population used for analysis. In the five groups, the proportion of males (51%-57%), mean age (67–71 years), and average education (15 years) was similar. The average MMSE score was 28, and 2845% of participants wereAPOE4carriers. The mean global z-score was 0.05–0.33, CMC 1.8–1.9, WMH/TIV% 0.59–0.72, PIB SUVR 1.50–1.66. The average number of scans was 2.7 per participant with an average follow-up time of 5 years in the groups with longitudinal data.

As shown in supplemental Table1, we found that CMC, WMH, and late life hypertension were all significant predictors for rate of decline in DTI-ALPS. Apart from looking at the individual predictors of DTI-ALPS, we built a multivariable model for predicting change in DTI-ALPS with time, age, sex, CMC, WMH and PIB as predictors, and all two-way interactions with time. We used backward elimination and derived a final parsimonious model with significant predictors of DTI-ALPS (Table2). The predictors age, sex, CMC, and PIB were significant for predicting DTI-ALPS. Out of all two-way interactions with time, only the interaction of baseline WMH with time significantly predicted the rate of decline in DTI-ALPS. The overall fixed effect model performance was about 35%.

We were interested in the relationship of DTI-ALPS with standard measures of MD and WMH. DTI-ALPS was negatively correlated with MD (r= -0.385) and WMH (r= -0.41). WMH and MD were positively correlated (r= 0.63). Separate LME models containing DTI-ALPS and MD as predictors and the respective interaction with time for predicting cognition explained the same amount of variability, a fixed effect R2around 0.29 (Supplemental Table2). A model containing DTI-ALPS and MD along with two-way interactions with both time and each other saw significant interactions with all three variables. Both DTI-ALPS and MD predict the rate of cognitive decline (Supplemental Tables 3 and Supplemental Fig.3).

The final parsimonious model derived from the LME analysis to assess the relationship of the global z-score with CMC, WMH, DTI-ALPS, and their longitudinal dependencies is shown in Table3. DTI-ALPS, CMC, and WMH interactions with time were associated with a greater rate of decline in global z-score. Also, DTI-ALPS significantly interacted with WMH to affect the rate of cognitive decline.

In addition, baseline age per decade had a negative effect on global z-score. We also found that being male was associated with lower global z-score, whereas the number of times receiving the cognitive assessments (learning effects) increased the global z-score.

Figure6shows the predicted cognitive trajectories with the quartiles of DTI-ALPS and WMH using an average 70-year-old male participant for illustrative purposes. Lower DTI-ALPS and higher WMH have the greatest cognitive decline. The other three quartile measurements (ALPS: q1, WMH: q1, ALPS: q3, WMH: q1, and ALPS: q3, WMH q3) start with the same baseline predicted z-score, but ALPS: q3, WMH: q3 had a steeper decline with cognition than ALPS: q1, WMH: q1. Interestingly, ALPS: q3, WMH q1 had a subtle decline in cognition.

In the present study, we evaluated the sources of signal of an automatically calculated DTI-ALPS from the MCSA population, investigated its relationship with demographics, aging and dementia markers (vascular risk factors, imaging measures of AD and small vessel disease), and its usefulness in predicting cognitive decline. The main findings are discussed below.

We modified Liu’s method [15] by changing the mean of ROIs to median. This made the signal more robust in cases where the ROIs overlap with the ventricles in the left superior corona radiata (LSCR) and right superior corona radiata (RSCR) or when fiber tracts crossed. Diffusivity measurements from different scanners were made more consistent by extracting single shell data, and this led to more harmonized DTI-ALPS values. The GE and Siemens scanner crossover data confirmed this finding.

While DTI-ALPS has been proposed as a ratio, evaluating the age dependencies of their individual components shed light on the source of the signal. We evaluated the four terms in the DTI-ALPS (averaged over left and right hemispheres) and observed that the signal along theprojection fibers have the maximum increase with age, which leads to the decline of the ratio of DTI-ALPS over age. The hypothesis that there is dilation of the PVS of the medullary veins, thus increasing the signal perpendicular to the projection fibers, is in line with these findings. However, it is important to note that there is no evidence for increased movementparallelto the medullary veins, which was the presumed original expectation of DTI-ALPS as a proposed measure of glymphatic function. This is also consistent with previous work [8]. Previous studies have shown negative relationships between DTI-ALPS and age and that it is higher in females [35,36]. Our study validated these age and sex associations in a large community-based sample and accounted for these confounding factors in further models.

A surprising technical finding which arose during our analysis is the apparent robustness of DTI-ALPS to changes in scanner manufacturer. For example, we observed an ICC of 0.9 when Siemens and GE data with the same b-values were employed, and 0.89 when Siemens data included additional b-shells (Supplementary Fig.1). This suggests that although standard dMRI metrics are known to vary across scanners and manufacturers, often necessitating harmonization algorithms, DTI-ALPS may not vary as widely as standard measures. This warrants further study in separate future work.

We found that vascular risk factors as measured by CMC and WMH were associated with baseline DTI-ALPS. In the single predictor models, we found that CMC, WMH and late life hypertension were the significant predictors of the rate of decline in DTI-ALPS. These findings were corroborated with previous studies that have shown significantly lower DTI-ALPS in hypertensive participants than the normotensive group [37]. Additionally, our CMC findings are consistent and extended the findings of reduced DTI-ALPS found in patients with diabetes [38]. Both hypertension and diabetes are well known factors that cause vascular pathologies, which may increase the inflammation in the brain, promote blood-brain barrier breakdown, and contribute to reduced DTI-ALPS. The observed significant decreases in DTI-ALPS with increase of WMH load is consistent with the prior findings [39–41] where they showed that DTI-ALPS is associated with WMH volume.

Prior work has shown DTI-ALPS associations with other SVD imaging markers such as cerebral microbleeds, lacunes, and PVS [41]. DTI-ALPS was seen to be different between SVD cognitively normal and cognitively impaired groups. The differences were significant even after adjusting for SVD markers and factors like age, hypertension and diabetes. We also found that the baseline DTI-ALPS was not significantly lower for MCI in comparison to CU participants after accounting for age and sex. Consistent with our findings, Kamagata et al. [8] did not observe a significant difference between mean DTI-ALPS of MCI patients and controls or between MCI patients and AD participants, which may indicate that the effect sizes of DTI-ALPS changes seen from CU to MCI stage may be low. In contrast, a previous study found significantly lower DTI-ALPS in AD than MCI or CU [42].

Previous studies reported lower DTI-ALPS in association with higher amyloid and tau burden [43,44]. Ota et al. [43] found that DTI-ALPS was negatively correlated with PIB SUVR (11C-PIB) in the left parietal cortices, bilateral temporal cortices, and left posterior cingulate gyrus as well as tau-PET SUVR (measured using18F-THK5351 tracer) in right parietal cortex and bilateral temporal cortex. Sacchi et al. [44] suggested that DTI-ALPS and PVS might be a surrogate for AD. Notably, we were unable to find any significant differences in DTI-ALPS between PIB + compared to PIB- or tau + compared to tau- groups cross-sectionally. However, in multivariable models PIB was associated with longitudinal DTI-ALPS along with CMC and WMH while adjusting for age and sex, though their contribution was lower than WMH (Table2). Longitudinally, PIB was not significant for predicting rate of decline in DTI-ALPS either in the single predictor or multivariable models after adjusting for age and sex. Taken together, our findings suggests that DTI-ALPS may be a surrogate of SVD and not AD biomarkers. It was unexpected among some of the co-authors to see that DTI-ALPS was not significantly correlated with automated volumetric estimation of PVS load after accounting for age. Both regional and global analyses did not provide any evidence of association between PVS and DTI-ALPS. Given that enlarged PVS is an indicator of impaired glymphatic clearance and causal to amyloid deposition, the poor correlation of amyloid and PVS with DTI-ALPS suggests that DTI-ALPS may be a poor surrogate of glymphatic clearance.

Several studies have linked lower DTI-ALPS to poorer cognition both cross-sectionally ( [40,41,45]) and longitudinally [46,47], claiming that it was due to glymphatic dysfunction. A previous study showed that lower DTI-ALPS was associated with neurodegeneration related cognitive decline with the association between DTI-ALPS and cognitive decline fully mediated by amyloid and brain atrophy [42]. While the cross-sectional DTI-ALPS associations mainly focused on memory, executive function and attention [7,40,41,45], the longitudinal studies showed significant relationships with global cognition and processing speed. Consistent with these findings, we found that baseline DTI-ALPS was associated with decline in global cognition over time after adjusting for age, sex, and number of cognitive assessments. Interestingly, the observed associations remained significant even after including models with MD and WMH (Supplemental Tables2,3and Table3). Our findings extend these previous observations and suggest DTI-ALPS contributes to cognitive decline above and beyond some traditional imaging measures of white matter integrity. Interestingly, DTI-ALPS significantly interacted with MD as well as WMH to predict decline in the rate of global z-score which suggests that DTI-ALPS and the other vascular pathway measures (MD and WMH) work together to influence the cognitive trajectory.

Although DTI-ALPS has been proposed as a surrogate marker of glymphatic system activity [16], caution is needed when interpreting it as a proxy for glymphatic dysfunction due to certain limitations. For example, glymphatic clearance through CSF-ISF exchange in the deep white matter accounts for only a small fraction of the total waste clearance in this region [9], such as through the blood brain barrier, may play a more dominant role. A recent review, drawing on evidence from rodent models, implicated multiple pathophysiological factors-including hypertension, diabetes, and amyloid deposition-as the key contributors to glymphatic dysfunction, and parallelly contributing to cognitive decline associated with SVD [48]. More recently Taoka et al. [7] acknowledged that DTI-ALPS is not a direct measure of glymphatic dysfunction and suggested that a higher DTI-ALPS may merely indicate an increase by water molecules of Brownian motion radial to the dominant diffusivity direction. While there is much literature suggesting that DTI-ALPS is associated with aging and dementia markers, the measurement itself has not been proven to be a specific biological marker. The original notion motivating the selection of the DTI-ALPS regions and formula is inconsistent with both the data and our understanding of the primary contributions to the DTI signal. The region choice would make sense for detecting an increase of diffusivity specifically in the x direction, but the distance traversed by individual water molecules during a diffusion pulse sequence is microns, while the diameter of PVS detectable by MRI is hundreds of times larger; water in spaces that large would diffuse isotropically and fast enough to leave little signal at b = 1000 s/mm2. There may be an unseen population of “less enlarged” PVS, but they are more likely to be branches of, and thus perpendicular to, the medullary veins, than parallel to them (Fig. 2 [9]), . Thus, the effect of an enlargement of PVS would be degenerate with the effect of age or disease related demyelination in the WM tracts of the DTI-ALPS regions. In our analyses, we did not find associations between automated PVS (regional and global) with DTI-ALPS, supporting the idea that the source of the signal of DTI-ALPS is unclear, and the values need to be interpreted with caution.

A major strength of the study was a longitudinal dataset with a large sample size and multimodal imaging measures from a community-based population. Also, an improved automated evaluation of the DTI-ALPS signal in a large cohort made it possible to combine data across two different protocols and scanners. The study had several limitations. First, the relationship between DTI-ALPS and glymphatic system has not been evaluated by pathophysiology studies, and hence should be interpreted with caution [7]. Second, it has been pointed out that the use of singlevalue makes it impossible to differentiate between different microenvironments with different diffusivities within a voxel. With 2 mm voxels, larger than nearly all PVS, the movement measured is from both water in PVS and in the surrounding white matter. Third, DTI-ALPS is measuring free water diffusivity along the direction of medullary veins or PVS, not necessarily ”within” the PVS. There is partial volume effect from commissural fibers passing through between the corpus callosum and more distal regions.

Although proposed as an indicator of glymphatic function, the origin of DTI-ALPS signal remains unclear. We evaluated DTI-ALPS in a large population and found that DTI-ALPS was significantly associated with vascular measures, suggesting that it is a good marker for vascular dysfunction. Because of its poor association with amyloid deposition and overall (and regional) PVS load, there was lack of evidence that it may be a surrogate of glymphatic clearance mechanisms. However, DTI-ALPS was significantly associated with decline in cognition as measured by global z-score even after correcting for MD and WMH suggesting that it provides complementary information to traditional vascular imaging markers in predicting future cognitive decline.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We thank all the study participants and staff in the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging, Mayo Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, and Aging Dementia Imaging Research laboratory at the Mayo Clinic for making this study possible. We would like to thank AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Inc., for their support in supplying AV-1451 precursor, chemistry production advice and oversight, and needed FDA regulatory cross-filing permission and documentation.This work was supported by NIH grants R01 AG056366, U01 AG006786, P50 AG016574, RF1AG069052, UF1NS125417, R37 AG011378, R01 AG041851 and the GHR Foundation grant. This study used the resources of the Rochester Epidemiology Project (REP) medical records-linkage system, which is supported by the National Institute on Aging (NIA; AG 058738), by the Mayo Clinic Research Committee, and by fees paid annually by REP users. The content of this article is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) or the Mayo Clinic.We thank the reviewers for their useful comments. We thank Caitie Hedberg and Amelia M. Huehls for reviewing the language and writing style of the manuscript.