On-chip microcavities with embedded quantum emitters
provide an
excellent platform for high-performance quantum technologies. A major
difficulty for such devices is overcoming the detrimental effects
of fluctuations in the device dimensions caused by the limitations
of the fabrication processes. We present a system based on a 1D photonic-crystal
cavity with an embedded quantum dot. A microelectromechanical cantilever
is used to tune the cavity mode wavelength via index modulation and
the quantum-confined Stark effect is used to tune the quantum dot
emission energy, thus mitigating the effect of fabrication imperfections.
To demonstrate the operation of the device, a maximum voltage-controllable
cavity tuning range of Δλ = 1.8 nm is observed. This signal
is measured at the end of a bus waveguide which side-couples to the
cavity, enabling the coupling of multiple cavities to a common waveguide,
a key requirement for scale-up in these systems. Additionally, a quantum
dot is tuned into resonance with the cavity mode, exhibiting an enhanced
emission rate with a detector-resolution limited Purcell factor ofFP= 3.5.

Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) embedded
in nanostructures have
been an active field of research for the past two decades, during
which significant progress has been made toward the realization of
quantum technologies based on this architecture. Demonstrations of
key properties such as transform-limited emitter linewidths,,highly indistinguishable single-photon emission,,strong
light-matter interactions−and highly efficient, deterministic single-photon generation,have established QDs as a leading single-photon source for quantum
technology applications.

Embedding QDs in optical resonators
such as microcavities enhances
many of their favorable properties due to the enhanced light-matter
interaction that arises from coupling between the QD and the cavity
when they are in resonance. In the weak-coupling regime, this enhancement
is known as the Purcell effect which
manifests itself as a reduction in the radiative lifetime of the QD. This phenomenon not only increases the emission
rate of single-photons from the QD, but also reduces the sensitivity
to losses caused by decoherence or nonradiative recombination, which is critical to achieve high performance
devices based on single quantum emitters.

To enhance the light-matter
interactions of a QD in a microcavity,
the QD emission must be in resonance with the optical mode of the
cavity. This requirement poses a significant challenge for semiconductor
QD systems as, due to the random nature of QD growth and fluctuations
in fabrication,,it is unlikely that a QD that
is located in a cavity will be on resonance with the mode of the cavity.
To grow QDs with high-quality optical characteristics the Stranski–Krastanov
method is often used, which nucleates QDs in random positions on the
substrate, and of random sizes, resulting in a distribution of emission
energies. Furthermore, fabrication imperfections
can cause nanostructure dimensions to deviate from their design, leading
to significant detuning of the optical modes from their intended wavelength.
Consequently, a method to control both the QD emission energy and
the cavity resonance is highly desirable to maximize the yield of
these devices.

The tuning of QD emission energies is a well-established
technique
in the field and can be achieved through several different, complementary
methods such as electrical tuning via the quantum-confined Stark effect, strain tuning,−magnetic field tuning and temperature tuning. When considering cavity tuning methods, they can be split broadly
into two categories: material or mode perturbation. Material perturbation
methods influence the whole cavity/emitter system by altering the
physical properties of the structure. Examples of material perturbation
tuning methods include thermal,,electro-optical, acoustic and strain.,Mode perturbation tuning methods modulate the effective refractive
index of the cavity mode by using an electromechanical device to control
the displacement of a dielectric material within the evanescent field
of the cavity mode. This approach has the advantage of preserving
the optical properties of the QDs while enabling control of the cavity
mode wavelength. Moreover, such an interaction is inherently local
to a single cavity, a key requirement for a scaleable cavity emitter
system. Such devices have seen success in silicon,−diamond - AlN hybrid and, more recently,
in GaAs−systems. Actuation can occur in either in-plane or out-of-plane
geometries. In-plane actuation requires intricate comb drives, which
are complex to fabricate, occupy a large footprint and typically require
moderate voltages on the order of 10 V to operate. Out-of-plane systems of the type we adopt, on the other
hand, rely on the electrostatic attraction between layers of the wafer
to displace the material, simplifying fabrication and reducing device
size.

In the present work, we embed InAs QDs in a 1D-photonic-crystal
cavity (PhCC) where the electric field maximum is located in the high
index material. Additionally, a perturbing beam is mounted on a singly
clamped cantilever to tune the cavity. This geometry brings two key
benefits relative to previous reports in GaAs systems. First, 1D-PhCCs
possess intrinsically low mode volumes, on the order of12(λn)3, providing
a favorable environment for strong light-matter interactions. Second,
the evanescent field of the cavity mode is easily accessible in a
side-coupled geometry from both sides of the cavity allowing for the possibility of simultaneous cavity-waveguide
coupling and cavity mode tuning. Such a device could enable waveguide-mediated,
cavity–cavity coupling with the integration of single quantum
emitters. These systems have recently been shown to have applications
as high-efficiency, high-fidelity broadband single-photon switches, an important component in scaleable photonic
circuits.

Our electromechanical approach allows precise, voltage-controllable
tuning of the cavity wavelength and the QD emission energy. Here,
we present the design and optimization of the cavity and cantilever,
with experimental characterization of the cavity tuning behavior.
Finally, we demonstrate the capabilities of the device by measuring
the cavity mode tuning signal from the device output coupler, highlighting
the waveguide coupling capabilities of our device. Additionally, we
tune a QD through the cavity mode and measure the resulting Purcell
enhancement.

Figuredetails the design and operational principle of our
device. An SEM image of the device is shown inFigurea. Each device consists of a singly clamped
cantilever terminated by a 1D photonic-crystal (perturbing beam) which,
at rest, lies in close proximity to a 1D-PhCC. A bus waveguide is
present on the opposite side of the cavity to enable side-coupling
to the cavity (seeFigureb). This waveguide is terminated by a shallow-etched grating
output coupler optimized for the QD emission wavelength (900–920
nm). The structures are fabricated in a 170 nm thick GaAs membrane
containing self-assembled InAs QDs. The top and bottom layer of the
membrane arep- andn-doped, respectively,
enabling the formation of ap-i-ndiode across the QD layer and allowingVQDto be applied across the QDs. Beneath the membrane,
an AlGaAs sacrificial layer is selectively etched after the structures
are patterned into the membrane to create free-standing devices. The
full wafer structure is shown inFigurec. Importantly the substrate, directly under
the AlGaAs sacrificial layer, isn-doped enabling
the creation of ap-i-n-i-ndiode across the whole structure.
This allowsVEMto be applied between
the cantilevers and the substrate.

(a) SEM image of an electro-mechanically
tunable, waveguide-coupled
cavity device. (b) False-color SEM image of the cavity-waveguide interface
region. The green, red, and blue sections denote the bus waveguide,
cavity beam, and perturbing beam, respectively. (c) Schematic of the
wafer and diode structures in the device. Applied voltageVQDtunes the QD transition energy andVEMmoves the cantilever toward the substrate
via an electrostatic force. (d) Top: Schematic of the 1D-PhCC design,
optimized via FDTD simulations. Bottom: Simulated electric field profile
of the cavity’s fundamental resonance.

To isolate the tuning of QDs from the cantilevers,
a trench is
etched through thep-type layer at the base of the
cantilever to break the electrical continuity between the cantilevers
and the cavities. This design should in principle, allow for the independent
tuning of the QD and cavity energies simultaneously. However, due
to insufficient isolation between the two diodes, while we demonstrate
the tuning of both the QD and cavity energies, we are currently unable
to demonstrate this simultaneously (For further details, see text
onpage S6 and Figure S7in the Supporting
Information). A cantilever size of 35.0 × 7.5 μm is chosen
to give the best compromise between a low actuation voltage and resistance
to drooping when the sacrificial layer is removed.

A schematic
and electric field profile of the 1D-PhCC cavity are
shown inFigured.
The cavity beam contains three regions: the cavity center with widthcw, a linear taper with minimum pitchamin, minimum air hole radiusrminand number of periodsnt, and a uniform mirror with pitcha, air hole radiusr0and number of periodsnm. The thickness of the nanobeamtis fixed by the wafer parameters and the width is chosen
to bew= 280 nm to support single mode propagation.
Each parameter was optimized using FDTD simulations to conduct parameter
sweeps for fixed nanobeam dimensions. The optimized cavity design
exhibited a Q-factor ofQ∼ 5 × 106without losses and a modal volume ofVm=0.48(λn)3(wheren= 3.4). The design
of the taper region is critical to achieving the optimal Q-factor
as it acts to smooth the interface between the cavity and mirror modes
which introduces scattering losses.,In practice,
as we discuss later, the cavity Q-factors are reduced into the range
of a few thousand due to the presence of inadvertent losses. In our
design, we employ a linear taper where the ratio between the pitch
and radius is constant i.e.a0r0=aminrmin. The optimal value obtained from our simulations
ofamin= 0.84a0is consistent with previous studies in the literature.

The perturbing beam design was also optimized
to minimize scattering
losses associated with beam displacement in the evanescent cavity
field while achieving a large tuning range. Similarly, the bus waveguide
design was optimized to balance between the cavity-waveguide coupling
strength, and the cavity Q-factor. This was achieved by carefully
adjusting the separation between the cavity and bus waveguide and
modifying the waveguide width to optimize the spatial and k-space
overlap between the cavity and waveguide modes (seeSupporting Informationfor more detail).

Figureillustrates
the operating principle of the device. WhenVEMis applied, an electric field is produced between the cantilever
and the substrate. This effectively creates a capacitor with charges
accumulating on each of the “plates”. AsVEMis increased, the electric field strength increases
due to the buildup of oppositely signed charges on each plate. At
a critical charge accumulation, such that the force of electrostatic
attraction is greater than the restoring force produced by the elastic
strain of the cantilever, the suspended structure will begin to deflect
toward the substrate. As the cantilever actuates, the perturbing beam
gradually shifts out of the evanescent cavity mode. With increasing
deflection, the influence of the perturbing beam on the cavity mode
index diminishes, thus, reducing the effective mode index resulting
in a blue-shift of the cavity mode.

(a) Angled SEM images of cavity/bus waveguide
region at (i)VEM= 0.0 V and (ii) 9.0
V showing the downward
displacement of the perturbing beam at 9.0 V due to the electrostatic
actuation of the cantilever. (b) (i) Illustration of the spatial overlap
between the evanescent cavity mode and the perturbing beam, which
is actuated to tune the cavity wavelength. (ii) Schematic of device
operation depicting the application of bias between the cantilever
and the substrate creating an electrostatic force which deflects the
cantilever toward the substrate.

WhereVis
the applied bias,d0is the distance between
the cantilever and the substrate at equilibrium (V= 0),dis the displacement, ϵ is the permittivity
of the material between the substrate and the membrane,Lis the length of the cantilever andEis the Young’s
modulus of the cantilever material. The maximum displacement of the
perturbing beam from the equilibrium point is therefore reached at
the pull-in voltageVpi, the point where
the electrostatic and restoring forces are balanced. This corresponds
to a displacement ofdmax=13TSLwhereTSLis
the thickness of the sacrificial layer. AboveVpi, the electrostatic force overcomes the restoring force,
causing the cantilever to collapse and adhere to the substrate. IfVEMis reduced to zero, the cantilever can recover
to its initial state if the restoring force is greater than the van
der Waals force between the substrate and the cantilever. Usingeq, we calculate the theoretical
pull-in voltage of our devices to beVpi= 2.50 V.Figureai,ii, shows angled SEM images taken at room temperature of a device
atVEM= 0.0 and 9.0 V respectively, where
the displacement of the perturbing beam relative to the cavity beam
is evident. Notably, the beam does not collapse at 9.0 V despite this
voltage exceeding the theoretical pull-in voltage, which we attribute
to resistance in the circuit used to bias the cantilever. The actuation
voltage is reduced when operating at cryogenic temperatures due to
the reduced resistance. At cryogenic temperatures, the pull-in voltage
becomesVpi∼ 6.5 V.

We present
the results from three tunable cavity devices (labeled
device 1,2 and 3, respectively) to best show the capabilities of our
design. Devices 1 and 3 share design parameters whereas device 2 has
slightly adjusted parameters to improve the cavity mode uniformity
and cavity-waveguide coupling efficiency. Namely,amin= 184 nm,wbus= 180 nm
for devices 1 and 3 andamin= 188 nm,wbus= 190 nm for device 2. Device 2 also uses
a deep-etched grating coupler design as opposed to the shallow-etched
design used in devices 1 and 3 to simplify the fabrication process
by reducing the required number of etch steps. The main factor for
the difference in the performance of the three devices is fabrication
imperfections causing unintended fluctuations of the device parameters.
Mitigating the effect of fabrication imperfections remains a significant
challenge in the development of scaleable photonic circuits incorporating
QDs. Recent improvements in fabrication procedures such as surface
passivation wet etching and resist reflow techniques
show the potential to improve the performance and uniformity of nanostructures
by reducing absorption and scattering from the surfaces of the devices.

To study the tuning behavior
of the structures, the wavelength and Q-factor of the cavity mode
were measured as a function ofVEMusing
a micro-photoluminescence (μ-PL) setup. An above-band laser
(808 nm) was used to excite the broadband QD ensemble in the cavity
region, thereby illuminating the cavity mode. The displacement of
the perturbing beam was estimated usingeq, with a small empirical offset in voltage
ofVoff= 3.8 V to account for the circuit
resistance.Figureshows a comparison between the experimentally measured and simulated
tuning behavior of a typical cavity (device 1). Overall, a good agreement
between the simulated and experimentally measured structures can be
seen for both the Q-factor (Figurea,c) and wavelength dependence (Figureb,d) as a function of displacement. To reproduce
the lower Q-factors seen experimentally compared to the optimized
simulated cavities - which exhibit Q-factors in excess of 1 ×
106- we introduce large scattering losses from the cavity
and perturbing beams by modulating the size and positions of the air
holes within the beams. This reduces the Q-factor of the simulated
structures to the same order of magnitude as the measured devices.
The Q-factor increases slowly at displacements between 0 and 50 nm,
before increasing more rapidly at larger displacements above 50 nm.
The relationship between the Q-factor and the displacement becomes
roughly linear in the simulation at displacements larger than 150
nm. The overall increase in the Q-factor is smaller in the experimental
data compared to the simulated device. This may be due to the lower
starting Q-factor in the experimental device. As the Q-factor continues
to increase right up to the end of the range, this implies that scattering
losses from the perturbing beam are the dominant loss mechanism (seeSupporting Informationfor more detail). These
are likely due to suboptimal air hole radii in the perturbing beam
and sidewall roughness in the fabricated device. InFigureb a small red-shift in the
cavity wavelength is observed at small perturbing beam displacements.
This behavior is also seen in the simulations, although the magnitude
of the red-shift is larger in the simulated device. This shift may
be due to the initial displacement shifting the perturbing beam through
an antinode of the cavity mode field, thus increasing the effective
index of the mode and producing a red-shift in the cavity mode wavelength.
The maximum observed tuning range of this device was Δλ
= 0.55 nm. This range corresponds to an in-plane separation of approximately
85 nm between the cavity and perturbing beams in simulation. This
agrees with the typical in-plane separation extracted from SEM images
of the fabricated devices (seeSupporting Informationfor further details).

Device 1. (a,c) Experimental and simulated relationship
between
Q-factor and perturbing beam displacement, respectively (b,d) Experimental
and simulated relationship between cavity mode detuning relative to
initial cavity wavelength atV= 0 and perturbing
beam displacement, respectively.

To demonstrate bus waveguide coupling, the cavity
detuning characteristics
of a second cavity (device 2) were measured by exciting the cavity
mode with an above-band laser and collecting the light scattered out
of the structure by the output coupler which terminates the bus waveguide
as shown inFigurea.Figureb shows
the PL spectra of the cavity mode with the cantilever displaced by
0 nm (black) and 300 nm (red), using the excitation and collection
scheme depicted inFigurea. Device 2 exhibits the same blue-shifting behavior as observed
for device 1. However, the maximum detuning observed from this device
was larger at Δλ = 1.8 nm with the detuning vs displacement
dependence being shown inFigurec. This tuning range corresponds to a separation of
approximately 57.5 nm between the perturbing and cavity beams, which
is estimated from the simulated relationship between detuning range
and in-plane separation between the cavity and perturbing beams (seeSupporting Informationfor further details).
The difference in separation between device 1 and device 2 is a result
of slight variations in the design parameters. This large difference
in tuning range (0.55 nm vs 1.8 nm) demonstrates the sensitivity of
the device to the in-plane separation between the beams (85 nm vs
57.5 nm). We also observe the expected increase in the Q-factor of
the cavity mode as the cantilever is deflected as seen in the first
device, increasing fromQ0= 640 at a
displacement of 0 nm, toQ300= 1530 at
a displacement of 300 nm, similar to the behavior observed inFigurea,c. The results
fromFiguresand  clearly demonstrate the robust, voltage-controllable
cavity mode wavelength tuning capabilities of our device and how the
light can be extracted off-chip via a side-coupled bus waveguide terminating
in a grating output coupler. Furthermore, the indirect cavity tuning
does not significantly degrade the Q-factor of the cavity. Our devices
therefore exhibit key attributes necessary for the effective scale-up
of QD-cavity based systems.

Device 2. (a) Annotated SEM image detailing
the excitation and
collection scheme of the measurements in (b) and (c). (b) Cavity mode
PL spectra of device 2 with perturbing beam displacements of 0 nm
(gray) and 300 nm (red). The additional sharp lines arise due to emission
from QDs in the outcoupler which are excited by scattered laser light.
(c) Experimentally measured relationship between the cavity mode detuning
and the perturbing beam displacement for device 2 demonstrating a
maximum tuning range of 1.8 nm.

To demonstrate
further the potential of our device for quantum technologies applications,
we explored the behavior of a single QD located in a third cavity
(device 3) from the same wafer.Figurea shows the PL spectrum of a QD state tuning as a function
of the applied bias when exciting and collecting directly above the
cavity. Here, a bias is applied between the top of the device membrane
and the top of the device substrate, forming ap-i-n-i-ndiode. As the current flow through thep-i-n-i-nis lower than in ap-i-nfor a given voltage, a larger voltage can be applied across
the QDs than in ap-i-nstructure. This enables us to observe quantum-confined Stark-tuning
of the QDs in the voltage range 2–5 V as shown inFigurea. A clear enhancement
in emission intensity is observed when the QD becomes degenerate with
a weakly excited cavity mode at ∼902.5 nm, a signature of Purcell
enhancement. Furthermore, a single PL spectrum corresponding to the
orange shaded region inFigurea is plotted inFigureb. This shows the QD PL signal (red curve) with the cavity
mode (green curve), as distinct spectral features. The apparent splitting
of the cavity mode arises due to interference fringes in our experimental
setup originating from a Fabry–Pérot cavity formed between
the membrane and the substrate in the wafer. By filtering for the
QD emission only and removing the influence of the near-resonant cavity
mode, we investigated the photon statistics of the QD, represented
byg(2)(τ). As shown inFigurec, a clear antibunching
dip at zero delay time (τ = 0) is observed, withg(2)(0) = 0.176 ± 0.142, well below the threshold
of 50% for single-photon emission.Figured further explores the interaction between
the QD and the cavity by plotting the nonresonant PL lifetime of the
QD emission as a function of detuning from the cavity mode. A substantial
reduction in radiative lifetime is observed when the QD is in resonance
with the cavity, reaching a minimum of approximately 350 ps at zero
detuning (limited by the APD response time). This imposes a lower
bound on the Purcell factor of the QD ofFP= 3.5.

Device 3. (a) QD emission line electrically tuned via Stark tuning
through a cavity mode ∼902.5 nm. (b) Single QD PL-spectrum
from (a) (shaded orange region). (c) Second-order correlation measurement
of the emission from the QD in (b). (d) Nonresonant PL lifetime of
the QD as a function of cavity detuning.

This work demonstrates the successful integration
of quantum dots
(QDs) with tunable photonic-crystal cavities on a GaAs platform, enabling
precise control over QD-cavity coupling. By combining voltage-controlled
QD tuning with cavity mode adjustment via electro-mechanically actuated
cantilevers, we achieve robust and repeatable resonance alignment
between QD emission and single cavity modes. This tuning mitigates
the challenges posed by the stochastic nature of QD positioning and
fabrication-induced variations in cavity dimensionsa key barrier
to scalable QD-cavity coupled systems.

The good agreement between
simulated and experimentally measured
tunable cavity Q-factors and wavelengths provides a reliable framework
for realizing this design as a scalable platform for multiple cavity-coupled
systems. Furthermore, the device design, employing a 1D-PhCC with
a low mode volume, ensures efficient coupling between QDs and cavity
modes while minimizing losses. The implementation of cantilever-based
tuning offers a localized method for cavity wavelength adjustment,
preserving the intrinsic optical properties of the QDs  a
challenge in many other systems.

The experimental results highlight
several key achievements. First,
a large, voltage controllable cavity mode tuning range is observed
in a side-coupled geometry. This paves the way for scale-up to multiple
waveguide-mediated coupled-cavity devices, with efficient on and off-chip
coupling of photons. Second, Purcell enhancement is observed through
increased PL intensity and reduced PL lifetime when QDs are resonant
with cavity modes. Additionally, single-photon emission with marked
antibunching characteristics is demonstrated, with photon purity limited
only by material losses and nonresonant excitation conditions. Finally,
we achieve such strong single-photon behavior within a tunable cavity
system, enabling more intricate studies of QD-cavity interactions
in future work.

Overall, this work establishes a robust framework
for achieving
precise QD-cavity coupling in semiconductor systems, paving the way
for advancements in quantum light sources and cavity-enhanced photon
emission. These results lay the foundation for future exploration
of complex quantum systems, including multi-QD cavity-coupled systems
for the realization of cavity-based optical switches in photonic circuit
designs and the investigation of QD–QD interactions within
coupled-cavity environments.

The wafer was grown on a (100) GaAs substrate
via molecular beam
epitaxy. The top 300 nm of the substrate isn-doped
with silicon atoms at a density of 2 × 1018cm–2. A 1.15 μm layer of Al0.6Ga0.4As is grown on top of the substrate, the top 200 nm of which
isn-doped with silicon atoms at a density of 2 ×
1018cm–2. This sacrificial layer is
selectively etched away in the device fabrication process. Next, the
device membrane containing embedded InAs QDs is grown. The primary
material of the 170 nm thick layer is GaAs, in addition, two Al0.3Ga0.7As quantum well barrier layers are included
either side of the QD layer to increase the electrical tuning range
of the QD emission energies. The barrier above/below the QD layer
is 30/50 nm thick, respectively. The QDs are grown by the Stranski–Krastanov
method and are located at the center of the membrane. The top/bottom
30 nm of the membrane arep-/n-doped
with carbon/silicon atoms at a density of 2 × 1019cm–2and 2 × 1018cm–2, respectively.

The nanostructures were patterned into a SiO2resist
via electron beam lithography and were subsequently transferred into
the membrane through an inductively coupled plasma etch. The wafer
was then exposed to HF acid to selectively etch away the sacrificial
layer and produce free-standing structures. Finally, the wafer underwent
a critical-point dry process to preserve the structures during the
removal of the residual acid. To create the diode structures as depicted
inFigurec mesas
were etched into the wafer at a depth of 150 nm for the QD tuning
and 1300 nm for the cantilever actuation. Thep-andn-type layers were then patterned with Ti/Au contacts which
were connected to individual pins on the chip carrier to enable separate
bias’ to be applied to the QD and cantilever layers.

The sample was placed in a low pressure helium exchange-gas bath
cryostat on 3-axis piezoelectric stages. A pair of achromatic doublets
and an aspheric lens are used to efficiently focus light onto and
collect emission from the sample.

The optical measurements were
conducted using a standard confocal
micro-photoluminescence setup where the QDs and cavity modes were
excited nonresonantly with an above band (808 nm) continuous-wave
laser. The spectra were recorded using a silicon charge-coupled detector
positioned after a grating spectrometer. The time-resolved data shown
inFigured was obtained
via excitation from a pulsed Ti:S laser operating above band (∼810
nm) at ∼80 MHz repetition rate. The signal was detected using
an APD with a timing resolution of 350 ps and dead time of 22 ns connected
to a time tagger with a bin width of 50 ps.

The authors thank Andrew Foster for helpful discussions.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsphotonics.5c00606.

This work
was
funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EP/V026496/1).

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.