The specificity of enzymes for their substrate typically means there is one enzyme for one molecule. Nanozyme research has focussed on mimicking reactions that enzymes can perform, with far less emphasis on selectively reacting with species in complex biological fluids. Herein we ask the question, can a nanozyme be engineered to do what enzymes cannot do, detect and react selectively with two different substrates in the same blood sample? This is achieved using a nanoparticle that mimics the three-dimensional geometry of an enzyme with isolated substrate channels leading to an active site. The nanoparticle was composed of an active gold core and an inert carbon shell that has nanochannels and was immobilised onto an electrode. With careful choices of electrochemical potential, the solution environment inside the carbon nanochannels can be controlled to create the conditions ideal for selectively reacting with each species in sequence. In this way it was shown that glucose and dopamine could be selectively detected in the same unadulterated whole blood, by using two different electrochemical potential pulse profiles. The concept of using nanoconfinement as enzymes do, altering the solution environment inside channels, and using electrochemical potentials to choose which reactions take place, which enzymes cannot do, is a general principle and can be extended to other active sites and substrates.

The selective detection of two analytes was achieved by utilizing nanoparticles with isolated substrate channels, inspired by enzymes, and electrochemical potential to alter the local solution to facilitate either reaction.

The detection of glucose in whole blood was achieved with a 100 nm gold nanorod, acting as the active site, coated in a 6 nm carbon shell which had 10 nm isolated nanochannels engineered into it such that they reached down to the underlying gold surface. This nanozyme worked by first applying a highly reductive potential to expel chloride from the gold surface, remove fouling proteins from the mouth of the channels and split water into hydrogen and hydroxide ions at the gold. The water splitting served to increase the local pH within the nanochannels. A high pH environment is required for appreciable glucose oxidation on gold.29–31Subsequently an anodic potential was applied to oxidise glucose at the recessed gold active site. The combination of the reductive potential and then pulsing to an oxidising potential for glucose resulted in selective detection of glucose in whole blood.

The strategy taken to detect both species selectively is shown inScheme 1. At neutral pH dopamine can be detected at more negative potentials than glucose but by then generating basic conditions in the nanochannels, the potential required for glucose oxidation shifts negative of dopamine. As such, an electrode with the nanozymes attached detects dopamine in a blood sample before the potential is pulsed sufficiently negatively to split water and generate base, whereupon glucose can be detected selectively. The selective detection of dopamine and glucose in unadulterated whole blood is demonstrated.

To determine the nanoscale structure of the nanozymes high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) was performed on the nanoparticles.Fig. 1ashows an image of one of the nanozymes. The regions of dark contrast were associated with gold, as shown by the Fourier transform of the image in the red boxed region which showed the presence of close-packed face-centred-cubic gold (Fig. 1b). The region of lighter contrast surrounding the gold rod was attributed to the thin, porous carbon coating.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging of the particles was performed to confirm the presence of isolated channels in the carbon shell. The SEM image inFig. 1cconfirmed the proposed structure of the carbon as having isolated channel nanostructures with the dark spots on the rods attributed to said channels. The pore diameter was estimated by scanning electron microscopy showing an average pore diameter of 9 ± 3 nm (Fig. S3).

To provide further evidence that the carbon was conductive, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to understand the chemical structure of the carbon. The C 1s spectra of the nanozymes suggested the carbon shell was conductive, with a characteristic asymmetric peak shape of the principal carbon–carbon chemical state observed due to semi-metal effects from electrons in the conduction band (Fig. S4).41–44In addition the N 1s spectra contained two signals attributed to nitrogen in a graphitic and pyridinic chemical state, common of conductive nitrogen doped nanomaterials. The other core-level XPS spectra are presented in Fig. S5.

To evaluate whether the underlying gold nanorod surface was electrochemically accessible, and therefore available for sensing, cyclic voltammetry of the nanozymes in phosphate buffer at pH 7.4 was performed. The cyclic voltammogram shown inFig. 1ddemonstrated the characteristic peaks associated with gold oxidation around 1 Vvs.Ag|AgCl (all potentials reported arevs.Ag|AgCl) in the anodic scan and the proceeding reduction of gold oxide to metallic gold in the cathodic scan around 0.4 V.45These set of tests confirmed the desired conducting substrate channel architecture was made.

We start first with showing the selective detection of dopamine fromScheme 1that should simply involve the repelling of fouling proteins and the oxidation of dopamine without a need to change the pH in the substrate channels.Fig. 2adepicts five representative two-step chronoamperometric potential pulses. From left to right, an initial reductive potential of −0.7 V was applied for 0.2 s to expel chloride and fouling proteins. After this a potential of 0.3 V was applied for 0.2 s to perform the electrooxidation of dopamine. The last point of each anodic chronoamperogram was then summed to generate a single measurement, with the concentration of dopamineversussummed current shown inFig. 2b and c. The nanozyme with confining substrate channels was four times more active than the bare nanoparticle (Fig. S6). A useful aspect of using the summation of many consecutive measurements to obtain a single data point is that the sensitivity of the sensor can be tuned by simply increasing the number of two-step potential pulses applied. Hence, for the detection of dopamine in the micromolar concentration range the summation of 90 pulses was used to give a linear response in concentration range between 10 and 60 μM (Fig. 2c). However, to achieve lower limits of detection such as those in the nanomolar concentration range, increasing this to 200 pulses facilitated a linear response (Fig. S7c). In turn, a good linear response was found in the presence of fouling proteins from a concentration range of 10 nM to 60 μM (Fig. S7). The reproducibility of the analytical response of the artificial enzymes between different synthesised batches of nanoparticles was also shown to be highly consistent (Fig. S8).

Next the simultaneous detection of both dopamine and glucose was attempted. This can be seen inFig. 3, which shows the presence of glucose did not negatively impact the detection of dopamine. Only a slight decrease in current due to the addition of dopamine was observed during pulses of −1.85 to −0.25 V used for the detection of glucose (Fig. S11). TEM analysis of the nanoparticles after sensing showed no change in the particle morphology after the application of both sets of two electrochemical potentials (Fig. S12).

Next, to evaluate whether the sensor could detect the two analytes one after another, collecting a measurement for a concentration of one analyte and immediately switching to detecting the other analyte was performed. As shown inFig. 4, the analytical current increased linearly for dopamine with dopamine concentration from 10 to 120 μM and glucose for glucose concentration from 2 to 12 mM. When measuring glucose, the addition of 20 μM of dopamine did not significantly change the measured glucose current (shown by the filled (before) and after (hollow) addition of dopamine shown on the red glucose calibration curve). Similarly, when measuring dopamine, addition of glucose did not significantly alter the dopamine current (shown by the filled (before) and after (hollow) addition of glucose on the blue dopamine calibration curve). This demonstrates that the presence of each analyte did not significantly affect the detection of the other analyte. The real time readout of alternating additions is presented as a plot of currentversustime in Fig. S13. The ability of the sensor to switch quickly between measurements of each analyte accurately is a desirable quality especially in an application such as continuous monitoring where a real-time readout of the concentration of both analytes can be performed.

The result in phosphate buffered saline containing human serum albumin inFig. 4demonstrates that the two electrochemical pulsing protocols allow for the selective detection of each analyte in the same solution, simultaneously. The next question was does this capability extend to a realistic clinical biological fluid such as blood? To answer this a calibration curve was generated for both glucose and dopamine in whole blood (a linear relationship between current and dopamine concentration was observed between 10 and 120 μM as shown in Fig. S14). Then a different blood sample was spiked with a concentration of glucose and dopamine within the calibrated range. Then sequential detection of glucose then dopamine on the artificial enzyme electrode was performed.Fig. 5shows the calibration curves as well as a comparison to the true value (based on a commercial glucose monitor reading in the case of glucose and the concentration of added dopamine).

The nanozymes were able to successfully estimate the concentration of both glucose and dopamine to an acceptable clinical accuracy. The glucose concentration in the spiked unknown blood sample was measured with a commercial glucose sensor to be 5.8 ± 0.2 mM. However, the artificial enzyme estimated the glucose concentration to be 7.8 ± 0.2 mM (95% confidence interval). This difference would, however, not translate into inappropriate treatment, sitting in region B of a Clarke error analysis which takes into account the absolute value of each measurement, the relative difference and the clinical significance of this difference.46,47The concentration of dopamine added to the spiked blood sample was 40 μM. The estimated value for the dopamine concentration obtained with the nanozyme was 35.5 ± 0.1 μM (95% confidence interval) an 11% error from the true value.

In conclusion, the successful detection of both glucose and dopamine at the same time and in the same solution was performed in complex biological media. This was facilitated by the implementation of enzyme inspired substrate channels which create a different solution environment around an embedded active site. The control of the solution environment was achieved through the application of electrochemical potentials to the nanoscale interface which expelled chloride and proteins from the surface allowing for a high hindrance to biofouling.

The implications of the finding of this work, are much greater than simply the capability of the detection of both glucose and dopamine with the same electrode in whole blood. Previously this two-step pulsing technique, to create a unique solution environment was resigned to generating alkalinity with a highly reductive pulse, which also expelled chloride and proteins. However, there are many analytes that on a variety of materials are electroactive at physiological pH. The findings of this study, which show a potential of far lower magnitude also facilitates anti-biofouling properties, demonstrating that the approach could be utilised on any electroactive material/analyte pair to improve analytical performance. With the further design of the interface, it may even be possible to detect more than two analytes using more advanced signal analysis or the implementation of multiple distinct active sites under the confining substrate channels. In addition, it may now be more feasible for this approach to be utilised to achieve enzyme like selectivity in other electroanalytical applications outside of the body.