Mucocutaneous separation (MCS) is a common early complication after colorectal cancer (CRC) surgery. The aim of the present study is to investigate the predictive value of preoperative nutrition-inflammation markers for MCS and establish a novel predictive model. The internal cohort composed of CRC patients admitted to Changhai Hospital Affiliated to Naval Medical University was randomly divided into a training cohort and an internal validation cohort at a ratio of 7:3, while patients from the First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical University and 72nd Group Army Hospital formed an external cohort. The clinical variables were retrospectively analyzed to establish a scoring system for evaluating preoperative nutrition-inflammation status. In the training cohort, the independent factors for MCS were identified through univariate and multivariate Logistics regression analysis. The predictive model was drawn with a nomogram, which was verified in the two validation cohorts by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, calibration curves and decision curve analyses (DCA). 359 and 145 eligible patients were included in the internal and external cohorts, respectively, including 47 and 30 patients suffering MCS in their respective cohorts. Old age, overweight, colostomy, end stoma, and peripheral blood markers were associated with MCS. The ROC curve showed that the nutrition-inflammation score (NIS) composed of GLR, SII and PNI predicted the differentiation of MCS well, and the area under the curve (AUC) was 0.752. Univariate and multivariate analyses showed that old age, end stoma and NIS (= 3) were independent risk factors for MCS. The AUC of the nomogram model based on these factors in the training cohort and validation cohorts were 0.850, 0.909, and 0.906, respectively. The calibration curves showed no significant difference between the predicted value of the model and the actual observed value, and the DCA curves showed that the model had good clinical application value. The risk score of this model was correlated with healing time of MCS, postoperative hospital stays, and chemotherapy intervals of CRC patients. The prediction model of MCS based on preoperative peripheral NIS had good accuracy and demonstrated promising performance of predicting the risk of postoperative MCS in CRC patients.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-16430-6.

Enterostomy is commonly used as a diversion measure to treat inflammatory bowel disease, digestive tract malignancies, intestinal obstruction, perforation, and trauma1,2. The purpose of enterostomy is to prevent digestive tract contents from entering the distal intestinal segment, thereby avoiding the aggravation of anastomotic complications, or as an alternative to digestive tract reconstruction due to primary disease3. In China, there are approximately 1 million patients with enterostomy4. Among these patients, colorectal cancer (CRC) is the leading reason for them to receive stoma surgery, accounting for about half4. Mucocutaneous separation (MCS) is a common early postoperative complication, defined as a partial or total separation of the stoma from the surrounding skin. The incidence of MCS varies widely between studies, ranging from 3.7% to 19.5%5,6. This early postoperative complication can increase hospital stay, delay the timing of adjuvant therapy, and impair the prognosis of CRC patients7,8.

Preoperative nutrition-inflammation status is a key factor in predicting postoperative complications. Some ratios composed of preoperative tests, such as the CRP-to-albumin ratio (CAR)9–11, lymphocyte-to-CRP ratio (LCR)12–16, glucose-to-lymphocyte ratio (GLR)17, and lymphocyte-to-monocyte ratio (LMR)18,19, are the predictive markers of the risk of postoperative complications. Furthermore, some scores based on lab test results are also used as predictive markers to evaluate such risk, including the prognostic nutritional index (PNI)20,21, geriatric nutritional risk index (GNRI)22,23, and systemic immune-inflammation index (SII)24,25. Because these markers are derived from routine preoperative tests, they have the advantage of being easily obtained in clinical applications.

Our study aimed at determining whether nutrition-inflammation markers could be applied to independently predict postoperative MCS in CRC patients who received enterostomy.

This study was a multicenter retrospective study. We included 394 CRC patients admitted to Changhai Hospital Affiliated to Naval Medical University from 1 January 2021 to 31 December 2022 as an internal cohort (CH cohort) and 188 patients from the First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical University and 72nd Group Army Hospital of Huzhou University as an external cohort (BB-HZ cohort), respectively. Inclusion criteria: (1) 18–80 years old; (2) Diagnosis of colorectal cancer with radical resection; (3) Postoperative temporary or permanent ileostomy or colostomy. Exclusion criteria: (1) Patients lost to follow-up; (2) Preoperative neoadjuvant therapy; (3) Incomplete clinical data. The final enrolled patients from CH cohort fell into the training cohort and the validation cohort in a 7:3 ratio. The operations of this research got the approval from the Ethics Committee of Changhai Hospital Affiliated to Naval Medical University (Shanghai, China), The First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical University (Bengbu, China), and 72nd Group Army Hospital (Huzhou, China) on the basis of the Declaration of Helsinki. All subjects provided a written informed consent for the data use.

Clinical data and preoperative tests in the study were collected from all patients via the medical record system of three institutions. Clinical data included gender, age, height, weight, pathological stage, stoma position, stoma type, and presence of MCS. The formula for calculating BMI was defined as weight divided by the square of height. According to the Chinese BMI classification criteria26, overweight and obesity are defined as a BMI ≥ 24 kg/m2. Therefore, enrolled patients were stratified into two groups using a BMI threshold of 24 kg/m2. In view of the previous literature27, we grouped the patients with 65 years old as the cut-off point. Additionally, patients were classified into two categories based on gender (male or female), pathological stage (stage I–II or stage III–IV), stoma location (ileostomy or colostomy), stoma type (loop stoma or end stoma), and presence of MCS (MCS group or non-MCS group). Preoperative test data included neutrophil count (NC), lymphocyte count (LC), platelet count (PC), serum albumin (SA), plasma albumin (PA), fasting blood glucose (FBG), etc. The nutrient-inflammatory markers were GLR (= FBG/LC), PNI (= SA + 5 × LC), and SII (= PC * NC/LC).

All enrolled patients were followed up by telephone regarding healing time, postoperative hospital stay, and chemotherapy interval. Healing time was defined as the number of days until the stoma mucosa and skin healed completely after surgery. Postoperative hospital stay refers to the number of days between the surgery and the discharge, while the postoperative chemotherapy interval is the number of days between the operation and the first chemotherapy.

The ROC curve was combined with the Youden index (maximum=sensitivity+specificity−1) for confirming the optimal cutoff values for GLR, PNI, and SII to predict postoperative MCS in CRC patients. When GLR and SII are greater than the cutoff value, it is 1 point; if less than the cutoff value, it is 0 points. PNI scores are calculated in reverse. NIS is the total score of GLR, SII, and PNI, ranging from 0 to 3 points.

The univariate regression analysis involved the NIS and clinicopathological variables of the patients in the training cohort. We confirmed variables withP< 0.05 as risk factors for the independent prediction of MCS. A nomogram was drawn by the R package “rms,” which corresponded the cumulative total score of various covariates to a 0–100% probability of MCS. The R package “pROC” was employed for plotting the ROC curve as well as calculating the AUC. The R package “ResourceSelection” was adopted to calibrate the Hosmer–Lemeshow goodness exhibited by the fit test and calibration curve. Calibration curves above or below the diagonal lines indicate underprediction or overprediction. The DCA was plotted by the R package “rmda”, to quantify the clinical effectiveness of the nomogram using net benefits at various threshold probabilities. ROC curves, calibration curves, and DCA curves were similarly employed for validating model accuracy in a validation cohort of patients.

SPSS 25.0 and R 4.1.3 served for the statistical analysis. For normally distributed quantitative data (mean ± standard deviation), Student’s t-test or ANOVA test were utilized to conduct comparisons between groups. Conversely, Mann–Whitney U test or Kruskal–Wallis test serve as the preferred non-parametric methods for such comparisons dealing with non-normally distributed continuous variables (median (interquartile range)). Comparative analysis of categorical data (n, %) was typically conducted using the chi-square test. Logistic regression analysis assisted in identifying the independent risk factors among these variables. Correlation between risk scores derived from predictive model and follow-up data were calculated and given as Spearman’s r and p-values. These parameters included odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI), and a two-sidedP< 0.05 reported statistical significance. The construction and validation of predictive models based on independent risk factors were as described above.

The study involved 359 eligible CRC patients with a colostomy or ileostomy from CH cohort (61.53 ± 10.96 years) and 145 patients from BB-HZ cohort (63.33 ± 11.32 years). As shown in the flow chart (Fig.1), participants from CH cohort were randomized into a training cohort (n = 250) and an internal validation cohort (n = 109). Comparison of clinical variables, including age, gender, BMI, stoma location, stoma type, and lab test results, indicated no obvious statistical differences between the three cohorts (Table1). The patients from CH cohort fell into MCS (n = 47, 13.09%) and non-MCS (n = 312, 86.91%) groups. Age, BMI, colostomy, end stoma, lymphocyte count, platelet count, GLR, SII, and PNI were factors that could impact the postoperative MCS occurrence, and all of them had aPvalue < 0.001 except BMI and PNI with a p value below 0.05 (Table2).

Comparison of CRC patients with MCS and non-MCS in the CH cohort.

Relative to the non-MCS group, the MCS group presented higher preoperative GLR (P< 0.001, Fig.2A) and SII (P< 0.001, Fig.2C), but remarkably lower PNI (P< 0.001, Fig.2B). The ROC curve and Youden index maximum showed that the optimal cutoff values for GLR, SII, and PNI to predict MCS were 3.975, 887.972, and 50.025, respectively. Based on these cutoff values, GLR, SII, and PNI were scored as follows: (1) GLR < 3.975, 0; GLR > 3.975, 1; (2) SII < 887.972, 0; SII > 887.972, 1; (3) PNI > 50.025, 0; PNI < 50.025, 1. As shown in Fig.2D, the NIS was defined as the sum of the GLR, SII, and PNI scores (NIS=GLR (0 or 1)+SII (0 or 1)+PNI (0 or 1), with a range of 0–3). Patients with MCS presented higher preoperative NIS relative to patients without MCS (P< 0.001, Fig.2E). The ROC curve found that the NIS was more specific for predicting MCS (AUC=0.752) than the individual markers (Fig.2F).

Construction of NIS. (A) Preoperative GLR was higher in patients in the MCS group than in patients in the non-MCS group. (B) Preoperative PNI was lower in patients in the MCS group than in patients in the non-MCS group. (C) Preoperative SII was higher in patients in the MCS group than in patients in the non-MCS group. (D) The best cutoff values of GLR, PNI and SII were obtained from the maximum of their Youden index. The NIS was calculated according to the best cutoff values. (E) Preoperative NIS was higher in patients in the MCS group than in patients in the non-MCS group. (F) ROC curves of NIS, GLR, PNI, and SII.

Patient NIS and clinicopathological parameters (age, gender, BMI, TNM stage, stoma location, and stoma type) were analyzed by univariate analysis. Age, BMI, stoma site, stoma type, and NIS were statistically significant (allP< 0.05). The multivariate analysis revealed that age above 65 years, end stoma, and NIS (= 3 points) were independent risk factors for predicting MCS (Fig.3).

Logistic regression analysis of clinicopathological parameters affecting the occurrence of MCS in patients after enterostomy. Univariate analysis showed that age, stoma site, stoma type, BMI, and NIS were significant for the occurrence of MCS. Multivariate analysis suggested that age (> 65 years, OR = 4.748, 95% CI 1.787–12.612,P= 0.002), stoma type (end stoma, OR = 24.292, 95% CI 1.173–502.919,P= 0.039), and NIS (= 3, OR = 14.675, 95% CI 3.744–57.514,P< 0.001) were independent risk factors.

A clinical model to predict postoperative MCS was constructed using age, stoma type, and NIS, and visualized with a nomogram (Fig.4A). To use the nomogram, a straight line is drawn upward from the value of each variable to the corresponding score, and the total score can be obtained by summing these scores. The percentage that corresponds to the total score indicates the probability of postoperative MCS predicted by the model.

A nomogram for predicting MCS. (A) nomogram derived from the training group. (B) ROC curve for the training group. (C) ROC curve for the internal validation group. (D) ROC curve for the external validation group.

In the model, the area under the ROC curve was 0.850, 0.909, and 0.906 in the training and two validation cohorts, respectively, demonstrating the model’s strong discriminatory ability (Fig.4B–D). The calibration curve illustrates that the model’s predicted probabilities strongly fit the actual probabilities in the three cohorts (Fig.5A–C). DCA curves illustrated the threshold probability of the nomogram in all cohorts and evaluates the clinical effect of the nomogram more intuitively, indicating the strong predictive ability of the predictive model and its high clinical application value (Fig.5D–F).

Evaluation of predictive models for MCS in patients with CRC. (A,B, andC) Calibration curve for the predictive model of the training group (A), the internal validation group (B), and the external validation group (C). (D,E, andF) DCA curve for the predictive model of the training group (D), the internal validation group (E), and the external validation group (F).

Comparison between follow-up data of enrolled patients illustrated that the healing time of patients in the MCS group was significantly longer than that in the non-MCS group in both internal cohort (P< 0.001, Fig.6A) and external cohort (P< 0.001, Fig.6D). The similar differences between the two groups in the postoperative hospital stay and chemotherapy intervals were observed (allP< 0.001, Fig.6B–F). The predictive model calculated an MCS risk score for each patient based on the three independent risk factors described above. Correlation analysis showed that the risk scores were correlated with the healing time(r = 0.23,P< 0.001, Fig.6G), the postoperative hospital stay(r = 0.20,P< 0.001, Fig.6H) and chemotherapy intervals(r = 0.16,P= 0.003, Fig.6I) in the internal cohort, while the same outcomes were obtained in the external cohort(healing time, r = 0.40,P< 0.001, Fig.6J; postoperative hospital stay, r = 0.38,P< 0.001, Fig.6K; r = 0.53,P< 0.001, Fig.6L). The correlation between these variables and risk scores was further enhanced when the study population was narrowed down to patients who developed post-operative MCS in the both internal cohort(healing time, r = 0.59,P< 0.001, Fig.6M; postoperative hospital stay, r = 0.44,P= 0.002, Fig.6N; r = 0.36,P= 0.013, Fig.6O) and external cohort(healing time, r = 0.56,P= 0.001, Fig.6P; postoperative hospital stay, r = 0.65,P< 0.001, Fig.6Q; r = 0.69,P< 0.001, Fig.6R).

Correlation between risk scores of nomogram and postoperative rehabilitation of CRC patients. (A,B, andC) Differences in healing time (A), postoperative hospital stay (B), and chemotherapy intervals (C) between the MCS and non-MCS groups in the CH cohort. (D,E, andF) Differences in healing time (D), postoperative hospital stay (E), and chemotherapy intervals (F) between the MCS and non-MCS groups in the BB-HZ cohort. (G,H, andI) Association of nomogram’s risk scores with healing time (G), postoperative hospital stay (H), and chemotherapy intervals (I) in the CH cohort. (J,K, andL) Association of nomogram’s risk scores with healing time (J), postoperative hospital stay (K), and chemotherapy intervals (L) in the BB-HZ cohort. (M,N, andO) Association of nomogram’s risk scores with healing time (M), postoperative hospital stay (N), and chemotherapy intervals (O) of the MCS patients in the CH cohort. (P,Q, andR) Association of nomogram’s risk scores with healing time (P), postoperative hospital stay (Q), and chemotherapy intervals (R) of the MCS patients in the CH cohort.

CRC is the top three representative malignancy for males and females globally28, with rectal cancer accounting for 50% of cases29. A permanent colostomy is often unavoidable due to the direct involvement of the anal sphincter or the elevator ani muscle by the tumor30. In patients who successfully preserve anal function, the most worrisome complication of rectal cancer after surgery is anastomotic leakage, potentially leading to a systemic septic reaction, with an incidence as high as 23%31,32. For patients with mid-low rectal cancer, a protective ileal loop stoma may lower the morbidity and mortality caused by anastomotic leakage. Additionally, a proximal colostomy is indicated for patients with colon cancer complicated by obstruction, ischemia, or perforation to prevent complications from primary anastomosis33. Consequently, enterostomy is widely used in treating CRC by surgery. However, despite the initial goal of stoma formation being to lessen the severity of anastomotic complications post-CRC, complications related to stoma still have a high incidence. In the study, postoperative MCS was observed in 77 out of 504 CRC patients (15.28%). Among those, more than half experienced prolonged hospital stays and delayed postoperative adjuvant therapy, both of which are unfavorable prognostic factors. Early predicting the risk of postoperative MCS in CRC patients aids in perioperative management and improves patient quality of life.

More and more studies have confirmed the predictive effect of peripheral blood nutrient-inflammatory markers on CRC patients’ postoperative complications. According to Xia et al., a high NLR (> 2.8), high PLR (> 140), and low PNI (< 47.1) could lead to elevated risk of postoperative complications in patients with stage T1-2 rectal cancer34. Preoperative hypoalbuminemia is related to short-term postoperative outcomes in CRC patients. Chiang et al. found that for every 0.1 g/dL increase in albumin, postoperative morbidity and mortality respectively decreased 7.3% and 15.6%35. Previous studies confirmed the strong association between inflammatory status and nutrient levels with MCS36–38. However, few studies have predicted stoma complications after CRC using preoperative nutrition-inflammation status. In this study, the peripheral nutrition-inflammatory markers GLR, SII, and PNI were associated with the incidence of MCS. In the ROC curve, the AUC values for GLR, PNI, and SII in predicting MCS were 0.700, 0.649, and 0.644, respectively. Therefore, we constructed a novel index combining nutritional status and inflammation levels, which included the three markers mentioned above and achieved an AUC of 0.752. NIS, as a preoperative nutrition-inflammation marker, demonstrated high specificity and sensitivity in predicting postoperative MCS in CRC patients.

The three cohorts of enrolled patients showed no significant differences in clinicopathological variables and nutrition-inflammation markers, ensuring the data were comparable. In the training cohort, the NIS was included in the univariate analysis along with age, gender, BMI, pathological stage, stoma location, and type. We conducted subsequent multivariate analysis on variables withP< 0.05 from the univariate analysis, and identified age, stoma type, and NIS as independent risk factors for predicting MCS.

There is an underlying mechanism by which NIS based on blood cell components, albumin, and blood glucose acts as a risk factor to independently predict MCS after CRC. The occurrence of MCS shares similarities with poor postoperative incision healing and infection. Patients with poor glycemic control and hyperglycemia are easier to suffer impaired wound healing and more susceptible to infection, hence exhibiting a higher risk of postoperative complications39. Besides, hyperglycemia triggers inflammation-mediated damage that may cause local vasodilation, neutrophil adhesion, chemotaxis, and phagocytosis, further reducing peripheral blood flow and angiogenesis, and delaying wound healing40. A meta-analysis by Tan et al. revealed a remarkably escalated risk of infectious complications after surgery in CRC patients with diabetes41.

About 35% of patients receiving colorectal surgery were moderately and severely malnourished before operation because their bowel function was injured by tumor-induced obstruction and malabsorption42. This manifests as preoperative hypoalbuminemia, decreased lymphocyte count, and reduced body weight. Malnutrition is related to an elevated risk of postoperative infectious complications43. The mechanism may involve reduced collagen synthesis and granulation, as well as an impaired immune response44. Neutrophil and platelet counts reflect the preoperative inflammatory state and are important components of wound healing. During the wound healing process, neutrophils migrate to the affected area through chemotaxis and cellular proteolytic enzymes, playing an antibacterial role and preventing infection. Platelets participate in coagulation and thrombosis, and they also play a role in wound healing and immune inflammation by releasing cytokines and recruiting immune cells45. Preoperative inflammatory status leading to neutrophil and platelet depletion can result in a relative deficit after surgery, with excessive abnormal fibrin fibers at the skin-mucosal junction, inhibiting granulation tissue formation and leading to delayed healing46.

This study further utilized the identified risk factors to independently predict the incidence of MCS based on the construction of a nomogram model. The AUC of the ROC curve reached 0.850 0.909, and 0.906, respectively in the training and validation cohorts, demonstrating the model’s high specificity and sensitivity. In the calibration curve, the model’s predicted values were not significantly different from the actual values. DCA revealed that the prediction model met the net clinical benefit. Consistent results were obtained in the validation cohorts. Furthermore, we further found that risk scores derived from this predictive model can predict postoperative recovery time of CRC patients, especially in patients suffering from MCS.

As a prevalent stoma-related complication, the incidence of MCS demonstrated substantial heterogeneity across published reports5,6,47. In addition to the factors of the patients themselves and the primary disease, variations in treatment teams, encompassing surgeons and nursing team, are considered a primary contributing factor. The risk of MCS is exacerbated by excessive stoma tension and ischemic stoma necrosis, which often arise from suboptimal stoma design and surgical technique38,48. These mechanistic factors elucidated the inter-center variability in MCS incidence observed in this study. This paradigm also explains why obstructive CRC patients underwent end colostomy in Hartmann’s procedure exhibited heightened MCS risk, as shown in the strong implication of the end stoma in the multivariate analysis of this study. In such clinical scenarios for emergency diversion, end stoma is susceptible to ischemic injury of the naked intestinal segment due to excessive mesenteric vessel clipping, overburdened tension caused by pulling the residual end, and concomitant infection or malnutrition49. Additionally, established colon stent implantation programs significantly decreased the necessity for emergency Hartmann’s procedure in cases of obstruction, thereby mitigating the subsequent incidence of MCS.

However, some limitations existed in the study. First, as a retrospective study, it is challenging to avoid subject selection bias. Second, although the study involved three institutions, the sample size was slightly insufficient. Third, due to the differences of preoperative routine examination items in different centers, not all markers and indices reflecting inflammation and nutritional status could be comprehensively considered. In addition, perioperative management, the surgeon’s skills and the emergency situation of patients were not included in the study due to the lack of objective indicators. To enhance the objectivity in evaluating the predictive capacity of this model, future research should be supported by prospective, multicenter trials with large sample sizes.

The study confirmed NIS based on GLR, SII, and PNI, along with age and stoma type, as independent predictive factors for CRC patients’ postoperative MCS. These markers are effective for the sensitive prediction of MCS. Early improvement of NIS throughout the perioperative period can lower the morbidity of postoperative MCS in CRC patients and improve short-term and long-term outcomes.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.