Individuals living with neuromuscular disease (NMD) often face substantial financial strain due to the chronic and progressive nature of these conditions. Despite growing awareness, the extent and determinants of financial toxicity (FT) in this population remain poorly understood. We assessed FT among individuals with NMD or their caregivers in Canada using a validated patient-reported outcome measure.

We conducted a national, cross-sectional survey of individuals with NMD or their caregivers registered with Muscular Dystrophy Canada (MDC). The survey, available in English and French, was completed online or by telephone with assistance from MDC personnel. FT was measured using the validated Comprehensive Score for Financial Toxicity (COST)–Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy questionnaire. Multivariable generalized linear models were used to identify factors associated with FT.

A total of 1,426 participants (mean [SD] age, 52.0 [19.5] years; 52% female) completed the survey. Seventy-five percent reported household incomes below the national median, primarily because of reduced employment. The average COST score was 17.2 [10.4], significantly lower than scores reported in other chronic conditions, including cancer. Moreover, 70% of respondents had COST scores below 26, indicating moderate or severe FT. After adjusting for other factors, COST scores were significantly worse among caregivers than in adults with NMDs. Lower scores were also observed among individuals identified as racialized minority (rate ratio [RR] 0.74; 95% CI 0.64–0.87); those with lower household income (RR 0.59; 95% CI 0.51–0.69), those with lower education (RR 0.91; 95% CI 0.82–1.00), and those unable to work (RR 0.74; 95% CI 0.64–0.86); students (RR 0.54; 95% CI 0.34–0.86); or early retirees (RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.74–0.99). FT was also greater among those diagnosed with autoimmune myopathies (RR 0.82; 95% CI 0.73–0.92), spinal muscular atrophy (RR 0.79; 95% CI 0.66–0.96), and limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (RR 0.87; 95% CI 0.77–0.99).

FT is highly prevalent among people living with NMDs, particularly caregivers and those with socioeconomic and clinical vulnerabilities. Policies to improve financial support and health care coverage for NMD-related needs could help alleviate this burden. Further research is required to understand the mechanisms contributing to FT within NMD subgroups.

High medical and nonmedical costs and income losses can result in material and psychological hardships as well as coping behaviors such as treatment delay or nonadherence.8Consequently, families living with NMD face risks of financial burden and distress related to diagnosis and treatment. Financial distress stems from accumulating expenses, worries about managing costs, and lifestyle adjustments to cope, such as seeking financial assistance or reducing leisure activities. Financial burden and psychological distress contribute to what is known as financial toxicity (FT).9FT is associated with poor health-related quality of life,10reduced spending on basic goods and leisure activities,11delayed or missed treatments,12and the use of savings to pay for treatment11in other patient populations.

FT and its determinants have not been well characterized among most NMD populations. Assessments of FT in other conditions (e.g., oncology and cardiovascular disease) may not be generalizable to NMD populations because of different ages at onset and disease courses. Clinical heterogeneity among NMDs may cause FT to vary by disease group, across age groups, or between patients and caregivers. This study was conducted to describe FT across a broad range of individuals living with NMD and to identify determinants of FT in the NMD population.

The survey was directed to adults living with NMD, children and youth (younger than 18 years) with NMD, and unpaid caregivers supporting someone with NMD. Caregivers were subdivided according to whether they themselves had NMD. All respondents were required to be 18 years or older, reside in Canada, and be fluent in English or French. Responses for children with NMD were obtained through a parent or guardian proxy. Proxy responses were permitted for adults unable to respond on their own. Caregivers were eligible if they provided unpaid care for an individual with a NMD. All respondents were required to self-report a clinical diagnosis of a neuromuscular condition for themselves and/or the individual under their care.

To limit fraudulent or duplicate responses, no incentives were offered for survey initiation or completion. To avoid bots, we included strategies such as mandatory open-ended response questions and skip logic responses, and tracking the household identification number with IP address fingerprinting. Timestamps were collected to ensure that questionnaires were not completed in inappropriately short time frames by bots. In addition, >80% of participants were registered with MDC, and NMD diagnosis was verified. The reporting of this study conforms to the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology guidelines17(eAppendix 1).

The study protocol was approved by the Ottawa Health Science Network Research Ethics Board (Protocol ID # 20210601-01H). All participants had access to the informed consent form, and provision of informed consent was implied by the completion of the questionnaire.

Key FT determinants were identified using conceptual frameworks of FT in other diseases22,23and NMD literature4,24-26and included age, sex, racialized minority status, education, household income, occupation status, urban vs rural dwelling, diagnosis group, time since diagnosis, private insurance status, out-of-pocket expenses for caregivers, and direct nonmedical and medication costs.

To help understand how FT in NMD is affected by other factors known to drive inequality in Canada, sociodemographic data, including age, sex, and racialized minority status, were collected. Participants were asked, “To which ethnic or cultural groups did your ancestors belong?” In addition, racialized minority status was defined using the racialized minority variable used by the Canadian census (i.e., individuals who are non-Caucasian in race or non-White in color).27While individuals identifying with Indigenous heritage are considered distinct from racialized minority by the Canadian census, Indigenous peoples were combined with the racialized minority population to improve statistical power. Rurality was defined using the forward sorting address28provided. Disease characteristics including NMD diagnosis, age at diagnosis, and time since diagnosis were also collected.

Adults with NMD were asked to report their highest level of education, employment status, occupation type, household income, marital status, private health insurance status, medications used to manage their NMD (including cost per month), and the percentage of their medication costs covered by their health insurance, as well as the number of visits and cost per visit to various health care providers in the past 6 months. Annual direct nonmedical costs, such as transportation fees, were calculated by multiplying the number of visits for each health care provider type over the past 6 months by the cost per visit and then doubling this total to estimate the yearly expense.

Caregivers provided diagnoses and age(s) at diagnosis for all individuals affected by NMD. Caregivers were also asked to report out-of-pocket expenses incurred during the past 6 months, because of their caregiving responsibilities.

Because the survey was open and distributed online through MDC's registry and outreach channels, we did not have a fixed number of invited participants. To assess the adequacy of our sample, we conducted a post hoc power analysis. This approach is common in community-based surveys involving rare disease populations, where a full sampling frame is not available.29Seventy-three percent of adults, 82% of caregivers, and 88% of minors with NMD had FT (COST scores <26). Using these proportions, we calculated statistical power with Cohenh—a standard effect size for comparing proportions in power analysis.30All 3 subgroups had >99.9% power to detect a difference from a reference proportion of 50%.

Descriptive analyses including Pearson correlations, independentttests, and analysis of variance were performed to describe COST scores by sociodemographic, health status, and economic variables. Statistical significance was set atp< 0.05. Because COST scores were skewed (eFigure 1), multivariable generalized linear models (GLMs) with log-link functions and a Gaussian family were used to assess associations of independent variables with the COST score as a continuous outcome variable. Binary indicator variables (1 = has the condition, 0 = does not) for each NMD subgroup were entered into separate models. The reference group for each model was defined as individuals without that specific condition, including those with other types of NMD. Owing to the clinical heterogeneity and different treatment responses among autoimmune myopathies, subgroup analyses were performed in inclusion body myositis (IBM) and non-IBM types. Age was modeled as a categorical variable to account for nonlinearity with the COST score (eFigure 2). Results are presented as rate ratios (RRs) with 95% CIs. Analyses were performed using Stata SE 17 (StataCorp, College Station, TX).

Data underlying this article are available on reasonable request to the corresponding author.

From the 2,375 questionnaires collected, 9 were excluded as test records and 940 were excluded because the participant did not answer any questions apart from basic demographics. A total of 1,426 responses were included in this study. 72.4% were adults with NMD, 19.7% were caregivers with or without NMD, and 8.0% were parents or guardians of minors with NMD. 52.3% of respondents were female. The mean ± SD age was 56.0 ± 16.1 years for adults with NMD, 53.2 ± 16.0 years for caregivers with or without NMD, and 10.8 ± 4.7 years for minors with NMD. 13.8% of participants identified as racialized minorities including 4.9% indicating Indigenous heritage. 85.2% resided in urban areas, and most participants completed the survey online.

Among adults and caregivers with NMD, 58.4% obtained a trade school diploma, postsecondary diploma, or higher degree and an additional 30.7% completed high school. Regarding employment status, fully retired people were the largest proportion (28.7%) while 22.0% were in paid employment and 20.5% were unable to work because of NMD-related disability. Most participants (55.5%) were married or in a common-law partnership. 23.6% reported household income over $100,000. Occupations held by adults with NMD differed markedly from those in the general population. They were more likely to work in business, finance, and administration (40% vs 16%) and education and government services (22% vs 12%) but less likely in sales and service (12% vs 21%), trades, transport and equipment operation and related occupations (2% vs 15%), and management (3% vs 10%).3139.1% of participants reported using medications related to their condition in the past 6 months with median (interquartile range) annual costs of $504 ($120–$1,794). The proportion with private health insurance was 47.8%, falling to 28.0% among those with household incomes below CAD $50,000. Insurance plans covered 84% ± 15% of medication costs, on average. Among caregivers, 27.5% had annual out-of-pocket caregiving expenses over $4,000 (eTable 1).

Across all participants, 81% reported at least some financial hardship due to NMD, ranging from 49% of those with oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) to 100% of those with spinobulbar muscular atrophy (Kennedy disease) (Figure 1). No significant differences were observed in the distribution of financial hardship responses between IBM and non-IBM autoimmune myopathy subtypes (data not shown). The mean COST score was 17.2 ± 10.4 (Table 1); caregivers without NMD had the lowest mean COST scores (12.3), followed by minors with NMD (13.3), caregivers with NMD (17.5), and adults with NMD (18.2) (eTable 2). BIND respondents expressed increased concerns about future financial problems, covering care costs, maintaining income, out-of-pocket expenses, and financial stress, alongside reduced control and satisfaction over their finances. Greater concerns were reported among caregivers without NMD and minors (by proxy), compared with adults and caregivers with NMD (p< 0.05).

Individuals who did not provide an NMD diagnosis (n = 48) have been omitted. COST = Comprehensive Score for Financial Toxicity; FACIT = Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy; Congenital NMD = congenital myasthenic syndrome, congenital muscular dystrophy, congenital myopathies, Pompe disease; DM1/DM2/myotonic myopathies = myotonic dystrophy type 1, myotonic dystrophy type 2, other myotonic disorders; FSHD = facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy; LGMD/later onset muscular dystrophies = limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, collagen 6 muscular dystrophy, distal myopathy or distal muscular dystrophy, other muscular dystrophies; OPMD = oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy; Other NMDs = amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy, mitochondrial disease, other/unknown neuromuscular disorders; SBMA (Kennedy disease) = spinobulbar muscular atrophy; SMA = spinal muscular atrophy.

Congenital NMD = congenital myasthenic syndrome, congenital muscular dystrophy, congenital myopathies, Pompe disease; DM1/DM2/myotonic myopathies = myotonic dystrophy type 1, myotonic dystrophy type 2, other myotonic disorders; FSHD = facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy; LGMD/later onset muscular dystrophies = limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, collagen 6 muscular dystrophy, distal myopathy or distal muscular dystrophy, other muscular dystrophies; OPMD = oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy; Other NMDs = amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy, mitochondrial disease, other/unknown neuromuscular disorders; SBMA (Kennedy disease) = spinobulbar muscular atrophy; SMA = spinal muscular atrophy.

Bivariate analyses suggested that, among adults with NMD, worse COST scores were significantly (p< 0.05) associated with younger age at survey completion, racialized minority status, lower education, student or unemployed status, lower household income, lack of private insurance, single or previously married status, and specific diagnoses (e.g., ataxias, spinal muscular atrophy [SMA], and congenital NMDs) (Table 1, eTable 3). For caregivers, age (35–64 years), disease group, and higher out-of-pocket expenses correlated with worse COST scores (p< 0.05). No variables were significantly associated with COST scores among minors with NMD (p< 0.05).

Results of the GLMs showed that, among all survey participants, caregivers with or without NMD had 13% worse FT scores compared with adults with NMD (RR 0.87, 95% CI 0.78–0.96). Racialized minority groups had COST scores that were 21% worse compared with White individuals. In addition, individuals diagnosed with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy had COST scores that were 13% worse while those with OPMD had COST scores that were 22% better, respectively, compared with those without these conditions (Figure 2).

All GLMs were adjusted for age, participant type, racialized minority status, and NMD subtype. COST = Comprehensive Score for Financial Toxicity; GLM = generalized linear model; Congenital NMD = congenital myasthenic syndrome, congenital muscular dystrophy, congenital myopathies, Pompe disease; DM1/DM2/myotonic myopathies = myotonic dystrophy type 1, myotonic dystrophy type 2, other myotonic disorders; FSHD = facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy; LGMD/later onset muscular dystrophies = limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, collagen 6 muscular dystrophy, distal myopathy or distal muscular dystrophy, other muscular dystrophies; OPMD = oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy; Other NMDs = amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy, mitochondrial disease, other/unknown neuromuscular disorders; SBMA (Kennedy disease) = spinobulbar muscular atrophy; SMA = spinal muscular atrophy.

In adults with NMD, the GLM results demonstrated that factors associated with worse COST scores included being a racialized minority (RR 0.74, 95% CI 0.64–0.87), a student (RR 0.54, 95% CI 0.34–0.86), unable to work (RR 0.74, 95% CI 0.64–0.86) or retiring early (RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.74–0.99), having a high school education (RR 0.91, 95% CI 0.82–1.00), and being diagnosed with autoimmune myopathies (primarily IBM) (RR 0.82, 95% CI 0.73–0.92) or SMA (RR 0.79, 95% CI 0.66–0.96) (Figure 3). Worse COST scores were observed in subgroup analyses restricted to those diagnosed with IBM (RR 0.78, 95% CI 0.69–0.89). Conversely, significantly better COST scores were associated with being retired (RR 1.26, 95% CI 1.10–1.44), having household income $150,000 or higher (p< 0.01), and being diagnosed with mild or later onset NMDs such as OPMD (RR 1.16, 95% CI 1.06–1.27). Among caregivers, older age was significantly associated with worse COST scores (eFigure 3).

All GLMs were adjusted for age, education, employment status, household income, private insurance status, racialized minority status, marital status, and NMD subtype. COST = Comprehensive Score for Financial Toxicity; GLM = generalized linear model; Congenital NMD = congenital myasthenic syndrome, congenital muscular dystrophy, congenital myopathies, Pompe disease; DM1/DM2/myotonic myopathies = myotonic dystrophy type 1, myotonic dystrophy type 2, other myotonic disorders; FSHD = facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy; LGMD/later onset muscular dystrophies = limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, collagen 6 muscular dystrophy, distal myopathy or distal muscular dystrophy, other muscular dystrophies; OPMD = oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy; Other NMDs = amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy, mitochondrial disease, other/unknown neuromuscular disorders; SBMA (Kennedy disease) = spinobulbar muscular atrophy; SMA = spinal muscular atrophy.

The burden of chronic comorbidity and the high prevalence and severity of disabilities associated with NMDs contribute to reduced functional independence.45However, the gap in service provision often forces families to incur high costs of assistive devices and paid caregiving to maintain independence.5,24In fact, informal caregivers of individuals with NMDs provided more hours of care compared with caregivers of people with other chronic diseases,26underscoring the more severe disability and heightened care demands associated with NMDs.24The increased caregiving burden may cause concerns about caregivers' future financial health46and contributes to their 13% worse COST scores compared with adults with NMD. Our findings, based on the COST-FACIT questionnaire, indicate that FT in individuals with NMD and their caregivers is primarily driven by economic strain—specifically concerns about future financial security, difficulty affording care-related expenses, and reduced satisfaction and control over one's financial situation. These results underscore the financial vulnerabilities faced by this population, even in the context of publicly funded health care. Targeted interventions could include expanded coverage for NMD-related treatments and assistive equipment, income support programs, and financial navigation services integrated into clinical care. These approaches may help alleviate the financial burden identified in this study and should be considered in future policy and care planning.

Despite adjusting for socioeconomic status, strong associations between racialized minority status and increased FT remained. Potential explanations for the increased FT observed among those of racialized minority include racial/ethnic differences in susceptibility to other systemic comorbidities, which affect disease activity and can lead to increased health care utilization and out-of-pocket costs on medications and treatments.51Disparities in access to health care, sociocultural factors, and racial discrimination can further potentiate racial and ethnic health disparities and thus the experience of FT.52Finally, coping methods that can either compromise or improve health and well-being have been shown to vary by racial/ethnic groups in cancer.53It is important to note that approximately 21% of participants did not report their racial or ethnic background. If individuals who declined to respond differ systematically in their experience of FT, this may introduce bias into our estimates. As such, while our findings highlight concerning disparities, the association between racialized minority status and FT should be interpreted with caution. This study has several limitations. First, we lack data on social determinants beyond education and income, such as experiences of discrimination and support received from extended family, which may influence health and employment disparities. Second, incomplete responses regarding outpatient medical and indirect costs among adults with NMDs limited our ability to adjust for these factors in our regression models. Third, the small number of parent proxy responses for minors with NMD reduced our power to detect significant predictors of FT in this subgroup. Fourth, retrospective reporting on costs may be subject to recall bias. Because the full sampling frame was unavailable, we were unable to calculate a traditional response rate or describe nonrespondents. However, a post hoc power analysis confirmed that our sample size was sufficient to support the main findings. Furthermore, we could not directly compare FT in early-onset genetic conditions because of a lack of published studies using the COST-FACIT questionnaire. Future research applying standardized and validated tools, such as COST, across diverse range of chronic and genetic diseases would help inform cross-condition comparisons of FT. Last, our findings are specific to the Canadian context within a publicly funded health care system. FT will likely differ in countries with alternative health and social support systems, limiting the generalizability of our results to other countries. In addition, owing to the rarity of the conditions examined, our findings may not fully represent the lived experiences of individuals with NMD across all regions of Canada. As our sample was drawn primarily from individuals registered with MDC, those with more severe symptoms may be over-represented. Despite these limitations, key strengths of this study include the use of a large national sample of individuals with NMD and caregivers experienced with NMDs, encompassing comprehensive sociodemographic, health, and economic data. MDC representatives aided with survey completion and verification of NMD diagnosis using registry data for participants who consented to provide identifiable information (name and email), which enhanced the accuracy and completion rate of the survey.

NMDs can limit earning potential by reducing employment rates and affecting the types of occupations held. FT is more prevalent among people living with NMDs compared with other chronic conditions. FT severity is influenced by factors such as racialized minority status, NMD severity and age at onset, education, occupation, income, and caregiving status. Policy interventions aimed at promptly recognizing FT and enhancing support for patients and caregivers are important. The financial and health outcomes for individuals with NMDs and their caregivers could be improved by providing assistance in financial planning and job placement and by expanding health care and disability coverage for medications, treatments, caregiving benefits, home modifications, and assistive devices.

The authors sincerely thank the individuals living with NMD and caregivers for taking the time to complete the survey and provide valuable feedback. The authors also thank Muscular Dystrophy Canada for their assistance in helping develop and conduct this study.