Corrosion represents
a key impediment to the greater adoption of
light metal alloys as alternatives to automotive steels in vehicular
applications. Thin nanocomposite coatings generate considerable interest
for their potential in aluminum alloy corrosion protection, which
is challenging due to the lack of conventional protection mechanisms
that are available for other metals. Here, we investigate the thickness-dependent
corrosion protection afforded to AA 7075 substrates by poly­(ether
imide)-based (PEI) coatings. Using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
to monitor ion transport, we observe that with increasing coating
thickness, PEI more effectively sequesters ions and enforces permeation
selectivity, thereby precluding deleterious substitution processes
that dissolve corrosion products. We further explore thickness-dependent
modifications to the PEI matrix by incorporation of unfunctionalized
exfoliated graphite (UFG) particles to control diffusion processes
and co-polymerization with siloxane to manipulate permeation selectivity.
Incorporation of UFG platelets can degrade corrosion protection through
galvanic coupling with the substrate and enhanced interfacial ion
diffusion at lower coating thicknesses. However, interphase development
mediated by hydration, network relaxation, and thermal displacement
of PEI chains yields a rigid matrix that enhances permeation selectivity
and imbues extended tortuosity. This combination results in superior
corrosion protection for thicker PEI coatings with embedded UFG platelets
under aggressive accelerated corrosion testing conditions. Siloxane
co-polymerization, while weakening interfacial adhesion to AA 7075
substrates, facilitates the sequestration of solubilized corrosion
products within the matrix under appropriate processing conditions.
The results illustrate the importance of understanding the dynamical
evolution of polymer secondary structure under aggressive accelerated
corrosion testing conditions, point to the specific role of secondary
structure and interphasic domains in enforcing permeation selectivity,
and establish fundamental thickness limits for retaining effective
barrier protection.

Light-weighting
offers a path to reducing fuel consumption and
carbon emissions in the transportation sector, an approach that has
gained new impetus with the rapid expansion of vehicle electrification.−While alloy designs with precisely engineered microstructures enhance
the strength of light-weight metals, their use in structural applications
exposed to the external environment introduces persistent materials
degradation challenges. These issues remain unresolved for some of
the most promising candidate materials such as aluminum and magnesium
alloys.−Localized corrosion in aluminum alloys arises from
the galvanic coupling established between the bulk aluminum matrix
and microalloyed surface precipitates in corrosive aqueous media,
which is exacerbated by chloride-ion-mediated ligand substitution
reactions that yield soluble corrosion products. To mitigate corrosion of light metals, protective coatings
employ various mechanisms, including anodic passivation,,cathodic protection,−barrier protection,−and the triggered release
of active inhibitors.−Typically, nanocomposite coatings integrate multiple
corrosion inhibition strategies by incorporating diverse fillers and
through finely-tuned modulation of their interphasic interactions
within the continuous polymeric matrix. Poly­(ether imide) (PEI)-based coatings offer best-in-class protection
for aluminum alloys, owing to their exceptional interfacial adhesion
and unique ability to establish permeation selectivity. Selective
permeation arises from the secondary structure formed by polymer chain
entanglement, which hinders ion transport to the coating/metal interface.,−In this article, we explore the failure mechanisms
of PEI coatings in harsh corrosive environments and examine how targeted
modifications, such as co-polymerization and functional filler incorporation,
can ameliorate ion permeation to the interface, augment defect tolerance,
and mitigate deleterious generation of soluble corrosion products.

In harsh corrosive environments, emulated under
laboratory conditions
through high-temperature exposure to brine or salt-fog, PEI coating
failure can occur through multiple mechanisms. Some notable pathways
include loss of interfacial adhesion and partial delamination of the
coating from the substrate, polymer chain degradation via radical
attack, imide hydrolysis, chain disentanglement, and chain scission.
Defects can also arise in the macromolecular network of PEI coatings
through void formation in fractional free volume near end-caps where
permeating species are able to diffuse unincumbered engendering formation
of diffusion channels that afford a more direct pathway for ionic
diffusion. Ion permeation, water absorption, and compounding effects
of localized corrosion resulting from processing imperfections can
be further magnified through defective interfaces with fillers that
imbue additional pathways for ion transport. While the resilience of polymeric coatings generally improves with
increased thickness because of the greater length of ion diffusion
pathways, thicker coatings can also introduce additional scope for
imperfections. A critical question that arises is the minimal viable
coating thicknesses where desired levels of corrosion protection can
be achieved.,Such a minimum coating thickness
is critical for estimation of economic viability of candidate solutions
for automotive lightweighting and for navigating Pareto trade-offs
between industrial implementation, cost, and coating longevity.

In this article, we examine the failure mechanisms of PEI coatings
with varying thickness upon prolonged exposure to room-temperature
brine, high-temperature brine, and salt fog conditions. In order to
enhance the longevity of corrosion-resistant PEI coatings, we further
examine two distinct approaches to alleviate failure through: (1)
inclusion of ion-impermeable unfunctionalized exfoliated graphite
as a filler to enhance tortuosity and imbue greater defect tolerance
in thick coatings; and (2) co-polymerization of PEI with siloxane
moieties to enhance flow properties, obtain pinhole-free thick coatings,
and accelerate network relaxation processes.

To evaluate coatings
of varying thickness, we specifically utilize
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to monitor the evolution
of electrochemical behavior over 100 days of immersion in a 3.5 wt
% aqueous NaCl solution, 30 days of thermal immersion in 3.5 wt %
NaCl solution at 70 °C, and 30 days of ASTM B-117 salt-fog testing.
We further investigate structural modifications at the PEI/AA 7075
interface using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). Results indicate that unfilled PEI coatings
extend the duration of protection as a function of thickness. Thin
coatings lack sufficient diffusive bulk to effectively sequester ions,
whereas thick coatings tend to contain internal defects that exacerbate
failure mechanisms. UFG inclusions elongate ion-diffusion pathways
in PEI through interphase development. Copolymerization modifies the
PEI backbone to decrease spatial constraints in the polymeric matrix
and increase the number of microdeformations during network relaxation,
thereby decreasing holidays and pinholes. The results provide valuable
insights into the failure mechanisms of multicomponent nanocomposite
coatings and inform strategies to ameliorate failure through tailoring
interphases and processing conditions.

UFG was synthesized, as described
in previous work.,Briefly, 5.0001 g of Bay Carbon
SP-1 graphite powder was dispersed in 100 mL of Honeywell Research
Chemicals 99.5% purity anhydrousN-methyl-2-pyrrolidone
(NMP) from Thermo Scientific Chemicals (CAS: 872-50-4) yielding a
4.76 wt % dispersion. The dispersion was then placed in a Branson
5510 ultrasonicator for 8 h to mechanically exfoliate the graphite
particles; the sealed, 250 mL borosilicate glass bottle was mechanically
agitated every hour to prevent sedimentation of the larger particles
and to redistribute particles to improve homogeneity of exfoliation.

Two types of polymer
pellets, provided by SABIC Inc., were dissolved in Honeywell Research
Chemicals 99.5% purity anhydrous NMP to achieve a concentration of
10 wt % polymer solution. The two types of pellets were a fully imidized
PEI, ULTEM 1000, and a fully imidized siloxane-PEI copolymer, SILTEM
1500. The UFG dispersion was added to a 10 wt % PEI solution of ULTEM
1000 to achieve 3 wt % UFG concentration in the final nanocomposite
coating. Additional NMP was added to the dispersion to generate a
loading of 5.9 wt % of polymer in NMP, which was previously found
to be optimal for spray deposition. To
prevent water absorption, all dispersions were stored under a headspace
of nitrogen gas. The dispersions were then spray-coated onto AA 7075
substrates using an automated spray coater (vide infra).

Size distribution
analyses of UFG nanoparticles in the 3 wt % UFG/PEI coating formulation
was determined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) on a FEI Quanta
600 FE-SEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM). UFG/PEI solutions were
drop-cast onto silicon wafers and heated on a hot plate temperature
of 250 °C to remove residual solvent for SEM and AFM analyses.
AFM was performed using a Bruker Dimension Icon AFM. The AFM was completed
on tapping mode with a MikroMasch HQ:NSC35n-type
silicon tip that had an 8 nm radius, 40° tip cone angle, a force
constant of ∼16 N·m–1, and a resonance
frequency of 300 kHz. Images were analyzed on NanoScope Analysis 2.0
software. The SEM images and AFM maps, presented inSupporting Figure S1, demonstrate the relatively homogenous
distribution of UFG nanoparticles within the 3 wt % UFG/PEI coating
samples. TEM images of 3 wt % UFG/PEI are provided inSupporting Figure S2.

EIS measurements were performed over the course
of 100 days by immersing the coated substrates in an aerated 3.5 wt
% aqueous NaCl solution held at ca. 20–25 °C to examine
the degradation of the coatings. EIS measurements were further performed
on coated substrates subject to 30 days of immersion in 3.5 wt % brine
solution at 70 °C, and coated substrates subject to ASTM B-117
salt-fog exposure. The electrochemical cell used a flat glass O-ring
flange placed on top of an O-ring and pinch clamped onto the PEI-coated
substrate to isolate a working electrode with a surface area of 5.226
cm2. The reference electrode was a saturated calomel electrode
(SCE) from Gamry, and the counter electrode was a Pt/Nb mesh soldered
to a Nb rod. The electrochemical cell was placed within a Faraday
cage. Each EIS measurement was preceded by an OCP measurement for
10 min, followed by potentiostatic impedance spectroscopy in the frequency
range of 100 kHz to 10 mHz with ten points/decade and an amplitude
of ±10 mV. Each test was repeated on duplicate substrates. Collected
EIS data was fitted to equivalent circuit models using Gamry EChem
Analyst software and Pine Research AfterMath software.

After EIS measurements
were converted into Bode and Nyquist plots,
circuit fit modeling was performed on each of the corresponding EIS
plots. Circuit fit modeling, determined by evaluation of the number
of time constants inferred from Bode and Nyquist plots, provides a
means of decoupling electrochemical processes based on their distinctive
frequency-dependent response. Capacitance values were extrapolated
from the circuit fit models, which were generated using Gamry Analyst
software or Pine Research AfterMath software.,The models provide a goodness-of-fit parameter, which is generated
to minimize residual errors, preferably on the order of 10–3or lower. In circuit fit modeling of organic coatings, substantial
noise can result from high water retention, or as a result of stochastic
fluctuations, if the system has not reached steady-state. As a result,
Kramer-Kronig analyses were performed to ensure the data collected
represented the intrinsic response of the coating samples. No data
points were excluded in our circuit fit models and a noise induction
element has not been used.

whereAis
the testing area,tis the coating thickness, ε
is the dielectric constant of the medium, and ε0is
the free space permittivity in vacuum. The dielectric constant of
both PEI and Si-PEI is ca. 3.02,,as compared
to a value of 78.4 for water. Owing to
the contribution of water to the cumulative dielectric constant, water
absorption into the polymer increases the dielectric constant, thereby
increasing the measured capacitance. The increase in capacitance modeled
using EIS provides a sensitive probe of water uptake.

Three types of standardized American
Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) testing were performed. Reported
tests performed include the ASTM D2197-13 scrape test. The ASTM D3359-17 tape test was performed; however, all samples pre-exposure and post-exposure
resulted in a 5B classification and will not be further discussed.
Similarly, the ASTM D4541-17 pull-off test demonstrated that all samples exceeded the strength of the epoxy
provided in the standardized test kit and will also not be further
discussed.

TEM was performed
using a JEOL JEM-2010 instrument with an accelerating voltage of 200
kV. The TEM sample was prepared using a Formvar-coated 400 mesh copper
TEM grid. 3 wt % UFG/PEI dispersion was drop-cast onto the copper
grid to obtain an electron-beam-transparent coating. The grid was
then placed on a hot plate set to 200 °C to remove residual solvent.

A critical descriptor for the efficacy of corrosion protection
of Al alloys by polymer coatings is the ability of the coatings to
prevent Cl-ion migration and attack at the coating/Al interface. Reaction
with Cl-ions transforms insoluble aluminum oxyhydroxide passivation
layers into more soluble chloride-substituted corrosion products,
which are gradually dissolved and transported along a concentration
gradient to the coating surface and then into the electrolyte, resulting
in localized corrosion. PEI shows exceptional
interfacial adhesion to AA 7075 substrates mediated by Lewis acid–base
interactions between imide carbonyl moieties and Lewis acidic Al surface
sites. To gain insight into barrier protection
offered by coatings in a variety of environments, three different
accelerated exposure tests have been performed on coated AA 7075 samples,
100 day immersion in a 3.5 wt % aqueous NaCl solution; 30 day immersion
in a 3.5 wt % NaCl aqueous solution at 70°C; and 30 days of ASTM
B-117 salt-fog testing in 5 wt % aqueous NaCl solution.

EIS
has been performed to monitor the electrochemical evolution of PEI-coated
substrates with varying thicknesses subject to 100 days of immersion
in a 3.5 wt % aqueous NaCl solution.Figureshows data acquired for 4–7 μm
(thin), 11–16 μm (medium), and 20–30 μm
(thick) PEI-coatings on AA 7075. SEM has been employed to image the
physical coating/metal interface and EDS mapping to generate elemental
Al maps to examine metal migration. The ion transport resistance of
PEI coatings increases monotonically with increasing coating thickness
corresponding to greater diffusion lengths that must be traversed
by corrodents to reach the substrate interface. As such, the initial
overall impedance at |Z|0.01Hzare ca.
107Ω/cm2for thin, ca. 109Ω/cm2for intermediate thickness, and ca. 1010Ω/cm2for thick coatings.Figureg shows that for the thin coatings
under consideration, measured impedance is variable over the 100 day
immersion, ranging between |Z|0.01Hzof
ca. 108Ω/cm2on day 14 to |Z|0.01Hzof ca. 106Ω/cm2on
day 75, then ultimately returning to |Z|0.01Hzof 107Ω/cm2by day 100. The diminishing
radii of capacitive loops present in the Nyquist plot,Figurej, indicate an increase in
the rate of charge transfer events that occur at the coating/metal
interface, which suggest continuous breakdown and restoration of the
passive layer, as well as pit nucleation and propagation. Increasing
the thickness of the coatings inFigureh,i yields greater retention of overall coating
impedance although pronounced deterioration is nevertheless observed
inFigurec, and corresponding
Al EDS map,Figuree, even for the thickest 20–30 μm PEI-coated AA 7075
substrate. As such,Figureillustrates that thicker coatings yield monotonically improved
corrosion protection of AA 7075 but the magnitude improvement of corrosion
protection is lower than anticipated, and that thicker coatings nevertheless
suffer from pitting corrosion on prolonged exposure. The observed
lack of linear scaling is posited to arise from the greater concentration
of imperfections in thicker coatings. Increased coating thickness
under similar coating specifications increases the probability of
defects that can engender localized failure. For instance, solvent
evaporation rates are governed by thermal gradients established across
thick coatings. As such, solvent elimination occurs more rapidly from
interfacial layers closer to the heat source as compared to the coating
surface. As a result, the sub-layers will begin to rapidly cross-link
within localized regions, which in turn generates stress gradients
across the coating.,,In thicker coatings where a greater amount of solvent is remnant
in the upper layers, blisters, voids, or pinholes can be generated
upon eventual solvent elimination. Pinholes resulting from incomplete
or inhomogeneous solvent removal from thicker coatings can serve to
engender localized uptake of corrodent species and can enable formation
of diffusion channels. Furthermore, pit propagation can be accelerated
as a result of localized acidic zones manifested inside pinholes.

Thickness-dependent corrosion performance of PEI coatings.
Post-exposure
SEM cross-sectional view of (a) 4–7 μm; (b) 11–16
μm; and (c) 20–30 μm on AA 7075 substrates after
100 days of exposure to 3.5 wt % aqueous solutions of NaCl. The scale-bars
correspond to 50 μm. Aluminum EDS maps of AA 7075 substrates
coated with (d) 4–7 μm; (e) 11–16 μm; and
(f) 20–30 μm. Bode plots corresponding to AA 7075 substrates
coated with (g) 4–7 μm; (h) 11–16 μm; and
(i) 20–30 μm. Nyquist plots for (j) 4–7 μm;
(k) 11–16 μm; and (l) 20–30 μm monitored
across 100 days of exposure to 3.5 wt % aqueous solutions of NaCl.

Two specific modifications are examined in subsequent
sections
as a means of increasing defect tolerance: (a) incorporation of UFG
to enhance the effective tortuosity of ion diffusion pathways,and to thus alleviate loss of permeation selectivity upon PEI degradation;
and (b) co-polymerization with siloxanes to improve rheological properties
(melt flow rate of 12 g/10 min of at 295 °C/6.6 kgf of Si-PEI
versus 9 g/10 min at 337 °C/6.6 kgf for PEI) and thereby reduce
the concentration of pinholes and holidays in the polymeric matrix.
Si-PEI exhibits a ca. 50 °C decrease in glass transition temperature
(Tg) upon co-polymerization as compared
to PEI, which is expected to enhance chain mobility and abet annealing
of defects during spray deposition. While imperfections remain inevitable,
whether resulting from processing conditions or induced by external
factors (e.g., chain scission, hydrolysis, void formation) involved
in deleterious corrosion events, increasing defect tolerance windows
can significantly increase coating lifetimes resulting in extended
protection and delaying or preventing catastrophic failure.

To first discuss the effects
of modifications for 4–7 μm, thin, coatings, upon 100
days of immersion in a 3.5 wt % aqueous NaCl solution and 30 days
of ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure in 5 wt % brine solution,Figureshows that overall
UFG/PEI and Si-PEI fare relatively worse than PEI alone (FigureandSupporting Figure S3). Examining the dynamical
evolution of the EIS response provides insight into some nuances.
The 4–7 μm UFG/PEI (Figurei) demonstrates superior performance to the
unmodified PEI (Figureg) until day 100. On day 75, both the PEI and UFG/PEI systems diverge
out of steady-state, thereby precluding an accurate EIS measurement.,The unfilled PEI subsequently undergoes network relaxation processes
and returns to steady-state conditions by day 100, whereas the UFG/PEI
does not, which points to slower network relaxation dynamics in UFG/PEI,
which is attributed to greater rigidity, likely derived from interphase
formation (vide infra).,,SEM images of the 4–7 μm UFG/PEI-coated substrates
inFigurea,c, and
corresponding EDS aluminum maps shown inFiguree,g show pit propagation in both corrosion
environments, 100 day immersion and salt-fog respectively, with localized
coating swelling in pitted regions. However, the degradation is not
severe enough to cause a significant change in adhesion (Table).

Corrosion Protection
Afforded by Thin UFG/PEI and Si-PEI Coatings.
Post-exposure SEM cross-sectional view of (a) 4–7 μm
3 wt % UFG/PEI; and (b) 4–7 μm SI-PEI on AA 7075 substrates
after 100 days of exposure to 3.5 wt % aqueous solutions of NaCl.
Post-exposure SEM cross-sectional view of (c) 4–7 μm
3 wt % UFG/PEI; and (d) 4–7 μm SI-PEI on AA 7075 substrates
after 30 days of ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure to 5 wt % aqueous solutions
of NaCl. The scale-bars correspond to 50 μm. Aluminum EDS maps
of AA 7075 substrates coated with (e) 4–7 μm 3 wt % UFG/PEI;
and (f) 4–7 μm Si-PEI after 100 days of exposure to 3.5
wt % aqueous solutions of NaCl. Aluminum EDS maps of AA 7075 substrates
coated with (g) 4–7 μm 3 wt % UFG/PEI; and (h) 4–7
μm SI-PEI after 30 days of ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure to 5
wt % aqueous solutions of NaCl. Bode plots corresponding to AA 7075
substrates coated with (i) 4–7 μm 3 wt % UFG/PEI; and
(j) 4–7 μm Si-PEI over 100 days of immersion in 3.5 wt
% aqueous NaCl solutions at ambient conditions. Bode plots corresponding
to AA 7075 substrates coated with (k) 4–7 μm 3 wt % UFG/PEI;
and (l) 4–7 μm Si-PEI after 30 days of ASTM B-117 salt-fog
exposure in 5 wt % aqueous NaCl. Nyquist plots for (m) 4–7
μm 3 wt % UFG/PEI; and (n) 4–7 μm Si-PEI coated
AA 7075 substrates monitored across 100 days of exposure to 3.5 wt
% aqueous solutions of NaCl. Nyquist plots for (o) 4–7 μm
3 wt % UFG/PEI; and (p) 4–7 μm Si-PEI coated AA 7075
substrates monitored across 30 days of ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure
to 5 wt % aqueous solutions of NaCl.

The Bode
plot (Figurei) of
the 4–7 μm UFG/PEI-coated AA 7075 shows
an initial |Z|0.01Hzvalue of ca. 108Ω/cm2and is characterized by three time-constants.
Two additional time-constants are manifested by day 30 when the impedance
value is decreased by an order of magnitude. Subsequently, on day
75, the |Z|0.01Hzvalue is reduced to
ca. 105Ω/cm2, which persisted for the
remainder of the 100 day immersion period. The Bode plot (Figurek), corresponding
to the 4–7 μm UFG/PEI-coated AA 7075 that was subjected
to ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure demonstrates a reduction in overall
impedance by two orders of magnitude. The observed salt-fog performance
is a result of the incorporation of greater free volume through creation
of additional UFG/PEI interfaces, wherein aerosolized salt water microdroplets
can permeate through imperfections and be transported to the PEI/AA
7075 interface. The Nyquist plot (Figurem) demonstrates diminishing radii of capacitive
loops further indicating degradation of the AA 7075 (see also the
equivalent circuit fit models inFigure S4andTable S1). The relatively inferior
performance of UFG/PEI observed inFigure, as compared to PEI alone (Figure), is attributable to galvanic
coupling between UFG particles and the AA 7075 surface. Such galvanic
coupling leads to a percolative network that accelerates corrosion,−and enables migration of Al to the coating surface,
as is clearly observed inFigurea,c. In addition, the UFG incorporation creates a new
interface within the PEI matrix, which can give rise to additional
free volume within the matrix and promote localized ion diffusion.
For 4–7 μm thin coatings, UFG/PEI thus affords less control
over the corrosion product as compared to PEI alone.

The SEM
images (Figureb,d)
and corresponding aluminum EDS maps (Figuref,h) for the 4–7 μm
Si-PEI-coated substrates analogously shows severe pitting failure
accompanied by a nominal loss of adhesion (Table). Coating swelling is further observed inFigureb, which is most
prominent above the areas of pit propagation and almost doubles the
pre-exposure coating thickness over the 100 day immersion period.
Notably, the 4–7 μm Si-PEI-coated AA 7075 samples that
were exposed to 100 days of brine immersion and 30 days of salt-fog
testing displayed the lowest measured adhesion out of all the samples
tested. The Bode plot for the 4–7 μm Si-PEI-coated substrate
(Figurej) depicts
a low initial overall impedance value of |Z|0.01Hzof ca. 106Ω/cm2, which
is decreased by two orders of magnitude over the first 30 days of
exposure, then increased back to the original |Z|0.01Hzvalue of ca. 106Ω/cm2by
day 50; this value is retained with some fluctuations for the remainder
of the 100 day immersion study. Similarly, the post salt-fog exposure
4–7 μm Si-PEI-coated-AA 7075 shows an initial impedance
of |Z|0.01Hzca. 109Ω/cm2, which is deteriorated to a final impedance value of |Z|0.01Hzca. 106Ω/cm2(Figurel). These
results suggest that the more aggressive salt-fog testing exacerbates
internal coating defects, which leads to greater deterioration of
the Si-PEI molecular network in thinner coatings. While the Si-PEI
coating is expected to enable more rapid network relaxation processes,
accelerated vapor and aerosol permeation through thin Si-PEI coatings
results in rapid corrosion of the AA 7075 substrate upon salt-fog
exposure. The Bode plots inFigurej,l further exhibit variability in the number of kinetic
time-constants, which range between 2 and 5 features over the course
of both exposure conditions. The Nyquist plots for the 4–7
μm Si-PEI-coated substrates (Figuren,p) are characterized by diminishing capacitive
loops indicating an increase in the occurrence and rate of charge-transfer
events. Equivalent circuit models for the 100 day brine immersion
of the varied thickness Si-PEI-coated AA 7075 samples are presented
inFigure S5; see alsoTable S2for a description of which circuit fit models correspond
to each day of the corrosion exposure. As such, for 4–7 μm
thin coatings, Si-PEI also fares worse than PEI, which is attributed
to worse interfacial adhesion resulting from co-polymerization with
siloxane monomers, which do not bind Lewis acidic sites on the AA
7075 substrate. Consistent with this hypothesis,Tableshows that the thickest 20–30
μm PEI-coated AA 7075 demonstrates higher adhesion (greater
than 10.0 kg) as compared to the 20–30 μm Si-PEI-coated
counterpart prior to exposure. These results corroborate that the
excellent interfacial adhesion of PEI to AA 7075 substrates is disrupted
by co-polymerization with siloxane groups, which degrades corrosion
protection afforded by PEI alone (Figure S3). As such, both types of modifications, UFG inclusions and siloxane
co-polymerization, degrade the performance of PEI alone for thin coatings.
We next examine whether such modifications, with appropriate processing,
can increase the defect tolerance of thicker PEI coatings.

Figure S1shows the size distribution
of UFG inclusions, which is consistent with extensive previous analyses.Figure S2shows TEM
images exemplifying the homogeneous dispersion of UFG particles in
PEI. Pronounced differences are observed for all three coating thicknesses
upon contrasting post thermal exposure coating samples of UFG/PEI
(presented inFigure) and PEI (shown inFigure S6), which
were immersed in 3.5 wt % aqueous NaCl solutions at an elevated temperature
of 70 °C for 30 days. The representative Bode plot inFigureg for 4–7
μm UFG/PEI reveals the overall impedance was reasonably maintained,
within an order of magnitude, at |Z|0.01Hzca. 107Ω/cm2. Only two time-constants
are discernible over the full 30 day period of thermal exposure for
4–7 μm UFG/PEI-coated AA 7075. In contrast, impedance
(Figure S6g) of 4–7 μm PEI-coated
substrate fluctuates around an average value of |Z|0.01Hzca. 105Ω/cm2, indicating
the superior performance of UFG/PEI coatings under aggressive thermal
conditions. Diminishing radii of the capacitive loops, evident in
the respective Nyquist plot (Figurej) for the thin UFG/PEI coating, reflect a modest decline
in performance (see also the equivalent circuit-fit models inFigure S7andTable S3for 30 day thermal exposure). In contrast, the Nyquist plot (Figure S6g) for the unfilled PEI coating equivalent
reveals the presence of an induction loop and a substantial amount
of noise, which is most likely attributed to water absorption. As
such, corrosion protection in thermal environments is markedly improved
for UFG/PEI as compared to PEI alone, and further, is more pronounced
with increasing coating thickness (comparingFiguresandS6). While
some isolated pitting is observed in SEM images (Figureb,c) and EDS maps (Figuree,f) for 11–16
μm medium and 20–30 μm (thick) UFG/PEI coated substrates,
the post-mortem SEM image inFigure S6cillustrates substantially greater pitting present in the thermally
exposed 20–30 μm PEI-coated AA 7075. Adhesion is somewhat
diminished for the 11–16 μm UFG/PEI-coated substrate
following 30 days of immersion under thermal conditions (Table) but the adhesion
of the 20–30 μm thick UFG/PEI coating is preserved within
limits of measurement.

Corrosion performance of UFG/PEI coatings on AA 7075 after
30 days
of immersion in 3.5 wt % aqueous NaCl at 70 °C. Post-exposure
SEM cross-sectional view of (a) 4–7 μm 3 wt % UFG/PEI;
(b) 11–16 μm 3 wt % UFG/PEI; and (c) 20–30 μm
3 wt % UFG/PEI on AA 7075 substrates after 30 days of thermal exposure
to 3.5 wt % aqueous solutions of NaCl at 70 °C. The scale-bars
correspond to 50 μm. Aluminum EDS maps of AA 7075 substrates
coated with (d) 4–7 μm UFG/PEI; (e) 11–16 μm
UFG/PEI; and (f) 20–30 μm UFG/PEI. Bode plots corresponding
to AA 7075 substrates coated with (g) 4–7 μm UFG/PEI;
(h) 11–16 μm UFG/PEI; and (i) 20–30 μm UFG/PEI.
Nyquist plots for (j) 4–7 μm UFG/PEI; (k) 11–16
μm UFG/PEI; and (l) 20–30 μm UFG/PEI monitored
across 30 days of thermal exposure to 3.5 wt % aqueous solutions of
NaCl at 70 °C.

Since interphases such
as observed in UFG/PEI coatings cannot be
formed for Si-PEI coatings, pitting corrosion is further exacerbated
in thermal environments for thin and intermediate thicknesses as shown
inFigure S8a,b, respectively. Under thermal
conditions, the 4–7 μm Si-PEI-coated AA 7075 has an initial
|Z|0.01Hzvalue of ca. 106Ω/cm2that decays rapidly (Figure S8g), and by day 2 of the exposure period the |Z|0.01Hzvalue of ca. 104Ω/cm2remains
constant, implying a complete loss of protection (worse than PEI alone,Figure S6g) under thermal exposure conditions.
Intriguingly, the 4–7 μm Si-PEI-coated AA 7075 substrate
displays a significant increase in adhesion after thermal exposure
conditions (Table), which is likely a result of additional siloxane crosslinking to
the corrosion product. The equivalent
circuit models for the 30 day thermal exposure of the three thicknesses
of Si-PEI coated substrates are shown inFigure S9(see alsoTable S4). The thick
Si-PEI-coated substrates are discussed in a subsequent section.

We next
evaluate whether the greater flowability imbued by the rheological
properties of Si-PEI endows improved corrosion protection at higher
thicknesses.Figure S10presents the intermediate
thickness, 11–16 μm, Si-PEI and UFG/PEI coated samples.
The SEM images (Figures S8b and S10b,d)
and corresponding aluminum EDS maps (Figures S8e and S10f,h) establish that moderate pitting is present upon
corrosion exposure under all conditions. Coating expansion is localized
around pits in the 11–16 μm Si-PEI-coated substrates
after 100 days of immersion at room temperature (Figure S8b), accompanied by a nominal increase in adhesion.
However, SEM images of the 11–16 μm Si-PEI coating samples
after 30 days of both thermal immersion (Figure S8b) and salt-fog testing (Figure S10d) exhibit substantial uniform swelling, in conjunction with considerable
improvement in adhesive strength (Table), as noted inFigure S8of the Supporting Information. The Bode plot inFigure S10hdisplays an initial |Z|0.01Hzvalue of ca. 108Ω/cm2and is typified by four time-constants. Conversely, on day 7, the
overall impedance increased to |Z|0.01Hzof ca. 1010Ω/cm2, which suggests that
the system has reached steady-state. Over the remainder of the 100
day immersion study, the impedance displays moderate instability characterized
by deviation in time-constants and impedance ranging between |Z|0.01Hzof ca. 109–1010Ω/cm2. As such, the coating performance
is improved over thin Si-PEI coatings shown inFigurej,l but is nevertheless inferior to PEI alone
(Figureh).

The thick 20–30 μm Si-PEI coatings manifest greater
defect tolerance, exceeding the performance of PEI alone under all
exposure conditions (contrastFiguresandS8to data for thick
PEI coatings inFigures,S3 and S6). The EIS evolution observed
in the Bode plots inFiguree,f exemplify the excellent barrier performance of the 20–30
μm Si-PEI-coated substrates with a measured impedance of |Z|0.01Hzca. 1011Ω/cm2, similarly characterized by a two time-constants, which are maintained
throughout the entire 100 day immersion in 3.5 wt % brine solution
and 30 day ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure to 5 wt % aqueous NaCl, respectively.
The Nyquist plot for the 20–30 μm Si-PEI-coated substrate
subject to 100 day brine immersion,Figureg, suggests the sample behaves as a near-ideal
capacitor indicating the electrochemical activity of the system remains
constant and limited over the exposure period (see alsoFigure S5andTable S2). While the Bode plot for the 30 day thermal exposure of the thick
20–30 μm Si-PEI-coated AA 7075 (Figure S8i) does contain multiple time-constants, as evidenced in
the equivalent circuit-fit models (Figure S9andTable S4) of the Nyquist plot (Figure S8l), the overall impedance is similarly
maintained at a value of |Z|0.01Hzca.
1011Ω/cm2. The apparent reduction in
the radius of the capacitive loop visible in the Nyquist plot inFigureh suggests an increase
in the rate of charge-transfer events at the coating/metal interface
resulting in some pit nucleation and propagation over the 30 day salt-fog
exposure period. SEM imaging (Figuresa,b andS8c) of the AA 7075
substrates coated with 20–30 μm Si-PEI, indeed, revealed
the greatest severity of pitting was present in the sample that was
exposed under aggressive salt-fog conditions. The post-mortem SEM
images of all 20–30 μm Si-PEI coated samples demonstrate
some degree of pit formation, indicating some metal dissolution is
prevalent under all of the exposure conditions. However, the aluminum
EDS maps of the 20–30 μm Si-PEI-coated substrates (Figuresc,d andS8f) show relatively modest pitting. These results
imply that the oxidized metal migrating out of the substrate is predominantly
captured within the Si-PEI network and retained close to the coating/metal
interface, thus mitigating diffusion pathways via chain rearrangement.
The accumulation of metal at the interface is further evidenced through
the reduction in adhesive strength exhibited by all the 20–30
μm Si-PEI samples (Table). Collectively, the imaging, adhesion, and EIS evolution
indicate that with thicker Si-PEI coatings, the improved flow properties
localize defects and prevent transport of soluble corrosion products
from the interface, thereby preserving corrosion performance over
extended periods.

Corrosion Performance of Thick Si-PEI coatings on AA 7075.
Post-exposure
SEM cross-sectional view of (a) 20–30 μm SI-PEI on AA
7075 after 100 days of exposure to 3.5 wt % aqueous NaCl solution.
Post-exposure SEM cross-sectional view of (b) 20–30 μm
SI-PEI on AA 7075 after 30 days of ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure to
a 5 wt % aqueous solution of NaCl. The scale-bars correspond to 50
μm. Aluminum EDS map of AA 7075 substrates coated with (c) 20–30
μm Si-PEI after 100 days of exposure to 3.5 wt % aqueous brine
solution. Aluminum EDS map of AA 7075 coated with (d) 20–30
μm SI-PEI after 30 days of ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure to a
5 wt % aqueous solution of NaCl. Bode plot corresponding to AA 7075
coated with (e) 20–30 μm Si-PEI over 100 days of immersion
in 3.5 wt % aqueous NaCl solution under ambient conditions. Bode plot
corresponding to an AA 7075 substrate coated with (f) 20–30
μm Si-PEI after 30 days of ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure in 5
wt % aqueous NaCl. Nyquist plot for (g) 20–30 μm Si-PE-coated
AA 7075 monitored across 100 days of exposure to 3.5 wt % aqueous
NaCl. Nyquist plot for (h) 20–30 μm Si-PEI-coated AA
7075 monitored across 30 days of ASTM B-117 salt-fog exposure to a
5 wt % aqueous solution of NaCl.

The preceding sections provide experimental evidence for the evolution
of corrosion resistance in PEI, UFG/PEI, and Si-PEI coatings on AA
7075 as a function of thickness. In general, barrier protection increases
with coating thickness under all accelerated corrosion conditions.Figureportrays the evolution
of calculated coating capacitance for 20–30 μm PEI, UFG/PEI,
and Si-PEI coatings in the 100 day immersion (Figurea) and 30 day thermal exposure studies, which
are governed by structure-dependent water absorption. The high barrier
protection evinced for the thick 20–30 μm Si-PEI-coated
substrate over 100 day brine immersion is a result of substantial
network relaxation. Initial coating saturation is reached almost immediately
on day 2, illustrated by the capacitance value of ca. 10–7Ω–1·cm–2·sn, which is followed by a two orders of magnitude
decrease by day 14. As a result of microdeformations and chain rearrangement
during the relaxation processes, the coating absorbs more water, which
yields a second saturation point on day 50. Further plastic deformation
and network relaxation of the 20–30 μm Si-PEI coating
is manifested by a decrease in coating capacitance over the remaining
50 days reaching ca. 10–9Ω–1·cm–2·snby
day 100. There is a single observed saturation point in the 20–30
μm unfilled PEI coating at day 50 where the calculated capacitance
increased almost two orders of magnitude. The lower energetic and
spatial constraints in the secondary structure generated by the aliphatic
siloxane co-polymer present in the Si-PEI coating system permits greater
mobility of the macromolecular network as compared to relatively more
rigid PEI alone.,−Water uptake
data reported for the two resins indicates that PEI accommodates more
water molecules, in deionized water, as compared to Si-PEI (1.3% saturationversus0.5% saturation respectively),,; however, the coating samples
demonstrate that Si-PEI retains more
water than PEI (Figurea). This indicates that the coefficient of water expansion is greater
in Si-PEI than in PEI alone resulting from greater chain mobility.
The greater amount of void space in the polymeric matrix of Si-PEI
yields higher diffusion rates, which is indeed observed as immediate
saturation. Consequently, a higher number of charge-transfer events
can be activated, resulting in more severe corrosion of the underlying
metal substrate. The Si-PEI coatings capture aluminum ions migrating
away from the metal interface and generate domains of sequestered
corrosion products (Figure). The capacitance corroborates those findings as the newly
developed domains fill void space, thereby impeding continuous hydration
of the sub-layers closer to the interface. This observed phenomenon
results in water retention in the upper layers of the thicker Si-PEI
coatings. As such, the thicker Si-PEI
coatings enforce permeation selectivity and impede ion transport;
however, at lower thicknesses, the accelerated water absorption and
extensive water retention rapidly degrades coating performance.

Contrasting
coating capacitance modulation resulting from water
absorption. Coating capacitance of the AA 7075 substrates coated with
20–30 μm Si-PEI, UFG/PEI, and unfilled PEI after (a)
100 days of immersion in 3.5 wt % aqueous NaCl solution at ambient
temperatures; and (b) 30 days of immersion in 3.5 wt % brine solution
at elevated temperatures of 70 °C.

Mechanistic origins of
thickness-dependent corrosion performance
and composite modifications to PEI to enhance barrier protection.
(a) Schematic illustration of a thin, 4–7 μm PEI coating
on AA 7075. The resulting matrix has shorter ion-diffusion path lengths
and has a limited active volume to sequester ions, which allows the
relative facile transport of corrodents from the electrolyte to the
coating/metal interface where they participate in deleterious charge-transfer
events; Cl-ions reaching the substrate initiate pitting corrosion
and solubilize the corrosion product based on ligand-exchange reactions.
(b) Transport processes in a thicker 20–30 μm PEI coating
on AA 7075; longer ion-diffusion pathways and a greater active volume
enables more effective ion sequestration, resulting in greater resistance
to ion transport from the electrolyte to the coating/substrate interface;
thus, the integrity of the insoluble corrosion product is preserved.
(c) Increased tortuosity and greater effective length of ion-diffusion
pathways engendered through incorporation of UFG particles. UFG incorporation
yields a more rigid matrix because of interphase formation that enables
permeation of water but sequesters ions and precludes them from reaching
the interface. As such, interfacial adhesion is preserved, and the
corrosion product is not solubilized. (d) Thin coatings deposited
via spray coating concentrate UFG particles at the coating metal/interface
and do not develop a clear interphase. This yields a percolative network,
additional interfaces, and free volume that promotes ion transport
to the interface thereby accelerating deleterious corrosion processes.

Thicker Si-PEI coatings fare worse than UFG/PEI
but afford enhanced
corrosion protection at high thicknesses as compared to PEI alone
by dint of their facile access to network relaxation processes that
yield entangled networks that can maintain permeation selectivity
and localize transport of corrodent species to the interface and solubilized
corrosion products from the interface.

Light-weighting vehicular components is
predicated on the design
of resilient, protective coatings that preserve underlying multicomponent
Al alloys from corrosion upon exposure to saline and hypersaline environments
across a broad temperature range. In this study, we explore failure
mechanisms of PEI corrosion protective coatings of AA 7075 as a function
of thickness and upon incorporation of a UFG filler and a siloxane
co-polymer. Thin 4–7 μm coatings all exhibit substantial
pitting corrosion of the underlying aluminum substrate. Indeed, the
base PEI polymer surpasses both the filler and co-polymer modifications
in performance by dint of its superior interfacial adhesion. In contrast,
when examining thicker coatings, 20–30 μm UFG/PEI-coated
AA 7075 shows exceptional corrosion inhibition including under aggressive
salt-fog conditions and under high-temperature immersion in brine.
The outstanding corrosion performance of UFG/PEI is particularly pronounced
at higher temperatures when network relaxation and chain mobility
engender an optimal interphase anchoring polymer chains to UFG basal
planes through π–π interactions. The rigid interphase
and surrounding interlocked PEI chains selectively sequester ions
and ensure preservation of oxyhydroxide passivation products at the
PEI/AA 7075 interface. Si-PEI coatings, whilst somewhat inferior to
UFG/PEI, afford improved performance as compared to PEI alone at high
thicknesses. The facile network relaxation and greater chemical stability
of Si-PEI coatings engenders the ability to block ion transport and
imbues greater defect tolerance. As such, optimal coating design requires
interfacial adhesion governed primarily by choice of the baseline
polymer, which in the case of PEI is enabled by strong Lewis acid–base
interactions between imide carbonyl moieties and Al surface sites
in AA 7075. However, to ensure long-term resilience in aggressive
environments, protective coatings require the establishment and preservation
of tortuous ion diffusion pathways and the ability to selectively
sequester and limit the mobility of ions and solubilized corrosion
products. Future work will explore multilayered systems with appropriate
surface treatment and interfacial adhesion with PEI, followed by coating
of a subsequent layer implementing strategies to limit the mobility
of ions and solubilized corrosion products. Future work will furthermore
explore direct imaging of the interphase structure through cryo electron
focused ion beam sectioning and cryo-transmission electron microscopy.

This project
was funded by SABIC Inc. T.E.S. acknowledges
the support of the NSF under a Graduate Research Fellowship grant
DGE: 1746932. Authors acknowledge support from the Qatar Research,
Development and Innovation Council, Qatar National Research Fund (ARG01-0525-230352).
Authors acknowledge the use of the TAMU Materials Characterization
Facility (RRID:SCR_022202) and Dr. Yordanos Bisrat. The authors acknowledge
the assistance of the Texas A&M University Microscopy and Imaging
Center Core Facility (RRID:SCR_022128).

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsengineeringau.5c00014.

T.E.S.: Conceptualization,
Investigation, Data Curation, Software, Methodology, Visualization,
Formal Analysis, Writing–Original Draft. J.K.C.: Investigation,
Formal Analysis. V.P.: Investigation. C.G.V.: Investigation. T.F.J.:
Investigation. K.F.: Investigation. S.S.: Formal Analysis. M.A.-H.:
Validation. H.C.: Validation. P.M.J.: Conceptualization, Investigation,
Project Administration, Validation, Resources, Writing–Review
& Editing. S.B.: Conceptualization, Project Administration, Validation,
Supervision, Writing–Review & Editing, Funding Acquisition.
CRediT:Joseph K Cantrelldata curation, investigation;Caroline Valdesinvestigation;Torrick Fletcherformal analysis, investigation;Kerry Fullerformal
analysis, investigation;Sujata Singhdata curation,
formal analysis;Peter Johnsonconceptualization, funding
acquisition, investigation, supervision, writing - review & editing.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.