Orthopaedic surgeons are at risk of occupational, noise-induced hearing loss due to exposure to instruments in the operating room. The primary objective of this study was to determine whether orthopaedic trauma procedures exceed recommended decibel (dB) limits. The secondary objective was to demonstrate which actions during a case create the highest sound levels.

Intraoperative recordings were taken during orthopaedic trauma surgeries and classified into open reduction internal fixation (ORIF), intramedullary nailing, closed reduction percutaneous pinning, external fixation, soft tissue procedures, or a combination thereof. Recordings were taken of drilling, screw insertion, suctioning, saw use, and mallet striking. Decibel levels were reported as maximum dB level (MDL), LAeq, LCpeak, and time weighted average (TWA). Percentage of allowable daily noise was reported as dose, while the dose predicted for an 8-hour period was reported as projected dose.

A total of 89 recordings were collected, comprising 46 baseline and 43 trauma case recordings. All procedures had significantly higher dB levels compared with controls for all variables (P< 0.001). In all cases, the MDL was greater than 85 dB. ORIF had the highest average MDL (108.4 dB) and TWA (70.3 dB). Overall, no procedures exceeded the maximum allowable daily noise dose. However, the soft tissue group had the highest projected dose (18.8%). Suctioning against soft tissue had the highest dose and projected dose.

Orthopaedic trauma procedures stayed within noise limits, but average MDL exceeded 85 dB. ORIF and suctioning produced some of the highest sound levels among procedures and recorded steps.

Orthopaedic trauma surgeries are heterogeneous. Procedures can involve multiple limbs, a multidisciplinary team, and a variety instruments.17As such, the level of noise generated during procedures may vary widely compared with other orthopaedic subspecialties. The primary objective of this study was to assess whether orthopaedic trauma surgeons are exposed to harmful noise levels in the OR and which type of procedures put them at a higher risk. Our secondary objective is to identify what parts of an orthopaedic trauma procedure create the most noise. The findings of this study could lead to the implementation of measures aimed at mitigating the risk of NIHL among orthopaedic trauma surgeons in the future.

After Institutional Review Board waiver, a prospective, single-surgeon, single-institution review was conducted using intraoperative recordings during orthopaedic trauma procedures. These procedures were classified into open reduction internal fixation (ORIF), intramedullary nailing (IMN), closed reduction percutaneous pinning (CRPP), external fixation, soft tissue procedures, or a combination thereof.

The Sound Level Meter (SLM) application (NIOSH, Washington, DC) was used to record noise exposure data with an iMM-6 (Dayton Audio, Springboro, OH) calibrated external microphone connected to an iOS device (Apple, Cupertino, CA). Baseline noise levels were established by recording 30 seconds intervals in the OR in the absence of OR personnel, music, forced warming units, and suction systems. However, the anesthesia monitors and ventilation systems remained on for all recordings. Surgical recordings were performed by a single, orthopaedic surgery resident who wore the microphone at the level of their collar to replicate the surgeon's hearing zone. Recordings were initiated before scrubbing for the surgery and stopped when the individual removed their surgical gown.

In a nonsterile environment, 30-second recordings were captured for various surgical actions using the SLM application. These included continuous power drilling, screw insertion with a powered driver, baseline suction, suctioning against soft tissue, suctioning fluid against a surface, saw use, and malleting. Power drilling, screw insertion, and sawing were performed on saw bones using the Unium system (Synthes, West Chester, PA). Suctioning was carried out with a standard Yankauer tip at maximum suction using the Stryker Neptune 3 system (Stryker, Portage, MI). Malleting was simulated by striking a metal surface using a metal hammer at a steady pace.

Multiple parameters were recorded intraoperatively and during simulated case actions, maximum dB level (MDL; highest sound pressure level), TWA (average dB level projected over an 8-hour period), dose (percentage of maximum allowable daily noise dose), projected dose (measured noise dose projected forward over 8 hours), LAeq (equivalent continuous sound level over a given period of time that has the same energy as fluctuating noise), and LCPeak (maximum value of sound pressure at any instant during the measurement, measured with “C” frequency weighting). “C” frequency weighting is defined by the inclusion of low frequency sounds that contribute to noise but are not perceived by human hearing. “A” frequency weighting is the standard weighting of audible frequencies for human hearing (Table2).

All surgical recordings were analyzed and classified by procedure. Descriptive statistics were performed first by comparing baseline with surgery. Continuous data are presented as mean (SD), and categorical data are presented as cell count (%). T-tests or Mann-Whitney U tests were used to compare continuous data. Following this unadjusted and adjusted regressions were analyzed looking at TWA as the dependent outcome. Data from procedures that fulfilled a single classification were then averaged and compared. Significance was determined atP< 0.05. This study was deemed exempt from Institutional Review Board and Animal Use Committee Review.

A total of 89 recordings were collected and analyzed. There were 46 baseline and 43 trauma recordings. Of the trauma recordings, there were 16 (37.2%) ORIF, 10 (23.3%) IMN, 4 (9.3%) CRPP, 0 (0.0%) external fixation, 1 (2.3%) removal of hardware (ROH), 2 (4.7%) soft tissue procedures, and 10 (23.3%) combined recordings. Length of surgery ranged from about 17 to 420 minutes with the greatest duration being a revision pilon and fibular shaft ORIF case.

The surgery group exhibited a significantly greater MDL (107.0 dB; 95% CI 105.0–108.0) compared with the baseline MDL (84.8 dB; 95% CI 81.7–87.9;P< 0.001; Tables3and4). The average TWA did not exceed the threshold of 85 dB for either group. However, the average TWA was significantly higher for the surgical group (68.8 dB; 95% CI 67.6–70.1) compared with baseline (33.4 dB; 95% CI 31.7–35.0;P< 0.001). Baseline recordings had an average dose of 0.0% (95% CI 0.0–0.0), while the surgical recordings had a significantly greater dose of 0.04% (95% CI 0.02–0.05;P< 0.001). The projected dose was 0.01% for baseline recordings (95% CI 0.0–0.01). This was significantly lower than the projected dose of 0.15% for surgical recordings (95% CI 0.12–0.17;P< 0.001).

Sound data comparing baseline and surgical procedures.

Values in parentheses are presented as an average.

Values in parentheses are presented as an average.

CRPP, closed reduction percutaneous pinning; EX-FIX, external fixator; IMN, intramedullary nail; Laeq, equivalent continuous sound level; LCPeak, peak level; ORIF, open reduction internal fixation; ROH, removal of hardware; TWA, time weighted average.

Sound data with confidence intervals, comparing baseline and surgical procedures.

95% confidence intervals are presented in brackets.

CRPP, closed reduction percutaneous pinning; EX-FIX, external fixator; IMN, intramedullary nail; Laeq, equivalent continuous sound level; LCPeak, peak level; ORIF, open reduction internal fixation; ROH, removal of hardware; TWA, time weighted average.

Among the different surgical recordings, ORIF had the highest average MDL (108.4 dB), TWA (70.3 dB), and dose (5.1%), followed by IMN (107.0 dB; 68.7 dB; 2.7%; Table5). Soft tissue procedures had the highest average projected dose at 18.8%, followed by ORIF (17.2%). Combined procedures had values for MDL (106.0 dB), TWA (70.2 dB), dose (4.5%), and projected dose (15.0%) that lay between those of ORIF and IMN. Overall, all procedures had significantly higher dB levels compared with controls for all variables. No procedures exceeded the maximum allowable daily noise dose even when the measured dose was projected over an 8-hour period. Of all the procedures, a revision pilon and fibular shaft ORIF had the highest recorded dose (32.0%) and projected dose (38.0%). The TWA of that particular case was 80 dB, nearing the NIOSH threshold of 85 dB.

Designations were only for single procedure only, except for the row listed as combined. Values are presented as an average.

CRPP, closed reduction percutaneous pinning; EX-FIX, external fixator; IMN, intramedullary nail; ORIF, open reduction internal fixation; ROH, removal of hardware.

Among the simulated actions, suctioning against a soft tissue surface had the highest MDL(108.4 dB), dose (15.6%), and projected dose (15012.5%). Following was suctioning fluid against a surface which had the second highest MDL (107.3 dB), dose (8.3%), and projected dose (7482.2%) (Table6).

In the United States, hearing loss affects around 15% of adults.18–21Occupational noise exposure contributes to hearing impairment in at least 22 million workers in the United States and nearly 45 million people worldwide.7,22–25Most notably, occupational hearing loss is one of the most commonly reported work-related injuries.7,22,23According to reports from OSHA and NIOSH, exposure to over 85 dB TWA over 8-hour workday increases the risk of occupational NIHL by 8%. However, even levels below the recommended 85 dB have been shown in the literature to still increase the risk of NIHL.7,26,27As noise levels surpass 85 dB, the duration of allowable daily exposure decreases, further escalating concerns of potential hearing damage for the surgeon, OR staff, and patients.7,26Specifically, Willet et al12found that orthopaedic OR staff exhibited a 50% prevalence of NIHL, which rose with increasing years of exposure.

Previous studies have mainly focused on the risk of noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) in other orthopaedic subspecialties.14To our knowledge, this is the first study to specifically assess noise exposure and the potential risk of hearing loss within the orthopaedic trauma operating room. Using the SLM application, we were able to capture not only MDL but also a range of additional metrics, including dose and projected dose. This allowed us to analyze how individual steps in the procedure—when extrapolated over an 8-hour work period—could contribute to harmful noise exposure.

Unsurprisingly, our simulated recordings revealed that suctioning against a soft tissue surface produced the highest MDL, dose, and projected dose. This even exceeded malleting or use of power instruments. A study by Walch et al used an anatomic silicon ear model to measure suction-generated noise during microsuction aural toilet. They described a “clarinet phenomenon,” in which partial obstruction of the suction tip creates sharp, high-frequency noise peaks.30Our study recreated this effect, using soft tissue and fluid to partially obstruct the suction tip.

Limitations of our study include it being a single-surgeon, single-institution study, thereby limiting the generalizability of our findings. Considering the prolonged utilization of noise generating instruments, however, our findings support the expectation that ORIF would exhibit the highest MDL, TWA, and dose. Second, there is substantial heterogeneity among musculoskeletal procedures in orthopaedic trauma surgery and not all were included in our study, but we included the most commonly performed procedures among orthopaedic trauma surgeons. Third, our study used continuous recordings. Therefore, we were unable to distinguish what the primary noise generator was during combination procedures. For example, if a procedure included both ROH and ORIF. Fourth, we were not adequately powered to compare procedure types directly and thus cannot draw any significant conclusions from this study. Fifth, we are unable to account for variability in individual recorder's distance from the operating field and equipment, height, and approach. However, we attempted to limit this by having the same individual perform all recordings.

In conclusion, the study provides evidence that orthopedic trauma surgeons are not exceeding daily recommended accumulative noise levels but are still regularly exposed to hazardous noise levels of above 85 dB. Orthopaedic trauma surgeons should consider using hearing protection in certain high-risk procedures where frequent use of instrumentation or suction is expected. Implementation of suction tips with an on/off switch can offer an additional way to mitigate the risk of NIHL. Surgeons can also factor in case selection to help decrease the risk of exceeding daily limits. Finally, orthopaedic implant companies should keep sound levels in mind when developing new orthopaedic equipment. These instruments should subsequently be used to replace noisier, older technology.

Thank you to Matthew Sherman, our biostatistician.