The aim of the study is to explore the experience and perspectives of healthcare personnel deployed from the hospitals and military into long‐term care (LTC) in Ontario during the pandemic.

Personnel from acute care hospitals, community care, the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF), and the Canadian Red Cross were deployed in support of LTC homes across Ontario.

This article reports on the study of personnel deployed into LTC during the COVID‐19 pandemic. Understanding the experiences and lessons learned will be useful to improve planning and responses to future pandemics and disasters.

A descriptive, exploratory research study design with a demographic questionnaire and semi‐structured interviews was used. Data analysis used a combination of open and process coding to identify thematic categories. The COREQ checklist was used for reporting on the study.

Interviews were conducted with 30 participants who described common challenges of navigating the unknown, defining one's role, and establishing order. Lessons included the importance of adaptability, flexibility, and pragmatism and emphasized the role of leadership.

The findings highlight challenges that personnel from civilian and military backgrounds experience when responding to disaster, and underscore the importance of communication, effective leadership, and cohesive teams. These findings are consistent with existing literature, contribute to the understanding of how personnel in disasters address challenges, and inform how to better prepare and train personnel for future disasters.

These findings can be used to inform disaster theory and practice, including disaster competencies such as the International Council of Nurses Disaster Nursing Competencies, and provide a framework to improve disaster planning and responder training.

The COVID‐19 pandemic had a devastating impact on Ontario's long‐term care (LTC) homes. Existing issues from the previous two decades, including chronic staffing challenges, aging infrastructure, and increasingly complex residents’ needs (RNAO2020; Oldenburger et al.2022), were exacerbated by COVID‐19, culminating in a province‐wide disaster.

Sixty‐four percent of COVID‐19–related deaths in Ontario occurred in LTC during the pandemic's first wave between March 1st and August 31st, 2020 (CIHI2021). Deployed staff described deplorable and inhumane conditions within these facilities (Marrocco et al.2020; Canadian Armed Forces2020). In response, the Ontario government enacted emergency legislation and mobilized personnel from hospitals and community care into LTC. Support was also requested from the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) and Canadian Red Cross. The Canadian Armed Forces deployed over 275 personnel across seven LTC homes in Ontario, while the Canadian Red Cross deployed over 300 personnel to support Ontario LTC and retirement homes (Government of Canada2021a,2021b).

Additionally, the province determined that management at specific LTC facilities were unable to contain COVID‐19 outbreaks. As a result, management responsibilities were transferred from LTC operators to local health organizations across Ontario, primarily acute care hospitals (Province of Ontario2020a,2020b).

The disaster in Ontario LTC was widely publicized in the media, and a provincial inquiry was conducted (Marrocco et al.2020). However, limited research has been published on the front‐line personnel who worked in LTC during the pandemic. Published studies identified challenges during this period, including heavy workloads, fear, anxiety, and the need for clear, consistent communication, supportive leadership, flexibility, and adaptability (Fisher et al.2021; White et al.2021; Yau et al.2021; Reynolds et al.2022; Hung et al.2022; Kirkham et al.2022). One study on Canadian military personnel who were deployed into Ontario and Quebec LTC facilities also identified concerns of moral injury and the potential mental health risks (Nazarov et al.2023).

Other countries experienced similar crises in LTC during the pandemic. Ontario's COVID‐19–related death rates were comparable to those of many developed countries (CIHI2020; OECD2021). Amnesty International reported over 18,000 COVID‐19–related deaths in England's care homes in 2020 (Amnesty International2020). The response to the COVID‐19 crisis in LTC varied across countries and included increasing staffing levels, restricting visitors, providing additional funding, and allocating specialized teams to support infection prevention and control (CIHI2020).

Canada's deployment of the military during COVID‐19 was also not unique. Although militaries do not train to respond to this type of disaster, the capabilities, resources, and access to readily available personnel were the final option that many countries turned to, including Canada, when other strategies had been exhausted. A review by Gad et al. (2021) identified 19 categories of civil–military cooperation in the COVID‐19 response across six European countries. These included building and staffing temporary field hospitals, medical evacuation flights, and augmenting the civil response with military capabilities. France deployed its military to provide logistical support and transport COVID‐19 patients, and it deployed personnel to establish field hospitals and provide support within existing healthcare facilities, while treating close to 10,000 people infected with the virus (Pasquier et al.2021). Gibson‐Fall (2021) suggests that COVID‐19 was a pivotal moment for civil–military cooperation globally, citing multiple examples of militaries’ changing roles in response to the pandemic.

The disaster in LTC both in Ontario and globally demonstrates that despite the fact that disaster preparedness and management systems are in place at multiple levels, these systems failed to prepare for the challenges that COVID‐19 presented. To better prepare and respond to similar crises in the future, the collective experience of personnel deployed to LTC needs to be documented and explored to identify what lessons can be learned. Furthermore, understanding the challenges experienced by both healthcare and military personnel can contribute to understanding how organizations should respond to future disasters or deployments.

The aim of the study is to develop a rich description of the context in Ontario's LTC during the pandemic, to analyze the perspective of personnel who were deployed, to identify lessons learned to improve preparedness for future disasters, and to improve training for those who respond to them.

The research question arose from the primary investigator's experience as military personnel deployed to work in LTC during the pandemic. The primary investigator was a registered nurse, who had worked in civilian and military healthcare settings for over a decade and recognized his positionality within the context of the researcher, as a participant observer (Green and Thorogood2014). The primary investigator engaged in bracketing with the research team to identify their own experiences, assumptions and perspectives, prior to beginning interviews (Green and Thorogood2014).

Other members of the research team constituted the supervisory committee for the primary investigator's PhD; they are all doctoral trained with experience in qualitative, mixed methods, and health policy research, including one nurse. They were involved in the development of the research design, data collection methods, data analysis, and validation of the findings.

The study was informed by the conceptualization of the COVID‐19 pandemic in LTC as a disaster (Oldenburger et al.2024). Furthermore, Kim and Sohn's (2018) description of complexity theory's relationship to disaster contributed to the recognition that the disaster of COVID‐19 in LTC was a confluence of factors, both preexisting and external, and also influenced by socio‐political factors.

A qualitative descriptive exploratory approach was employed, appropriate for exploring a new phenomenon where there is limited research, while providing first‐person description (Kim et al.2017). Demographic questionnaires and semi‐structured interviews were chosen to collect data.

Snowball sampling was used as a preferred methodology to study a population that was otherwise difficult to access (Naderifar et al.2017). Since there was no collective database of personnel or organizations that had deployed, provincial government records and news reports were used to identify hospitals that deployed personnel into LTC homes, and e‐mail invitations were then sent by organizations to those who had been deployed. The research team also connected with organizations and individuals they knew who had been involved in deploying personnel into LTC, who could help identify and invite those who had participated in the deployment. Inclusion criteria for the study were personnel deployed into LTC homes in Ontario, from either the military or acute care hospitals (March 2020–February 2021). Recruitment continued until data saturation was achieved (Creswell and Poth2018).

Ethics approval was obtained from Hamilton Integrated Research Ethics Board (HiREB), CAF Surgeon General Health Research Program, and the hospitals from which participants were recruited. All participants were provided with information about the study and completed an informed consent letter prior to the interview.

The semi‐structured interview guide was developed from an adaptation of the International Council of Nurses’ (ICN) Disaster Nursing Competency Domains (ICN2019). ICN's competency domains were selected as the framework for the interviews since the domains are common with other disaster disciplines but relate specifically to the front‐line nursing care role that deployed personnel experienced in LTC. Questionnaires and interviews were conducted between November 2022 and July 2023 online via Zoom by the primary investigator. The interviews were audio‐recorded, transcribed by the Zoom platform, and reviewed by the primary investigator. To protect participant privacy, recordings and transcripts were saved with alphanumeric codes and stored separately from identifiable data. Code saturation was achieved after 11 interviews when no new themes were identified, and saturation of meaning was identified after 20 interviews when themes were thoroughly understood from the participants’ descriptions. As Hennink et al. describe, code saturation is when you have “‘heard it all,’ but meaning saturation is needed to ‘understand it all’” (2017, p. 1).

A total of 30 interviews were conducted, ranging from 30 minutes to 2 hours. There were 20 participants who had been deployed from an acute care hospital and 10 from the military. Of those 30, 18 were identified as female. The average age was 39, and 29 had worked in a clinical environment prior to deployment, with an average of 13 years’ experience. Nineteen were nurses, while others were paramedics, occupational therapists, and psychotherapists. Education included nine with college diplomas, eight with undergraduate degrees, and 13 with graduate degrees. During the deployment, 15 were identified as working in a front‐line role, 13 as management, and two described their role as mixed. Deployments ranged from 2 weeks to 18 months.

Data analysis was conducted manually by the primary investigator and began with open coding. Initial codes and emerging categories were discussed with the research team to develop a codebook. This was followed by pattern‐coding to identify broad categories from participants’ descriptions of their deployment, and process coding (Saldaña2021) for codifying personnel's management of challenges they experienced. The coding process and refinement of code categories into themes were guided by thematic analysis. Themes were defined as “a shared, multi‐faceted meaning, patterned across at least some of a qualitative dataset” (Braun and Clarke2021, p. 296). As the primary investigator conducted the coding, no measure of inter‐rater reliability was administered. However, regular meetings with the research team were held to discuss the coded passages, codebook, and category development; research team members reviewed coded transcripts to validate the application of the codebook and category development. Other validation strategies included member‐checking with four participants after coding was complete, to provide feedback on themes to establish the credibility of the findings (Creswell and Poth2018). Member‐checking reaffirmed the categories but did not identify new codes or recommend substantive changes to the existing categories.

The study findings provide a rich description of the experience and perspectives of deployed personnel. The following are excerpts from participants’ descriptions of the context of the LTC home to which they were assigned. A number of participants were deployed as part of a large group, either as teams or integrated with facility staff. Upon entry into the LTC facility, participants described the initial shock of the situation they witnessed, including the sanitary conditions of the facilities: “There were bed bugs, cockroaches, mice, and rats. A lot of patients when we first went in were laying in their beds soiled in and urine and stool” (R10), “There was definitely a smell of body odour and urine” (R8), “[There were] people going unchanged for very long amounts of time, people with terrible ulcers” (R19).

Participants also recounted the severe lack of staffing in the facilities, “they didn't have enough people to remove the deceased from their rooms yet” (R1), “We had forty‐seven residents. At the beginning of the deployment we were lucky if there were three [Personal Support Workers]s for the whole floor” (R8), “There was twenty percent staffing” (R18).

Seconded healthcare providers and military personnel also described the state of the staff still working in the facilities, “It was just chaos everywhere, everyone was just scared and frantic and exhausted” (R1), “you could see a lot of […] fear in them […] you could almost feel it in the air that they were almost defeated” (R20). They also note the lack of adequate resources available to them, “[Personal Protective Equipment] was locked up and we had only access to small quantities which was hard to keep staff safe” (R21), “they would be forced to re‐using gowns between two, if not more patients” (R29).

Existing staff and management were absent at many facilities, presenting challenges for deployed personnel. One participant described a facility as having only one remaining staff member present when they arrived: “There was only one member of that particular organization's leadership team on site” (R4). Other respondents commented that, “They had a CEO who was not on site. They had a director of care who had COVID and resigned in the middle of their outbreak” (R15), “When I arrived […] there was almost nobody from the LTC [facility]” (R21).

Common themes were identified amongst both military and hospital professionals. As shown in Figure1, the analysis divided the themes into the categories Challenges and Reflections, with linkages between the themes.

Three themes emerged and were identified as challenges: Navigating the unknown, defining one's purpose, and establishing order.

Navigating the Unknown. The initial challenge was the unknown, from navigating new systems to unfamiliar patient populations and environments. Hospital staff described not knowing what to expect; “We didn't know what we were going into” (R24), “I think the challenge for us was we didn't know how many people […] how long this was [going to] carry on” (R30). Since COVID‐19 was unlike anything they had prepared for, they were often left to their own devices. Participants explained that “There was no rule book for me as a manager […] This was pretty novel [for the hospital] to deploy in long‐term care” (R28), “COVID is outside of our community disaster […] we always planned […] short‐term in nature” (R22).

Hospital management noted that previous experience or engagement facilitated preparations for the deployment, “We had been involved in two other evacuations of other sites, some of our planning there [and those experiences] helped us plan for this deployment” (R4). Another stated: “[I had] initial discussions, either by e‐mail or phone with the facility themselves […] so that when I arrived on site, [I understood] what was happening throughout the organization” (R11).

Observations from military personnel described similar challenges managing the unknown, conducting recces1to become acquainted with the context and facility's needs, “[Recces were done] at every single LTC facility [to really understand] the long‐term facilities and what their needs were” (R18).

However, even with the planning and preparation that took place, personnel experienced new challenges upon deployment, as one manager described, “LTC is black and white […] there's no discussion. It is ‘you must’ […] I had this massive binder in front of me, stating I must do A, B, C, D was beyond overwhelming” (R15).

Front‐line employees from the hospital also described the insecurity of navigating the unknowns, “We didn't know people by name. We didn't know anything about the patients” (R10), “[At the beginning] we probably were all very much at risk, in terms of not knowing the patients” (R15), “Not every resident had an identifiable patient chart or file […] we had nothing” (R30), “information just didn't get passed on. And it did result in a choking hazard. That's just one example of many that the information was the limiting factor to help us provide safe and competent care” (R7), “Everyone was maybe a little bit flying by the seat of their pants” (R23). One of the biggest unknowns included the evolving guidance on how to protect against COVID‐19. As one respondent stated: “The messaging was very fluid, [COVID‐19] it's contact, it's droplet” (R23).

To cope with the challenges, personnel described going back to the basics: triaging, primary assessments and basic life‐saving interventions: “We weren't able to provide care to them. […] We were making sure they that they were not dying” (R10), “our top priority was just making sure residents […] were alive and stayed alive” (R14). Another recounted, “[…] it was the very basics. It was, is this person eating, drinking? […] That was your top priority” (R2).

Once residents were determined to be medically stable, personnel pivoted to basic care, “When we first went in it was major outbreaks, trying to make sure people were medically stable and were getting the care they needed,” (R10), “ just those personal care needs feeding, bathing, and toileting” (R5), and “[The] daily routine, especially feeding them, and changing them, were the main priorities” (R29). Personnel described the role as basic and task‐focused, recognizing that other aspects of care given lower priority were missed, “Their mental and emotional well being was definitely kind of at the bottom of the list” (R13), “Not having enough nurses on ground, even though they were prioritizing their daily routine […], the physical assessments [were] being neglected” (R29), and “[You] would come across things that had been missed” (R3).

Hospital managers also reported difficulty balancing priorities in care delivery. One participant stated: “There's ways to risk mitigate that it's just a matter of finding the gray” (R11). Along with managing the uncertainties of being in a foreign environment, personnel also had to contend with understanding what they were expected to do when they arrived. Participants recalled that “it wasn't clear what was expected of me” (R23) and “I never actually received any orientation” (R28).

Defining One's Purpose. The second challenge personnel experienced was defining their purpose. Military personnel explained that: “This was not the role that most medics and or nurses had ever deployed into” (R18), “I don't think that anybody anticipated we would be doing something like this at home” (R17), “Something like this is not something we were prepared for” (R7), and “[…] never in my career did I think the doors of long‐term care would close behind me” (R19). Furthermore, medics from the military are not defined as regulated health professions in Ontario (Province of Ontario1991) and therefore have a scope of practice not recognized outside the military context. As one medic described, “initially we were told we couldn't do any medical practice due to our scope of practice not extending outside of the military. So, we were basically doing what [Personal Support Workers] would be doing” (R29).

Front‐line personnel from the hospital also experienced difficulty in identifying their role, as many had difficulty familiarizing themselves with the new clinical environment: “I was obviously terrified. I had never been in LTC. I had no idea what nurses in LTC do” (R13). Another described: “I'm an educator, so [LTC is] very different, like, I'm not on the floor doing direct patient care. So it was very different” (R3). Two nurses also described that “There were some nurses that came in that didn't want to do the nursing role” (R21), and “Not everyone is equipped to do peri‐care” (R6). Lack of direction while deployed was also identified as a challenge in understanding one's role: “I don't think our roles were really that clearly defined” (R23), “It just felt really chaotic, there was nobody driving the bus” (R16), and “I didn't feel like I was really contributing that much. You know there was quite a lot of time where I just felt like I was sitting around” (R13).

In response to this challenge, personnel identified the importance of adaptability and flexibility, specifically adapting to new challenges. “[Our work] definitely deviated from what we were used to doing, […] learning on the fly as to what practices can keep you safe and what might get you in trouble” (R26), “So it was a lot of scaling down, adapting, re‐evaluating our abilities so that we could tailor it to the more appropriate level of care for the residents” (R7), and “we learned as we went what was need […] it was putting out a fire all day” (R24).

Flexibility became the key to modifying their approach providing ethical care, “There was a lot of ethical considerations of how we can adjust these protocols” (R11). Flexibility was also required by personnel for transitioning between roles: “I would say that you have to be willing to do whatever your need to do” (R12), “I had to become the leader. I had to become the [Registered Nurse] on the floor, but also the manager in terms of delegating tasks to people” (R15), “Towards the end I was personally less involved with direct care and more on the managerial side” (R7).

Establishing Order. The third theme that emerged in the interviews was the challenge of establishing order. Both front‐line personnel and management recognized that there were underlying issues that needed to be addressed. Three subthemes were identified: organization and leadership, communication, and teamwork and support.

Organization and Leadership. The lack of facility leadership in many of the LTC homes was viewed as a critical issue. One hospital manager described, “[The] leadership group became inaccessible, so in terms of the relationship between our organization and the residence leadership, there wasn't really any” (R30). Deployed personnel identified that the lack of leadership left staff unsupported: “[Facility staff] felt really unsupported by their organization. […] They really felt like they were let down. […] I mean they were just crushed” (R26). Participants described staff remaining at the facility as overwhelmed, filling multiple roles. “It was important to really have a perspective on what the administrators in those homes were doing at the time, because they weren't functioning necessarily in just an administrator role. They were helping in the kitchen, helping with housekeeping, and helping with care of residents” (R4).

To address the lack of leadership and support for front‐line personnel, hospital management established a physical presence in the facility. A participant explained: “We had on‐site presence, both myself as a director as well as a manager. […] one of us was on‐site at least 16 to 18 hours each day, 7 days a week” (R4). Front‐line personnel described the positive impact the presence of their leadership had: “I definitely felt the support of the hospital and the management team, seeing management work alongside and support us” (R10), and “[When] I got down there, there was definitely a core group of leadership that I think put a lot of effort into making sure that redeployed staff felt valued, felt welcome” (R5).

Military personnel similarly described the impact of having leadership physically present: “The management that we [had] within the team [were] on‐site with us. So, they were very understanding” (R29), and “[Leadership in my group was a nursing officer]. They were great and very supportive” (R8).

Communication. The second subtheme was communication. Military and hospital personnel alike described problems with communications in the facility: “initially it was difficult, because whoever we would be providing hand over to may have never worked on the unit” (R3), “There was zero contact with management [of the facility]” (R10). The hierarchical structure in LTC was also described as impacting communication between different facility staff—in some cases staff did not even know the names of other employees on the unit: “[You] could tell this was cultural. […] The [nurse] who was there didn't even know who the agency staff or [personal support workers] were working with them by name” (R2).

Teams also expressed difficulty with internal communication, including lines of communication between their leadership in the deployment and the flow of information—to the extent that personnel were hearing updates about their deployment from the media before it was communicated from leadership. “Having so many chains of command made it [very confusing] as to where should information go? […] a lot of information came up either little or late, at very last minute giving us very little time to prepare for anything” (R29), “[leadership] tried to keep us informed and communicated, but we found out more from the news than we did from our chain of command” (R7).

To address communication challenges, hospital and military management described setting up a routine of daily huddles and check‐ins: “We always maintained communication on a daily basis. Before setting out on our shifts, and also afterwards” (R7), “There would be huddles on the units at various times during the day, where [the leadership] would be floating around [and come to check‐in] and a get a report” (R15). Leadership's presence and effective communication were considered essential amongst personnel, contributing to a sense of teamwork and support while in the field.

Teamwork and Support. The final aspect of establishing order was forming teamwork and a support system. Personnel described that facility staff were overwhelmed and demoralized, due to lack of support from their own management: “They were just crushed in terms of who they could draw on and their resources. […] It just kind of vanished within a couple days” (R26), “What [the hospital leadership] would do in ten minutes, would take [the LTC leadership] five days” (R9), “it became evident that [LTC leadership] weren't comfortable […] having huddles with their staff” (R1).

Participants also described the difficulty and trauma they felt in coping with circumstances while deployed: “nobody will understand or be able to walk in your shoes if they haven't been through it” (R10). However, other personnel identified the significance of trust and camaraderie that did help them feel supported: “There was a big sense of comradeship, […] it didn't matter if you were a manager working as an RPN or you were an RN” (R2). Furthermore, the presence of hospital management made personnel feel supported and trusted that their leadership was behind them. Working as part of a team with colleagues from their own organizations also helped to bolster their confidence: “I had teammates who [were] already there, and I […] felt more comfortable approaching for assistance, and we worked cohesively, I would say because we knew each other prior” (R3), “I was buddied up with a colleague at the hospital that I worked at” (R5), “I think the fact that we were such a great team together. It really helps, like we played off each other” (R8).

Deployed personnel encountered a range of experiences and challenges while embedded in LTC homes. However, they also identified strategies to help them cope and overcome these difficulties. Their insights offer valuable lessons to help plan and prepare for future large‐scale emergencies, including pandemics.

After describing the challenges experienced during the deployment, the next step is to examinereflectionson how challenges in providing care were managed. In the civilian context, this is often called a debriefing. In contrast, in the military, this is commonly called an after‐action review, where lessons are derived from the collective experience. The themes of reflection in this section are a compilation of both explicit statements by personnel and those identified implicitly from descriptions of how challenges were actively managed.

Adaptability and Flexibility. The first theme of adaptability and flexibility was identified in managing challenges early in their deployment. Hospital managers described constantly reassessing needs and new information: “Obviously there [was] a lot of emerging data on best practice guidelines [so our IPAC lead] was the one providing us with the latest research” (R18), “[Looking] at creative ways to solve problem that don't necessarily have a perfect solution” (R11), “we had consistently been updating […] processes” (R24).

Front‐line providers described adaptability and flexibility, “it was really a shared duty and very dynamic, depending on the day” (R5), and “you might be in certain circumstances, but you end up with a situation that maybe [wasn't what you expected]” (R26). Adaptability and flexibility were also crucial in defining their purpose: “initial days [were] focused on personal care, [evolved] into an [infection prevention and control]” (R26). One front‐line personnel stated: “I think the people that were most effective were the ones that were the most flexible and just [said], ‘I don't have anybody here telling me what to do, but I can see what needs to be done” (R16), “I think that flexibility is paramount to being able to [be] successful” (R17). However, the existing LTC system was also perceived to present barriers for flexibility, as hospital and military personnel commented: “[legislation] didn't leave space innovation” (R25), “the medics came up with a process that was turned down” (R23).

Pragmatism. The second theme of pragmatism was about how personnel efficiently managed the limited time and resources they had. This pragmatic perspective was identified as critical for focusing on the fundamentals to keep residents alive: “Just trying to do basic care and basic assessments as best as I [could]” (R3), “at the beginning [it was] the very basics” (R2); “It was very exhilarating, very fast‐paced, very intense, it was really just task‐focused” (R26).

Another aspect of pragmatism that was described was balancing risks and expectations. As one participant stated: “We had to strive with delivering the best we could with the resources that were available” (R2). Another described: “There's the ideal of what would be best to do in this scenario, but it doesn't necessarily align with the particular nuanced approach that's needed” (R11).

Presence of Leadership. The final three subthemes correspond to the challenge of establishing order and leadership characteristics that personnel perceived as important to the deployment. First, management and front‐line personnel identified the important role of leadership's presence. Managers described their presence as a strategy to maintain situational awareness and understanding of the evolving needs, “There needs to be a leader here and there needs to be concrete direction and roles” (R16). Front‐line personnel perceived the managers’ presence as a sign of empathetic leadership and felt it built trust that leadership understood and supported their challenges: “You were definitely inspired by this individual. […] that was really inspiring and just in terms of the leadership style for this type of response that was needed” (R26) and another described, “we also had on‐site [manager] which I found really helpful, [and] knew would have time for me and [was] always there” (R13).

Transparent Communication. Reflecting on the challenge of communication during the deployment, personnel described leadership's presence as facilitating open and clear lines of communication. One military personnel stated, “[The nursing officer] would make rounds and come check on us. So most of my concerns or questions would go through him” (R8); “Management that we have within the team […] were very understanding. [They had] very good communication, they were supportive” (R29). In addition to ad hoc communication between front‐line personnel and management, both the military and hospital management established regular “huddles” to provide updates and opportunities for front‐line personnel to share concerns. One hospital manager described it as “communication and structure […] You have communication feedback loops and you're heavily relying on the structure of the system” (R30).

Trust and Cohesion. Lastly, the subtheme of trust and cohesion arose throughout participants’ descriptions of their experience. For many, the role of trust and cohesion began even before arriving at the LTC homes, as they were already familiar with the colleagues and managers they were deploying alongside: “it was really really helpful to have that buddy” (R5).

Hospital personnel noted that the flattened hierarchy in their organization, as opposed to the more rigid structures witnessed in LTC, provided a sense of trust and respect amongst the deployment teams. Personnel being paired up or grouped into teams also helped alleviate some anxiety about the uncertainty they faced. Further, working with colleagues from the same organization also provided some normalcy. Lastly, sharing the experience, unknown conditions, and trauma with colleagues provided a support system they could share the experience with, both during the deployment and after returning: “there was a real sense of [camaraderie] and support. […] like the ability to […]learn and […] laugh with one another and […]trudge through a pretty awful set of circumstances” (R5).

COVID‐19 exacerbated an existing crisis in Ontario's LTC sector into a province‐wide disaster (Oldenburger et al.2022,2024). Meanwhile, deploying personnel from the military and acute care hospitals into LTC homes was a first for the province. This study provides an in‐depth description of participants’ experiences, including challenges and how they were managed. Further, participants’ perspectives demonstrate a dynamic relationship between the challenges they faced and how they addressed them. An adaptation of the earlier Thematic Guide demonstrates the interconnections with blue arrows (Figure2).

Temporally, challenges emerged as personnel went through different phases of the disaster. From pre‐deployment and entering the LTC facilities, they experienced the challenge of the unknown. Then, once they began to work in LTC, they were challenged to understand their role and purpose while deployed. And finally, as the situation stabilized with returning staff and deployed personnel becoming more familiar with the facility and understanding their role, focus shifted to establishing processes to maintain the stability and prepare for departure. Additionally, these experiences were dynamic in that the adaptability and flexibility they developed while navigating the unknown were seen to contribute to redefining their purpose. Furthermore, once they defined their purpose, they were comfortable in establishing order within the paradigm of adaptability, flexibility, and pragmatism, thus leading to transparent leadership, improved communication, building trust, and the establishment of cohesion amongst personnel.

Previous studies from personnel working in the pandemic identified challenges of workload, fear, anxiety, and poor communication (Yau et al.2021; White et al.2021; Palacios‐Ceña et al.2021). Moving forward, findings from this study suggest that leadership must be physically present and, in times of crisis, must focus on supporting personnel's ability to be flexible and adaptable to manage challenges they experience. Being pragmatic is also critical to ensure that leaders and front‐line personnel allocate limited resources to the most critical priorities, accepting the risk that other priorities may temporarily be neglected. This initial focus then helps lead to stability where there is opportunity to instill systems to facilitate effective communication and teamwork, and transition to normal functioning.

To support training and policy for nurses and other health professionals, these findings provide concrete recommendations for disaster competencies. Table1maps study findings to ICN's eight disaster nursing competency domains (ICN2019) to identify the study's implications for existing disaster competencies and responding to disasters in the future.

Mapping study findings to ICN disaster nursing competency domains.

Mapping the study's findings to existing competencies provides a point of reference to compare the experience and lessons from the pandemic response with responses to other disasters. Previous studies have examined disaster competencies and convened working groups to develop a comprehensive list of core disaster competencies (Hsu et al.2006; Daily et al.2010; Walsh et al.2012; Schultz et al.2012). However, many of these pre‐dated the pandemic and do not examine the role of front‐line health providers deployed into a specific sector during times of disaster, as reported in this study. These findings provide a framework for the application of lessons from the pandemic experience in how to improve training for health providers and disaster planning.

This study was not without limitations. Sampling was affected by the variation in deployment size and length. Organizations also acknowledged that leadership changes, lack of consolidated records on deployed personnel, or limited access to deployed personnel due to departures from the organizations impacted recruitment. The limitation of the sample size was mitigated by expanding the sample to include all personnel with front‐line roles in LTC. There is also potential for selection bias, as the research team relied on their own contacts and invitations to organizations to invite their personnel to participate. Organizations were asked to invite all personnel who deployed to LTC homes, and all personnel who responded were considered for inclusion. Interviews also occurred over two years after deployment, increasing the likelihood of recall bias. To address this risk, initial interview questions focused on participants’ visceral experience of being deployed and then explored different aspects of the deployment. Lastly, the interviewer was both a participant observer and had professional connections with some of the participants. However, he neither had a supervisory role nor was deployed with study participants. Potential bias was addressed by the lead investigator bracketing his own experience of deployment prior to the interview, and he did not share his own experience until after the interview concluded. The primary investigator also reviewed the transcripts, coding, and categories with other members of the research team during the data analysis. At the same time, member‐checking was conducted to receive feedback and validate the findings.

The COVID‐19 pandemic had a devastating effect on LTC in Ontario, and the deployment of personnel from other settings into LTC was unprecedented. This descriptive exploratory study of personnel deployed in LTC in Ontario provides a thorough description of their experience, perspectives on the challenges they faced, and lessons that were learned. These findings are invaluable not only to understand the devastating state of LTC during the pandemic but also to improve the training and preparedness of health providers for future disasters. Further, future research can examine how LTC and other congregate settings can be better connected with the larger public healthcare system to mitigate the risk of similar disasters, with improved prevention, preparedness, and response.