Injury is the leading cause of death and a cause of disability in children and negatively affects physical health, mental health, and quality of life in both the short- and long-term. The goal of a pediatric trauma system is to optimize the care for children within a state, regional, or national trauma system across the entire continuum of care regardless of where they live or where the traumatic event occurs. This continuum includes injury prevention, prehospital care, interfacility transport between hospitals providing different levels of care, acute and critical inpatient care, inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation, and reintegration into the community and primary care medical home. A systems-based approach, one that requires distinct elements of structure and function to perform together in an interrelated and cohesive manner to improve care quality, is essential. To improve outcomes after injury, a cohesive system must effectively provide optimal care for the “right child, at the right place, at the right time” across this continuum.

Injury has been the leading cause of death and a cause of disability in children in the United States for decades.1,2Injury leads to more years of potential life lost than cancer, congenital anomalies, and perinatal health issues combined.1,3Survivors of childhood injury frequently suffer mental and behavioral health sequelae and physical disabilities, sometimes with long-term consequences.4,5Improving outcomes requires an approach that recognizes childhood injury as a significant public health problem. Using the continuum of care model for trauma system development and planning provides a framework to integrate care and optimize outcomes.6This continuum of care includes injury prevention, prehospital care, emergency department (ED) care, interfacility transport, acute and critical inpatient care, inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation, and reintegration into the community and primary care medical home (Fig.1).7A systems-based approach requires distinct elements of structure and function to perform together in an interrelated and cohesive manner.8,9A functional trauma system is represented by a sequential practice of evidence-based evaluation and management along the continuum of care and needs to be team-based, cohesive, and seamless to improve care quality in an efficient and effective manner.

Trauma system continuum of care. Figure developed by Tanya Gerber, graphic recorder. Reprinted with permission.

Children are injured in a variety of geographic locations, and involvement of emergency medical services (EMS) and both local and regional hospital systems is paramount to optimizing care. Pediatric trauma care refers to the care received in any setting by a child who has suffered a traumatic injury, and a trauma center is a hospital-based setting specifically designated or verified to provide trauma care.23,24Trauma care is provided in a variety of settings including in the field, at nontrauma hospitals or centers, and at adult and/or pediatric trauma centers (PTCs). Additionally, in addition to the ED, minor trauma care may be provided at urgent care and private practice clinics.

Ideally, a comprehensive pediatric trauma system incorporates prehospital and hospital-based care capable of initial stabilization of children of any age and their transfer, when needed, to centers providing advanced pediatric trauma care. A cohesive system allows for prompt communication and coordination, with tiered care concordant with patient needs. A trauma system focuses not only on survival but also survivorship,25following the patient through discharge to a rehabilitation or home environment. Integration of disaster response systems at the local, state, regional, and national levels is an essential component of any functional trauma system.26Coordination of trauma system development generally includes physicians and nonphysician clinicians (e.g., nurses, nurse practitioners, or physician assistants) and their professional organizations; hospital, state, and regional emergency management teams; the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response Hospital Preparedness Program; state hospital associations; local and state departments of health; state and regional trauma advisory councils; state legislatures; and local community leaders, among others (Table1).

Other subspecialty societies including but not limited to hospital medicine, urology, otolaryngology, vascular surgery, ophthalmology, plastic surgery, and oral and maxillofacial surgery, among others.

Independent public health organizations and agencies associated with families and child health are also important partners.

Effectiveness of state or regional pediatric trauma systems across the country has not traditionally been assessed. However, a state-based scoring system was created in 2022, called the Pediatric Trauma System Assessment Score (PTSAS), to measure each state's pediatric trauma capacity within the context of their trauma system (Fig.2). Through a Delphi process, six domains were chosen (injury prevention and recognition, access to care, quality improvement and trauma registry, disaster, legislation, and funding), each of which included three to five seminal parameters reflecting a state's pediatric trauma capabilities. A PTSAS summary score ranging from 0 to 100 was computed based on the weighted averages of each domain (with a score of 100 being the highest capabilities). The PTSAS score has been associated with both out-of-hospital and in-hospital deaths, and every 1-point increase in PTSAS has been associated with a decrease in overall state-based mortality of 0.12 (95% confidence interval [CI], −0.22 to −0.02) deaths per 100,000 children (Fig.3).

Often, a combination of approaches is essential. Dr. Barbara Barlow was instrumental in identifying, describing, and promoting regulatory changes related to window falls by children in New York City.33After Dr. Barlow's work in Washington Heights led to a 1979 ordinance requiring landlords to install window guards, the number of injuries children sustained from falling out of windows decreased in the neighborhood by 96%.38Effective public health messaging through the “Children Don't Fly” campaign helped solidify and disseminate her pivotal work.

Despite incredible efforts in the injury prevention space, it is important to note that many causes of injury to children have not changed over the past decade.56Aside from deaths due to motor vehicle collisions and pedestrian injuries, which have declined substantially, many injury-related causes of deaths have not changed for 20 years.2,41This highlights the importance of continued focus on injury prevention initiatives at local, regional, and national levels.

Prehospital care may be provided by a variety of emergency health care clinicians, including emergency medical technicians, advanced emergency medical technicians, emergency medical responders, and paramedics.69Police and/or fire departments, private or third-party ambulance services, and public agencies all play a role in parts of the country. Aside from specialty units associated with large children's hospitals, individual prehospital nonphysician clinicians infrequently care for critically ill or injured children, particularly those who volunteer or work in rural or underserved areas. Limited knowledge and experience with pediatric trauma patients are addressed by continuing education efforts through established courses supported by the AAP, American College of Emergency Physicians, American Heart Association, National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians, National Association of EMS Educators, and National Association of EMS Physicians, among others. Local and regional EMS-based pediatric-specific educational initiatives and practical experience at children's hospitals have been used to optimize competency and comfort with care of the injured child. Additional methods for skill maintenance include simulation and online and remote training.70–73Simulation-based training for prehospital personnel in the management of pediatric emergencies is associated with improvement in some skills (i.e., choosing the correct airway equipment and use of Broselow tape), and data suggest that low-fidelity simulation training is more effective than high-fidelity simulation at improving pediatric resuscitation skills.72However, limited exposure of any training (whether simulation-based, lecture, or online self-study) may not be sufficient to substantially improve skills,72highlighting the need for iterative and varied approaches to capacity building and skill maintenance. The EMSC Program has introduced pediatric readiness to EMS systems, using collaborative approaches and promoting a PECC for each EMS service. The PECC is responsible for pediatric quality improvement to make sure that pediatric equipment is up to date and working and that all emergency health care clinicians know how to use the equipment and use periodic simulation to refresh skills.

Individual states have the responsibility of regulating their own EMS system. In some states, EMS agencies are required to submit practice guidelines and protocols to the state medical director for approval and other states require a standardized state protocol. Evidence-based and standardized pediatric-specific protocols for prehospital care are an essential component. In all states, licensure of EMS agencies requires an approved number of education hours and/or experience dependent on the level of service provided, although these hours may or may not include pediatric education.

Transport decisions are a collaborative effort between referring and accepting physicians to determine mode (air vs. ground), the appropriate level of expertise of transport team members, and the necessary equipment to ensure a safe transport to optimize patient care, all while considering the cost and time for the mobilization of each transport type and the respective travel times.91Although the patient's health is the utmost priority to guide interfacility transport decisions, recognizing the impact of transport on the child and family (e.g., separation of child and parent) is important.

The use of technology to support clinical care decision making has increased over the past decade. Telehealth services have the potential to enhance the reach of tertiary trauma care for children in rural and underserved areas where pediatric specialty care is not readily available.94Services can include education, protocol sharing, “as low as reasonably achievable”–based guidelines, and administrative oversight.94As a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic, teleradiology has been progressively used around the nation. Data suggest that efficient cloud-based imaging may lead to decreased repeat imaging, lower costs, and fewer delays in care for pediatric trauma patients.95With the growth of telehealth opportunities to improve care, appropriate and commensurate payment models must be developed to support telehealth services.

In 2006, the National Study on Costs and Outcomes of Trauma found that trauma center care was associated with decreased mortality, particularly for the most critically injured patients.96In general, trauma centers are described by their ability to provide trauma-specific care, with level I being the highest, most comprehensive level of care (Table2).24Trauma centers can be self-described, state designated, and/or ACS verified. They can be classified as PTCs, ATCs, or combined adult/PTCs. The ACS verifies ATCs as levels I, II, and III and pediatric centers as level I or II, with level I as the highest level. Verification by the ACS is a process that is integrated into their quality programs and involves four components: adherence to standards, comprehensive infrastructure, rigorous data to guide quality improvement, and external peer review. State criteria for trauma level designation may differ from or be identical to ACS verification criteria and may include as many as four or five levels. American College of Surgeons verification criteria are reviewed and updated at regular intervals and published as “Resources for the Optimal Care of the Injured Patient,” which provides a comprehensive description of the necessary resources to provide optimal care for injured adults and children (Table3).23A 2022 standard for ACS verification at all levels of trauma centers addresses the pediatric readiness of the hospital ED: “In all trauma centers, the emergency department must evaluate its pediatric readiness and have a plan to address any deficiencies.”23This standard aims to raise awareness of the importance of pediatric readiness, include the trauma surgeon as part of the team, and begin to optimize resources for pediatric care in all settings.

Pediatric trauma centers are generally capable of providing a broad range of pediatric services delivered by pediatric-focused staff, including physicians and nonphysician clinicians trained in pediatric emergency medicine, nurses with demonstrated competency in the care of injured children, pediatric anesthesia providers, and pediatric medical subspecialists and surgical specialists. Resources at PTCs required by the ACS include readily available/on-site interventional radiology, pediatric anesthesiology, pediatric surgery, pediatric orthopedic and neurosurgical care, and pediatric critical care, among others. A protocol for screening patients at high risk for psychological sequelae from their injury is also required, along with a process for referral to a mental health clinician trained in trauma-informed care.23For the appropriately trained clinician, examples of evidence based therapies may include Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and Alternatives for Families: A Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. To help guide trauma centers, the ACS Committee on Trauma has published best practice guidelines to guide screening and intervention for mental health disorders in the acute trauma patient, including pediatric-specific resources.104Pediatric trauma centers also often have certified child life specialists, and the 2023 standard for ACS verification requires all PTCs to have a child life program. In addition, PTCs often have child abuse physicians; pediatric registered dietitians and pharmacists; pediatric physiatrists; pediatric occupational, physical, and speech therapists; pediatric pain medicine specialists; and pediatric palliative care services. Many of these specialized services can be offered through consultation and, in some cases, telemedicine.

A well-equipped and staffed pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) is essential for optimal care of the injured child,113and the availability of PICU beds within a region may improve survival in pediatric trauma.114Pediatric intensive care units offer a setting with necessary equipment and advanced technology to support physiologically unstable or intubated patients who need advanced monitoring. Pediatric intensive care units are staffed by physicians and nonphysician clinicians with pediatric critical care training or expertise. Pediatric intensive care unit resources are essential for the management of severe traumatic brain injury and advanced burn resuscitation.19,115In the PICU, attention is paid not only to physiologic stability but also to minimizing secondary harm (e.g., preventable delirium, decubitus ulcers, hospital acquired infections). The ACS recommends that surgeons be the primary physicians and/or involved on all patients admitted with traumatic injuries; however, notable variability exists in the structure and care processes in place for critically injured children.116Critically injured children likely benefit from collaborative care by both the trauma and PICU services. Likewise, comanagement with medical teams on acute care floors is often beneficial and/or essential depending on hospital-specific resources and processes (i.e., which teams are in house, relative expertise, etc.) and patient age and comorbid diagnoses (i.e., uncontrolled diabetes, prematurity, psychosis, complex care needs, etc.).

A unique aspect of pediatric trauma care is the need for awareness and recognition of signs of child abuse and neglect. Various historical factors, examination findings, and diagnostic testing results are associated with child physical abuse.123–125A combination of these findings is often included in institution-specific screening tools. It is important to note that multiple reports have identified disparities in child abuse reporting, with children from historically marginalized racial or ethnic groups disproportionately identified as potential victims of abuse and more likely to be investigated, to be subject to unnecessary tests, and to have a change of caregiver at discharge.126–133Minimizing disparities in reporting (and unnecessary tests) requires a multipronged approach, including clinical pathways/guidelines and staff education on bias reduction.

Injury during childhood has been associated with poor educational outcomes, functional status, and quality of life.5,170–174The trauma community has more recently emphasized survivorship and recovery given the potential long-term physical and mental health effects of trauma on the child, family, and community.175To this end, postinjury trauma-informed care, along with recovery and resiliency programs, are becoming more common.176–179The goal of a trauma system is to return children to full, age-appropriate function with the ability to reach maximum adult potential. This process includes reintegration into the community, school or educational environment, and primary care medical home. The primary care pediatrician is an essential navigator in this postinjury phase of care, supporting children and adolescents with short- and long-term sequelae, in addition to assisting in the transition to adult trauma-informed care clinicians. Crisis intervention and ongoing support can be offered through hospital-based violence intervention programs to youth who are injured through interpersonal violence and are at risk of reinjury and psychosocial trauma.180–182For injured children with extensive care needs after the acute injury, the availability of both inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation resources specifically for children is a scarce yet vital component of trauma care. Physical, occupational, cognitive, speech, and play therapies, along with psychological and social support, are essential elements of a comprehensive rehabilitation effort for the injured child and family. The ability to begin early rehabilitation during the acute hospitalization, particularly for children with traumatic brain injury and cognitive challenges or with fractures and mobility requirements, is inherent to recovery and reintegration.183–185There are many areas of the country with no inpatient pediatric rehabilitation resources and limited outpatient resources that are barriers to optimal or expeditious recovery. Novel approaches to care, such as telehealth and mobile or wearable health technologies, may help increase access to pediatric-specific care to meet the needs of all children, despite where they live, grow, and play.

Effective clinical performance and quality improvement are integral components of trauma programs and indirectly for trauma systems as a whole. Performance improvement efforts often focus on patient safety and harm prevention, reporting of delays in diagnosis or care, near misses, trends in morbidity across service lines, mortality review to recognize opportunities for improvement, and/or communication issues. Review of trauma care provided to children is facilitated by comprehensive chart review. Collaborative reviews between transferring and receiving institutions and transport teams are important for children transferred for additional care. Each dedicated trauma center has an institutional trauma registry, which exports data to state and (often) national databases so that outcomes can be risk adjusted and benchmarked to allow for evaluation of care quality across institutions and inform opportunities for improvement. Quality review generally adopts the Donabedian framework of structure, process, and outcomes, with selection of performance improvement initiatives based on performance indicators that fall below a specific threshold based on benchmarking.190,191Quality indicators should be remeasured after implementation, with reassessment of outcomes. Outcomes are compared through programs like the ACS Pediatric TQIP, the Cardiac Arrest Registry to Enhance Survival, and the National EMS Information System. Data systems, however, continue to be disjointed and lack the ability to link across data sets to fully understand the continuum of care and the connection between processes and outcomes. One consideration is to create a National Unique Identifier for each trauma patient that starts from the initial encounter (e.g., EMS, urgent care, or other) and is added to all centers (and their data set), at which the patient is treated. This identifier would follow a child from initial evaluation through acute treatment, rehabilitation, and postdischarge follow-up. This is an important step to obtain comprehensive understanding of the impact of a pediatric trauma system on long-term outcomes.

Capacity building, education, and training at all health care centers that treat injured children are important. The highest-level trauma centers often provide education and outreach to local and regional community centers and state agencies to improve care for children. National trauma and EMS organizations work jointly to include children's unique needs and interests in their programs to ensure that children receive timely and appropriate care no matter where they are injured. Continuing trauma education for physicians, nurses, and prehospital professionals can be accomplished by courses such as the Advanced Trauma Care for Nurses, Trauma Nursing Core Course, PTS/STN Pediatric Trauma Across the Care Continuum nursing course, PALS Plus: Trauma, NAEMT's PHTLS and EPC courses for prehospital providers, and the Advanced Trauma Life Support courses, all of which includes key components for children. The Emergency Nursing Pediatric Course has injury-specific modules as well.

Disaster preparedness for adults and children in the United States has improved significantly since Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Hospital accreditation programs including The Joint Commission have strengthened their disaster preparedness requirements for institutions. There is considerable federal support through the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response Hospital Preparedness Program and the HRSA Regional Pediatric Pandemic Network (PPN) to improve pediatric disaster care nationally.193–196As of 2022, there were 10 children's hospitals partnering with professional associations, nonprofit organizations, government agencies, and others through the PPN to improve the pediatric readiness of health care systems and ensure high-quality, equitable pediatric care in emergencies, disasters, and pandemics.

Many studies have examined the association of race or ethnicity and/or insurance status with mortality. Black and Hispanic children who require operative intervention following major abdominopelvic trauma have a higher risk of postoperative mortality compared with White children.220In other studies, lack of insurance and disparities in socioeconomic status were associated with mortality after pediatric injury.221–223There are limited data on racial and ethnic disparities in pediatric trauma morbidities such as disability, quality of life, and mental health; however, studies suggest that Black children have worse functional outcomes after traumatic brain injury.224,225These differences are not due to a biologic difference, but likely reflect complex underlying disparities.

Next steps at the ACS level involve including an equity-focused quality framework into data systems such as the TQIP and beginning to study patient-reported outcomes, which may provide more insight into disparities in care.227,228The Center for Disease Control and Prevention's Division of Adolescent and School Health has defined action steps to address health disparities and include focused programmatic efforts, raising awareness, building partnerships, and documenting impact.229Additionally, the US Department of Health and Human Services and the Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion's Healthy People 2030 focuses on “eliminating health disparities and creating equitable opportunities for people to live healthy lives.” More information on Health Equity in Healthy People 2030, including goals, objectives, and tools for action, can be found online (http://odphp.health.gov/).229Altogether, disparities occur along the continuum of the pediatric trauma care and equity-based efforts to address these disparities must also span the continuum of care.

Injury is the leading cause of death and a cause of disability in children in the United States. Using a systems-based approach along the continuum of care for trauma system development and planning along with integration of research, outreach, and iterative evaluation (Fig.5) provides a framework to integrate care and optimize outcomes. The ideal pediatric trauma system is comprehensive and cohesive but seamlessly integrated with the adult trauma system of care to provide optimal and equitable care for the “right child, at the right place, and at the right time” across this continuum.

Graphic depicting trauma system involvement above and beyond patient care. Figure developed by Tanya Gerber, graphic recorder. Reprinted with permission.

M.E.F. and K.T.F. conceptualized and organized the policy statement, coordinated and supervised the manuscript drafting, drafted sections of the initial manuscript, edited the initial manuscript as a whole, and critically reviewed and revised the manuscript. V.S. drafted sections of the initial manuscript, edited the initial manuscript as a whole, and critically reviewed and revised the manuscript. All authors approved the final manuscript as submitted and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

Members: Toni K. Gross MD, MPH, FAAP, FAEMS, Chairperson; Kerry S. Caperell, MD, FAAP; Jennifer A. Hoffmann, MD, MS, FAAP; Jennifer E. McCain, MD, FAAP; Sylvia Owusu-Ansah, MD, MPH, FAAP; Christian D. Pulcini, MD, MEd, MPH, FAAP; Mohsen Saidinejad, MD, MS, MBA, FAAP; David Schnadower, MD, MPH, FAAP; Caleb E. Ward, MB BChir, MPH, FAAP; Muhammad Waseem, MD, FAAP.