As climate change progresses, it is critical to assess the equity of health impacts, adaptation interventions and policies. Climate change can contribute to coastal hazards like flooding resulting in loss of life, property and land, leading to potential long-term physical or mental health impacts. Additionally, some UK coastal populations often face social deprivation and limited healthcare access, which can be worsened by environmental changes.

Four studies examined the differentials in current and future coastal flood impacts, and seven assessed the equity of adaptation measures. Coastal flood risk is unevenly distributed across the UK. Policies and practices like household insurance and property resilience measures may increase inequalities, while community engagement, planning and structural solutions can reduce disparities, depending on local context and implementation.

Adaptation to UK coastal flood risk requires both short-term and long-term strategies. Approaches relying on individual behaviour or household income may worsen health inequalities. Further evaluations and better evidence are needed to improve flood planning and incident management. Climate change presents a challenge for organisations to deliver national and local policy responses ensuring that adaptation is effective and equitable in the immediate and longer term.

Coastal flooding undermines health and well-being. Many coastal areas with high levels of deprivation are also at high risk of flooding. In the UK, investment for coastal flood risk interventions including defences funded through government or partnership funding has been targeted at low-income, deprived communities, but evidence is less clear for other adaptation or resilience measures.

A comprehensive scoping review of current evidence on inequalities in coastal flood risk and in adaptation responses for coastal communities in the UK. There is limited evidence on observed or modelled inequalities in health impacts from coastal flood hazards despite the high prevalence of social deprivation in coastal communities in the UK.

Greater consideration of equity is needed in local and national coastal risk adaptation planning and intervention to address the exacerbation of health inequalities among coastal communities already experiencing challenges such as deprivation, ageing population and social decline. The evidence highlighted here can inform UK and other high-income country decision-making and policy implementation such as national and regional flood and coastal risk resilience plans, national climate change risk assessment frameworks and also flood and coastal risk mapping of the most vulnerable.

Flooding causes mortality, injuries and mental health conditions5as well as exacerbations of non-communicable diseases and increased contact with health services.9Coastal flooding is often episodic, affecting the same communities repeatedly and, without warning or prior action being undertaken, can cause mass mortality. A global systematic literature review identified that flood events were associated with an increased prevalence of anxiety disorders in Spain, and post-traumatic stress disorder and depression in the USA and Australia.10 11The review reported predictors of developing a mental health condition following a flood disaster include: precarious living conditions, low household income, displacement from home, persistent material damage and insurance-related issues.9 10Coastal flooding is more dangerous than surface or fluvial flooding due to the depth and velocity of water.12Managing flood risk involves national and local governments, emergency responders, healthcare, community groups and flood forums. In extreme cases, flooding can threaten the viability of coastal communities.13Public investment currently prioritises deprived coastal areas for flood risk management solutions. Many urbanised coastal zones rely on traditional engineering to hold the coastline, as indicated in Shoreline Management Plans (SMPs) in England and Wales.14A review of 19 EU coastal countries highlighted a progressive increase in the adoption of local adaptation plans and strategies addressing problems faced by coastal areas but a lack of attention to equity issues, such as preventing the exacerbation of pre-existing vulnerabilities in the most exposed coastal regions.15Additionally, UK coastal flood defences are deteriorating due to ageing assets, limited maintenance funds and more extreme weather.16New strategies are needed to enhance community resilience and address residual risks.

Social and health inequalities in the UK are widening. The Marmot Report on Inequalities 2020 advocates two key strategies: integrating equality and health equity into all policies (across all government departments) and implementing effective, evidence-based interventions and delivery systems.17The distributional impacts of the evolving coastal flood risk on health in the UK need to be better understood3and recently, there has been increased attention on the health risks faced by coastal communities in the UK.3 4Public health and equity are not sufficiently considered in the implementation, efficacy and cobenefits of coastal adaptation strategies. At a minimum, these interventions should not disadvantage specific groups or worsen existing disadvantage. Governing bodies must balance adaptation with conflicting priorities, such as housing targets, economic challenges and limited funding. Additionally, local authorities’ capacity constraints have hindered recovery from coastal hazards.1 8This paper aims to review the evidence on the differential health impacts of coastal flooding and assess the health equity implications of coastal flood adaptation responses in the UK.

A literature search was conducted in March 2023 to identify studies on the distributional health impacts of coastal flood hazards and health equity implications of coastal flooding adaptation. Database searches were limited to English-language studies from 2010 to 2023 inclusive. The search was limited to English-language studies from 2010 to 2023 due to a prior systematic review.1Six databases were searched: PubMed, Global Health, Web of Science, Scopus, Social Policy & Practice and PsycINFO. Reference lists of included studies were handsearched, and authors were contacted for full texts if not openly available. The review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA) guidelines18(online supplemental material S1). The search strategy, developed in PubMed, was adapted for other databases (online supplemental material S2).

Coastal community defined as ‘any coastal settlement within a local authority area whose boundaries include coastal foreshore, including local authorities whose boundaries only include estuarine foreshore. Coastal settlements include seaside towns, ports and other areas which have a clear connection to the coastal economy” as per the Coastal Communities Alliance.49This was applied to all UK nations.

Implemented coastal flood risk management, response, policies, strategy or intervention. Coastal flood risk management aims to reduce the impacts of coastal flooding through adaptation measures including spatial planning, engineered hard and soft interventions, and insurance as well as utilising community resilience, for example, local flood forums. Incident management services provide warning of properties at risk from flooding within flood forecasting timescales.

Direct health impact: being flooded, flood risk to health, death, injury, morbidity outcome (eg, hospital admission).

We included only papers published in English, without limiting study design (eg, observational, modelling, intervention and qualitative studies). Flood risk is defined as a function of hazard, exposure and vulnerability. Areas at risk include current or future flooding from rivers, the sea, groundwater and surface water (pluvial). Health inequality refers to differences in health status due to experiences and opportunities faced by groups. We considered individual factors (protected characteristics), structural factors and socially excluded groups, such as people experiencing homelessness.19Protected characteristics, covered by the Equality Act 2010 to prevent discrimination, include age, gender, race, disability, religion, beliefs and pregnancy. However, discrimination is only part of the broader causes of health and social inequalities. Structural inequalities manifest in access to housing, income, employment and services. Adaptation opportunities are unlikely to be equally distributed across the UK population. Coastal flood risk management and adaptation interventions were categorised into spatial planning, engineering, insurance and community resilience (table 2).

We conducted a narrative synthesis of the findings due to variations in study design, methods, interventions and data sources. We separately analysed inequalities in the health impacts of coastal change and the equity implications of coastal adaptation. Outcome measures included health service use, flood risk, mental health, physical health, economic pain, financial loss and displacement. Key findings from the scoping review were mapped to dimensions of health inequality and flood risk interventions, with results reported by health outcome domain.

To inform the framing of the results in this review, a coastal and health equity discussion workshop was conducted with the Health Protection Research Unit on Environmental Change and Health public panel PLANET.20The 25 public contributors provided useful insights and comments during the 1-hour online workshop and were reimbursed with a voucher of their choice for their valuable contribution to this research. The PLANET panel was sent a draft version of the manuscript to review.

All studies assessed either coastal or fluvial flooding in coastal areas. Three of the studies were focused on storms, whereas all others characterised flood risk by proximity to coast. No studies observed impacts from hazards other than coastal flooding, such as coastal erosion. We found four papers that quantified the distributional health impacts of flooding in coastal communities21,24(table 3). Seven papers considered the health equity implications of coastal adaptation measures25,31(table 4).

The studies in this review came from various populations: UK (n=3), Scotland (n=3), county (n=3), England (n=1) and England and Wales (n=1). The dimensions used to measure inequality varied significantly across studies. Seven studies disaggregated coastal flooding risk or impact by age, and studies also considered: household income (n=7), housing tenure (n=5), disability/mobility (n=6), those experiencing poor health (n=3), social vulnerability (n=3), household deprivation (n=2), ethnicity (n=2), car ownership (n=2), occupation (n=2), education (n=2), household type (n=2) and those with caregiving responsibilities (n=1). Four studies used composite vulnerability indices, for example, neighbourhood flood vulnerability index. Flood risk or health outcomes reported in the included studies were similarly heterogenous (tables34). The most common reported outcome was population flood risk as a proxy for health impact (n=7). Four of the 11 studies analysed health service delivery. Only one reported mental health impact, specifically stress, long-term deterioration of mental health and worry about future flooding as outcomes of interest.29Three studies analysed the impact of flooding in coastal areas on a measure of financial impact: financial loss (n=1), costs to the National Health Service (n=1) and Expected Annual Damages/Relative Economic Pain (REP) (n=1). The adaptation interventions addressed included building or contents insurance/Flood Re (n=5), emergency planning response (n=3), flood warning systems (n=3), flood risk management (n=2), property level protection (n=1), evacuation (n=1), spatial planning and building regulations (n=1).

There is limited evidence of inequalities in access to flood warnings. Demographic, social and housing tenure differences were not predictors of receiving a flood warning or assistance.30However, households with a disabled person were less likely to report receiving assistance from emergency responders.30The survey, not limited to coastal flooding, showed less than 50% uptake of property flood resilience (PFR) measures among flooded households. Note that PFR is not considered a key intervention for coastal flooding. Those with children, a mortgage or in terraced housing or flats were less likely to implement flood alleviation measures.30The paper highlights complexities in social housing and surface water flood risk management, finding council tenants more likely to have flood alleviation measures postflood, but less likely before a flood, which indicated that local governments act to implement property-level flood alleviation measures after a flood but not before a flood. One study noted challenges in identifying flood vulnerability within communities, such as ‘hidden populations’, leading to miscommunication between responders.27Other barriers to evacuation included overcrowded housing, refusal to evacuate, non-English language, limited mental capacity and complex healthcare needs.

A full summary of the findings is provided inonline supplemental material S3.

Despite the importance of equity in adaptation, we found limited evidence on the health impacts of flooding or the equity implications of coastal risk management in the UK. This includes the full hazard to impact chain, and the full understanding of the variables that could improve or exacerbate impacts that could directly influence short-term and long-term health outcomes (eg, duration of disturbance, removal of damp from homes, loss of income, access to mental and other health services). Although the evidence is limited, we found that UK coastal communities face increased disadvantages from coastal flooding, with the most socially vulnerable neighbourhoods at disproportionately higher risk, consistent with existing literature.1 2 5 13This disparity arises from increased exposure, extreme weather and variable access to risk management and resilience measures. Many UK coastal regions already face economic and social decline, so climate-driven flood risks may worsen these disadvantages.5A large body of evidence exists on inequalities related to inland flooding which are different from coastal flooding in the UK context.32Evidence from global literature highlights poorer residents and older adults have a higher risk during and after coastal and river flood events in the USA as well as consequences for communities in disruption to healthcare delivery and infrastructure following flood events.9Like this review, flood impacts vary by flood type, but the most affluent are typically more exposed to river flooding.33This review highlights an important gap in the understanding of the distributional health impacts of coastal flooding in the UK.

This review found that socioeconomic and demographic factors influenced the health impacts of coastal flooding. Age, income, caregiving responsibilities, limited household amenities and distance from services were linked to short-term and long-term impacts, such as financial loss, mental and physical health decline and displacement. Similar findings were seen in studies on psychosocial symptoms from all flood sources in England.34The proposed decommissioning of Fairbourne, Wales, by mid-century showed high levels of stress and mental health decline among residents, sparking debate and exploration of innovative adaptation approaches.35Homeownership was linked with greater short-term flood impacts, but financially secure homeowners recovered more quickly, likely depending on insurance coverage.35Feedback from Fairbourne residents highlighted increased stress and anxiety due to limited capacity to address issues raised in the SMP.36Some coastal communities in other countries report solastalgia, distress from environmental change, though it is less common in the UK depending on flood events.37,39Furthermore, social, health and welfare providers’ engagement is crucial in developing decision pathways for Fairbourne and similar at-risk communities. This review found reduced spatial coverage and increased travel times for emergency services during coastal flooding. Inaccessible or remote coastal communities, including care homes, were most affected. Older adults, especially in rural areas or coastal care homes, were disproportionately impacted by reduced emergency service coverage, while ethnic minorities and deprived households in urban areas were less likely to experience service inaccessibility. Emergency planning should consider service accessibility to vulnerable groups during floods.

Financial costs from coastal flooding are expected to be higher for deprived households, with the most socially vulnerable neighbourhoods facing twice the average REP. The economic impacts may stem from limited insurance coverage, as around 32% of households in flood-prone areas are uninsured.7 26This review shows that contents insurance uptake is higher among high-income households, homeowners or those previously flooded, while black and other ethnic minorities are less likely to have insurance and face greater flood disadvantage. Lower-income groups with low contents insurance uptake experience higher relative flood impacts in vulnerable neighbourhoods. Previous research supports this, showing differential insurance uptake by income. Across Europe, evidence indicates regional inequalities in the ability to use flood insurance as a mechanism for flood risk adaptation, showing an unaffordability and declining demand for flood insurance towards 2080.40The proposed cessation of Flood Re in 2039 may worsen the lack of flood insurance uptake among vulnerable groups already at risk.41 42Housing type and tenure were linked to higher property-level flood alleviation rates, though this varied for council tenants depending on previous flood experience.

This scoping review followed the PRISMA guidelines and included six databases from various research disciplines. To our knowledge, this is the first review analysing the equity implications of coastal change impacts and health risks, as well as the distributional impacts of coastal risk management and adaptation strategies on health in the UK. Due to limited data on health impacts from flood exposure, we used flood risk as a proxy measure for health impact. The findings from this review can inform future government and local authority adaptation strategies, ensuring all groups are considered and identifying strategies that may create inequalities. Some studies in this review modelled the distributional health impacts of coastal change through spatial mapping, but they focused on flood risk exposure rather than specific flood events. Flood risk mapping has methodological limits, as it classifies all populations living in flood zones as ‘at-risk.’ Future research could quantify distributional health impacts by analysing specific flood events and associated physical and mental health outcomes.

Overall, this paper highlights the limited evidence of spatial and temporal distributional differences in coastal flood risk and health impacts among UK coastal communities. Adaptation to coastal flood risk currently involves a range of short-term and long-term approaches that may either exacerbate or address current inequalities. Adaptation strategies relying on individual behaviour change, insurance or retrofitting could worsen inequalities within coastal communities. Providing more in-depth impact evaluations of coastal flood risk interventions and management on health equity outcomes is needed to support flood planning, particularly in areas that may be facing deprivation and social decline. Further assessment of large-scale coastal flood risk resilience projects and equitable, accessible financial protection is crucial for understanding health outcomes and addressing coastal inequities.48Climate change presents a challenge for organisations to implement national and local policies ensuring effective and equitable adaptation.

Grace Turner and Sari Kovats are members of the NIHR Health Protection Research Unit (HPRU) in Environmental Change and Health. We thank the members of the HPRU Environmental Change and Health Public Involvement and Engagement Group (PLANET) for useful comments and dissemination of findings from this review. Sally Brown is a visitor at the University of Southampton.

The views expressed do not reflect those of her current employer. The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR, UK Health Security Agency, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, University College London, the Met Office or the Department of Health and Social Care.