This case study reports a team of three male (48 ± 12‐year) amateur rowers' physiological and psychological characteristics, training adaptations and responses to an ultra‐endurance rowing race across the Atlantic Ocean. Over 10 months, rowers completed laboratory‐based testing on three occasions (8 months pre‐race, 1 month pre‐race and 1 month post‐race), as well as self‐reporting fortnightly training metrics and monthly resilience, challenge/threat appraisals and mental toughness scores. Compared to baseline, lactate threshold (LT: +28 ± 12 W) and LT turn‐point (LTP: +25 ± 24 W) improved after training. However, maximum power remained unchanged (+3 ± 8 W) and peak oxygen uptake decreased (−0.30 ± 0.22 L·min−1). During training, 54% of sessions were ergometer‐based rowing, 31% strength and conditioning and 15% sea‐based rowing. After 38‐day of transatlantic rowing (∼12‐h per day [3 x 4‐h blocks], per rower), the team finished first in the trio category and sixth overall. Mean body mass was −12.7 ± 2.0 kg (−14 ± 2%) lower at race finish, and rowers self‐reported a range of medical issues during the race (dermatological: 100% incidence, musculoskeletal: 100%, seasickness: 66.7%, mental health: 33.3%, infections: 33.3% and loss of appetite: 33.3%). One month post‐race, cumulative fatigue and inadequate recovery were likely demonstrated by impaired LT (−29 ± 11 W), LTP (−16 ± 27 W) and maximum power (−19 ± 19 W); however, increased resilience, challenge/threat appraisals and mental toughness were reported. A 38‐day transatlantic rowing race requires a considerable training demand for amateur rowers and induces a range of acute medical issues and prolonged cumulative fatigue.

A 38‐day transatlantic rowing race reduced body mass and induced a range of acute medical health issues (e.g., dermatological, musculoskeletal, seasickness, mental health, infections and loss of appetite).

One month post‐race, cumulative fatigue and inadequate recovery were demonstrated by impaired lactate threshold, lactate threshold turn‐point and maximum power.

One month post‐race, improved mental toughness and resilience were observed, reflective of psychological adaptations to this arduous event.

Ultra‐endurance sports and challenges are becoming increasingly popular and more accessible across the globe, from running the Marathon des Sables, ascending the world's highest mountain to rowing across the Atlantic Ocean. The latter challenge is related to theWorld's Toughest Row(www.worldstoughestrow.com), an annual race that involves rowing ∼3000 nautical miles across the Atlantic Ocean from San Sebastian in La Gomera, Canary Islands, to Nelson's Dockyard, Antigua. Individuals typically row ∼8–18 h·day−1, undertaking 2–4‐h repeated cycles (depending on crew number and tactics) for ∼40–50‐day or longer. During the race, rowers face an extreme array of environmental (e.g., high winds, ultraviolet exposure, wet weather, heat stress), physiological (e.g., severe exhaustion, sleep deprivation, sores/blisters), nutritional (e.g., caloric deficit, gastrointestinal disruption, dehydration) and psychological stressors (e.g., isolation, hallucinations, mental toughness). However, there remains limited research, in both case study and experimental design, which has investigated individual/team training and responses to transoceanic rowing.

Previous literature investigating ultra‐endurance rowers (ranging from recreational amateurs with no ocean rowing experience to well‐trained endurance individuals) has highlighted the importance of undertaking scientific support in preparation for transoceanic events. Alschuler et al. (2020) described a 37‐year‐old rower's increased psychological stress (e.g., anxiety and loneliness) during a 38‐day solo crossing of the North Atlantic Ocean. Similarly, Zeiner et al. (2023) presented transient, variable responses in sleep quality (e.g., delayed sleep latency and increased awakenings) and well‐being (e.g., exhaustion and tiredness) during a 42‐day race in a female rower with no previous ocean rowing experience. Gordon (2003) also investigated a 29‐year‐old solo rower who crossed the Atlantic Ocean in 63‐day, whereby a large energy deficit occurred during the latter stage of the race (∼18,000 kJ·day−1), likely due to energy deficits from halving rations within the final 10‐day. Despite completing the races, these case studies demonstrate that recreational/amateur rowers (with limited to no ocean rowing experience [Alschuler et al.2020; Zeiner et al.2023]) face hazardous physical and psychological consequences associated with this type of extreme activity and highlight the importance of adequate training, nutrition and psychological preparedness, including education. Previous crew and team‐based investigations included Holsgrove‐West et al. (2024), who reported ∼10% reductions in body mass in 49 recreational rowers (24–67‐year) after their 46 ± 7‐day Atlantic crossing. Carron et al. (2017) also described the experience of 23 recreational rowers who rowed ∼10 h·day−1and slept ∼6 h·day−1during the 39–52‐day race between Dakar in Senegal and Cayenne in French Guiana (∼2600 nautical miles). Energy and fluid intake ranged ∼4000–7000 kcal·day−1and ∼1.0–5.5 L·day−1, respectively, with body mass losses of ∼13.3%.

Numerous medical issues have also been reported, the most prevalent being dermatological (92% incidence: e.g., blisters), trauma (83%: e.g., knee pain) and disembarkation syndrome (58%: e.g., land imbalance). Psychological symptoms were also observed, including feelings of anxiety (17% incidence) and auditory/visual hallucinations (25%). Galsworthy et al. (2022) similarly reported that the highest incidence of health‐related issues in 66 rowers were dermatological (21% incidence: e.g., pressure sores), musculoskeletal (12%: e.g., knee pain) and seasickness (11%) during a previousWorld's Toughest Row. These responses and normative data are important, as they provide insight to amateur rowers preparing for transoceanic races, in addition to informing practitioners' decision‐making when prescribing training, designing scientific support and guiding education.

However, there are limited studies which have monitored and reported rowers' training and subsequent adaptations, as well as responses to theWorld's Toughest Rowrace itself. Ellis et al. (2024) reported no changes or complications in cardiac function after training or the 50‐day race in 4 recreational rowers (57 ± 2‐year). Maximal volume of oxygen uptake (V̇O2max: +2.3 ± 3.1 mL·kg−1·min−1) and rowing economy (V̇O2at 2:15 min per 500‐m pace: −0.4 ± 0.2 L·min−1) improved after ∼6–9 months of training (although training load monitoring was not reported). As expected, body mass was lower at the finish line (−12.9 ± 3.1 kg); however, at 3‐week post‐race, V̇O2maxwas lower (−3.0 ± 3.1 mL·kg−1·min−1). Keohane et al. (2019) investigated 4 well‐trained rowers (27 ± 1‐year) prior to and after 33‐day of rowing across the Atlantic. Body mass was 5.5 kg (−1.6%) lower on the finish line but restored after 2‐week of recovery, where V̇O2max(3.9 vs. 3.8 L·min−1[48.2 vs. 46.7 mL·kg−1·min−1]) and maximal power output remained similar (321 vs. 318 W [both: 4 W·kg−1]). However, cumulative fatigue and symptoms of overtraining were still likely, as blood lactate concentrations (B[La]) were higher during post‐race submaximal exercise intensities, likely due to inadequate recovery (Keohane et al.2019).

These studies highlight the importance of enhancing education and undertaking scientific support to best prepare rowers in the lead‐up to an ultra‐endurance transoceanic rowing race. For example, these practices may inform rowers' knowledge regarding nutritional planning, highlight potential physical and psychological health risks, familiarise rowers with the physiological demands of the event and plan rowing/sleep routines and tactics. However, there is currently limited research that has attempted to characterise routine rowing training for ultra‐endurance events and also rowers' functional, physiological and wellness responses in the lead‐up to and after an ultra‐endurance rowing race. Nor have psychological adaptations been investigated, which is important considering heightened and prolonged maladaptive psychological stress is likely experienced during uncontrollable extreme environments and can have detrimental performance and health implications (Alschuler et al.2020; Zeiner et al.2023). Understanding psychological characteristics that are subject to change in the presence of new situational information, including the capacity to balance demands and resources (e.g., challenge and threat states [Meijen et al.2020]) and the possession of coping traits (e.g., resilience and mental toughness [Sarkar and Fletcher2014]), should also be monitored during preparations and after extreme challenges, as this information may identify psychological determinants of performance and shape appropriate coping strategies. Therefore, this case study aimed to (1) investigate the physiological and psychological adaptations to 5‐month training in amateur rowers, (2) characterise the training undertaken during this period and (3) evaluate the acute and chronic responses to theWorld's Toughest Row. It was hypothesised that (1) the determinants of endurance performance would improve after the training period; (2) training would be mostly categorised as high volume, low intensity; and (3) rowers would likely experience episodes of ill health during the race and incur acute changes to body mass at race completion, and no long‐term detriments to physical or psychological health would occur.

Three amateur male rowers (48 ± 12‐year, Tier 2), who were registered for the 2023–2024World's Toughest Rowacross the Atlantic Ocean, volunteered and provided written informed consent to participate in this case study, which was approved by an institutional ethics committee (ETH2223‐3468) and conformed with the Declaration of Helsinki (2013). The three rowers reported varied rowing experience. One had previously rowed across the Atlantic in 2022 for a different trio team and had a moderate level of endurance experience (i.e., cycling and triathlon), whereas the other two had no previous sea/ocean rowing race experience; they also had a moderate level of endurance experience (i.e., triathlon and river rowing). At the time of baseline testing, they had been training for ∼1.5‐year after a bespoke programme by a specialist rowing trainer and coach. This support continued throughout the case study but had not previously been evaluated by any scientific support or laboratory testing procedures.

Over a 10‐month period, the rowers completed laboratory‐based testing on three separate occasions: (1) baseline (8 months pre‐race), (2) post‐training (1 month pre‐race) and (3) post‐race (1 month post‐race), as per Figure1, with the race starting in December 2023. These timepoints were selected for logistical reasons to access the laboratory either side of the race start/end. During the 5‐month monitored training period (June–October 2023), rowers self‐reported their physiological and psychological responses, as well as training and wellness scores, within a training diary. The race started on 13 December 2023 at 8:41 a.m. Participants were tracked online using theWorld's Toughest Row(www.worldstoughestrow.com) live ‘YB Races’ tracker application.

A schematic illustrating the case study design, laboratory testing and training timepoints. LT = lactate threshold and V̇O2peak= peak volume of oxygen uptake.

During the laboratory assessments, participants completed a series of psychological, health, functional movement and exercise tests. This was conducted in the same order during each visit and under similar conditions (20.4 ± 0.3°C and 49.3 ± 4.5% relative humidity). Participants arrived rested at the same time of day (10:00 a.m. [±1 h]) and initially completed medical questionnaires. Next, psychological questionnaires were completed, which included the Connor–Davidson Resilience Scale (CD‐RISC: Connor and Davidson2003), the situation appraisal scale (SAS: Williams and Cumming2012) and a short version of the mental toughness questionnaire (MT‐10 adapted: Clough et al.2002). This was followed by baseline health tests to assess height (Seca stadiometer, Germany), body mass (Seca electronic scale, Germany), resting heart rate and blood pressure (Omron 750CP, Japan) and lung function (hand‐held Microplus Medical Ltd. spirometer, UK). Body mass index (BMI) was calculated from height and body mass (kg·m2). Mean arterial pressure (MAP) was estimated from the average of three systolic (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) readings (MAP = [2 x SBP + SBP]/3). Lung function measures included the average of three attempts for forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in 1‐s (FEV1) and FVC/FEV1ratio. Participant's body composition was then estimated using a standardised 4‐site skinfold thickness assessment (Harpenden, Baty International, UK), after the Durnin and Womersley (1974) calculation to estimate body fat percentage (Siri1956), and bioelectrical impedance (Tanita SC‐330ST, the Netherlands) to estimate body fat percentage, muscle mass, fat mass, fat‐free mass and total body water.

Participants underwent flexibility testing using a sit‐and‐reach box (HaB International Ltd., UK), functional movement screen (FMS) using the FMS test kit (Functional Movement Systems Inc., USA) and core stability testing using timed prone and side plank assessments. These tests were used to assess hamstring and lumbar flexibility, whole‐body movement and range of motion, and core strength, stability and endurance, respectively, all of which may help identify increased risk of injury or lower back pain (Gonzalez et al.2018).

Finally, participants completed an incremental submaximal to maximal exercise test performed on a rowing ergometer (Concept2 RowErg PM4, USA). The test consisted of 7 stages of 5‐min bouts (4‐min rowing, 1‐min recovery break for B[La] sampling). After a 10‐min self‐paced warm‐up, the test started at 2:22 min:sec per 500 m pace, which decreased by 0:06 min:sec per 500 m per stage (as per Tanner and Gore2012). Participants rowed until volitional exhaustion, defined as a failure to maintain the pace (500 m split) required for the specific work stage for five consecutive strokes (strokes per minute [spm]), or if the final stage was reached and surpassed, until voluntary withdrawal. This marked the culmination of the exercise test. The drag factor was set to 125 throughout the tests to replicate the race setting (e.g., ocean water and boat drag) and mimic training conditions (i.e., consistently using a 125 drag factor). Test protocol, pace and drag factor were the same for each rower. During the test, breath‐by‐breath respiratory gas measurements and heart rate (HR: via Polar 810s watch and T34 strap, Finland) were measured and recorded continuously via a metabolic cart (MetaLyzer 3B‐R2, Cortex Ltd., Germany). In the final 15‐s of each stage, the modified rating of perceived exertion (RPE) category‐ratio 10 (CR‐10) scale (Borg1998) was also used to record RPE. Upon completion of each stage, average rowing power, 500 m split time and stroke rate were recorded, after which participants stopped rowing and 20 μL of capillarised fingertip blood was sampled and analysed immediately for B[La] (Biosen C‐Line EKF Diagnostics analyser, UK).

Breath‐by‐breath respiratory gas measures (volume of O2[V̇O2] and carbon dioxide [V̇CO2], minute ventilation [V̇E] and respiratory exchange ratio [RER]) were retrospectively calculated from 30‐s average data. Lactate threshold (LT) and LT turn‐point (LTP) were defined as an exercise intensity that elicits (1) a 1‐mmol·L−1rise in B[La] above baseline and (2) an exponential, sustained increase in B[La], respectively (typically between 2 and 4 mmol·L−1[Spurway and Jones2007]), and identified via visual inspection post‐test with confirmation between two physiologists. Mean V̇O2for the last 30‐s at stages corresponding to LT and LTP was calculated, and V̇O2peakwas determined from the highest V̇O2value recorded from the 30‐s average of the final stage.

FMS was used to assess mobility and postural stability (Onate et al.2012). This screening was completed at each visit and included seven separate assessments that required participants to undertake fundamental movement patterns that utilised both neuromuscular and joint control in the absence of locomotion (Frost et al.2012). The FMS included overhead deep squat, hurdle step, in‐line lunge, shoulder mobility, active straight leg, trunk stability push‐up and rotary stability (Cook et al.2014). FMS scores were rated on a scale from 0 to 3 arbitrary units (A.U.), where 0 = ‘Pain experienced’, 1 = ‘Unable to complete’, 2 = ‘Completed with compensation’, and 3 = ‘Completed perfectly’. Each assessment was performed three times, with five of the movements (hurdle step, in‐line lunge, shoulder mobility, active straight leg raise and rotary stability) performed independently on both left and right sides. In these five movements, the lowest score obtained contributed to the FMS total (Kraus et al.2014); meanwhile, in whole‐body movements (overhead deep squat and trunk stability push‐up), the best score recorded out of the three attempts counted towards the total FMS score, allowing a total score of 21 A.U. to be obtained. A total FMS score of ≤ 14 A.U. was defined as an increased injury risk (Bonazza et al.2017; Bunn et al.2019). For the sit‐and‐reach flexibility test, the rower's best of three scores was recorded. For the timed prone and side (using the right‐hand side) plank tests, participants were provided with instructions to follow and a 10‐min break between assessments.

During the training period, participants self‐reported their body mass and resting HR using their own weighing scales and smartwatches. Training duration (h:min) and session RPE (sRPE) using the CR‐10 scale were also recorded. Land‐based rowing training was undertaken on an ergometer (Concept2 RowErg), with data stored and downloaded post‐session (e.g., duration, stroke rate, power output). Rowing ergometer training intensity was categorised as follows: ‘Low’ = ≤ 20, ‘Moderate’ = 21–27 and ‘High’ intensity = ≥ 28 spm (Thompson2005). Sea‐based rowing training was undertaken on the race boat, with data (duration and distance) self‐reported. Strength and conditioning session time was also self‐reported. In addition, wellness scores were collected on a five‐point Likert scale that included five specific categories: fatigue (5 = ‘Very Fresh’, 1 = ‘Always Tired’), sleep quality (5 = ‘Very Restful’, 1 = ‘Insomnia’), general muscle soreness (5 = ‘Feeling Great’, 1 = ‘Very Sore’), stress levels (5 = ‘Very Relaxed’, 1 = ‘Highly Stressed’) and mood (5 = ‘Very Positive Mood’, 1 = ‘Highly Annoyed/Irritable/Down’). The sum of each category was calculated for each self‐reported diary entry, which resulted in an overall wellness score ranging from 5 to 25 A.U. and was interpreted as ‘higher is better’ (modified version of Lathlean et al.2019) (Table1). Data were self‐reported and input on the same day for each fortnight’s entry (i.e., Sunday).

Mean ± SD data for health screening and functional movement assessments from baseline to pre‐ and post‐race timepoints.

Note:*signifies a change above the SWC, and ∆ signifies a change between timepoints.

For psychological monitoring, participants completed resilience, challenge and threat states, and mental toughness questionnaires using the CD‐RISC, SAS and MT‐10, respectively. The CD‐RISC consists of 25 items rated on a five‐point Likert scale (5 = ‘True all the time’, 1 = ‘Not at all true’), such that a higher overall score reflects greater resilience. The SAS consists of six items, three directly targeting challenge states and three directly targeting threat states, rated on a seven‐point Likert scale (7 = ‘Very true’, 1 = ‘Not at all true’), where higher mean scores reflect greater challenge and greater threat. The MT‐10 consists of 10 items rated on a five‐point Likert scale (5 = ‘Very true’, 1 = ‘Not at all true’) such that a higher overall score reflects greater mental toughness. Data were again self‐reported and input on the same day for each month’s entry (i.e., first Sunday of each month). Participants were familiarised with all scales and questionnaires upon their first laboratory visit.

Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD), as well as absolute and relative (%) change (∆). A priori limits to highlight meaningful changes in key outcome measures after training and/or the rowing race were as follows: ±0.4 L·min−1for V̇O2, ±13 L·min−1for V̇E(as per Meyer et al.2001), ±2% for rowing power output (supported by Schabort et al. (1999), 2.0% [1.3%–3.1%], Soper and Hume (2004), 2.0%, Treff et al. (2022), 0.2%–1.9%) and ±1 A.U. for total FMS scores (Cook et al.2014). The smallest worthwhile change (SWC) was also calculated across all other outcome measures using the following equation: 0.2 x between‐subjects SD from baseline data (Hopkins2004).

The team completed the transatlantic race in 38‐day, 18:29:00 h:min:s (covering 2637 nautical miles), finishing first in the trio category and sixth overall. Compared to the start of the race, body mass at the race finish line demonstrated an average loss of −12.7 ± 2.0 kg (−14 ± 2%). Rowers experienced a variety of self‐reported health issues, ranging from dermatological (reported in 100% of rowers: oar‐related blisters [66.7%], cuts, scratches and abrasions [66.7%]), musculoskeletal (100%: leg [66.7%] and forearm pain [33.3%]), seasickness (66.7%: occurring within the first 7‐day), mental (33.3%: visual hallucinations), infections (33.3%: lower respiratory tract) and loss of appetite (33.3%) during the race as well as land sickness upon race completion (66.7%). Although rowing cycles were transient and dependent upon various factors (e.g., weather, perception of effort/fatigue), routine breaks of ∼4‐h occurred to allow for rest, recovery and sleep. An estimated ∼30 L of water were purified per day, with ∼7.0–9.5 L consumed for fluid and food per rower per day (with the remainder used for washing).

The rower's characteristics and health measures are presented in Table1; these data include baseline, pre‐race and post‐race timepoints within the laboratory assessments. Body mass reduced from baseline to post‐race (−4.8 ± 5.6 kg [−5% ± 6%]), whereas body fat % reduced from baseline to pre‐race (−0.8% ± 0.9%) and then increased at the post‐race timepoint (+0.6% ± 2.6%). Only minor changes were observed in resting cardiovascular measures, with SBP and HR reducing from pre‐ to post‐race (−10 ± 19 mmHg, −6 ± 11 b·min−1). No observable changes were found in lung function.

Sit‐and‐reach flexibility improved from baseline (17 ± 4 cm) to pre‐race (20 ± 4 cm) and then reduced post‐race (16 ± 5 cm). Front and side plank performance also improved from baseline (229 ± 75 and 73 ± 7 s) to pre‐race (249 ± 74 and 102 ± 8 s) but again reduced post‐race (248 ± 61 and 89 ± 9 s). However, FMS scores remained unchanged throughout baseline (13 ± 2 A.U.), pre‐race (13 ± 1 A.U.) and post‐race (13 ± 2 A.U.). These data and individual aspects of the FMS are displayed in Table1.

A summary of the relative changes in key submaximal and maximal determinants of endurance performance from baseline to post‐race laboratory testing timepoints is presented in Figure2.

Mean (columns) and individual (shapes) changes in (A) LT power, (B) LTP power, (C) V̇O2peakand (D) maximal power from baseline to post‐race testing timepoints.

LT and LTP improved after the training (+28 ± 12 and +25 ± 24 W, respectively). As expected, when comparing baseline LT (142 ± 21 W) with the improved pre‐race LT (170 ± 14 W), outcome measures including V̇O2, V̇E, HR and B[La] were higher, whereas compared with baseline LTP (180 ± 38 W), the improved LTP at pre‐race (206 ± 16 W) demonstrated lower V̇O2, V̇Eand HR. When comparing the same exercise intensities between baseline and pre‐race testing, reductions were observed across all outcome measures (Table2). After the rowing race, however, reductions in both LT and LTP were observed compared to pre‐race (−29 ± 11 and −16 ± 27 W, respectively) and were near baseline levels (−1 ± 1 and +9 ± 17 W, respectively).

Mean ± SD data for submaximal and maximal exercise assessments from baseline to pre‐ and post‐race timepoints.

Note:*signifies a change above the SWC, and ∆ signifies a change between timepoints.

After the training period, max power remained relatively unchanged compared with baseline (+3 ± 8 W), whereas V̇O2peak, V̇Epeakand HRpeakdecreased (−0.30 ± 0.22 L·min−1, −5.5 ± 2.9 L·min−1and −9 ± 4 b·min−1) (Table2). After the race, max power and V̇O2peakwere also lower compared with pre‐race (−19 ± 19 W and −0.08 ± 0.44 L·min−1) and baseline levels (−16 ± 12 W and −0.39 ± 0.22 L·min−1) (Table2).

After the training period, resilience (0 ± 2 A.U.), challenge appraisals (0 ± 1 A.U.), threat appraisals (0 ± 0 A.U.) and mental toughness (−1 ± 0 A.U.) remained unchanged compared to baseline (Table3). After the race, however, resilience, challenge appraisals, threat appraisals and mental toughness were higher compared to both baseline (+8 ± 5, +3 ± 1, +3 ± 0 and +3 ± 2 A.U., respectively) and pre‐race timepoints (+8 ± 3, +3 ± 0, +3 ± 0 and +5 ± 2 A.U., respectively) (Table3).

Mean ± SD data for psychological monitoring outcome measures at baseline, during training and pre‐ and post‐race timepoints.

Note:*signifies a change above the SWC and ∆ signifies change between timepoints.

Typical training microcycle data for land‐ and sea‐based training are presented in Table4. During the 5‐month monitored training period, 54% of training sessions (n= 63 sessions) were land‐based rowing ergometer training, 31% (n= 36 sessions) were strength and conditioning and 15% (n= 18 sessions) were sea‐based rowing.

Typical training microcycle during the 5‐month training period.

The land‐based rowing ergometer sessions totalled 42:49 ± 3:07 h:min of training and covered 614 ± 3 km in distance. Each week, 3 ± 1 training sessions were completed (range: 1–4) with an average session duration of 54:39 ± 17:19 min:sec (range: 00:25–2:05 h:min) and an average power of 196 ± 24 W (130–224 W) (Figure3). Total weekly training distances were 31,479 ± 11,655 m·week−1(6474–53928 m·week−1), with 74.6% of the sessions (n= 47) categorised as ‘low’ (i.e., ≤ 20 stroke rate), 12.7% (n= 8) as ‘moderate’ (i.e., 21–27 stroke rate) and 12.7% (n= 8) as ‘high’ intensity (i.e., ≥ 28 stroke rate).

A summary of the 5‐month training data for (A) each week's mean ± SD rowing ergometer time (h:min:sec) and distance (m), and sea‐based rowing time (h:min:sec), and (B) each fortnight's mean ± SD and individual wellness and sRPE scores (both A.U.).

The land‐based strength and conditioning sessions occurred 2 ± 1 times per week (range: 1–3) and typically lasted 1:02 ± 0:18 h:min per session. The sea‐based rowing training occurred intermittently throughout the training period (1 ± 1 time per week, range: 0–3), with a total time of 142:34 h:min in the boat. This took place from Portland, UK, and ranged from a single session of rowing for 1:13 h:min to 3 consecutive days in the boat totalling 57:20 h:min (Figure3). Average fortnightly wellness and sRPE scores were 16 ± 2 A.U. (range: 14–19 A.U.) and 6 ± 1 A.U. (range: 4–8 A.U.), respectively (Figure3). Self‐reported body mass and resting HR averaged 89.6 ± 9.7 kg and 53 ± 5 b·min−1, respectively.

Average resilience (93 ± 9 A.U., range: 83–106 A.U.), challenge appraisals (4 ± 1 A.U., 3–5 A.U.), threat appraisals (2 ± 1 A.U., 1–5 A.U.) and mental toughness (40 ± 5 A.U., range: 31–46) scores fluctuated throughout the training period, although notably, resilience displayed consistent improvements and threat appraisals displayed consistent reductions (Table3).

This case study (1) investigated the physiological and psychological adaptations to 5‐month training in amateur rowers, (2) quantified the training undertaken during this period and (3) evaluated the acute and chronic responses to theWorld's Toughest Row. Insights are provided into the training and physiological/psychological demands pertinent to such challenging events to support future participants, reduce potential injury risk and minimise negative impact associated with prolonged ultra‐endurance events.

As expected, body mass was lower at both the race finish line (−12.7 kg [−14%]), agreeing with previous literature (Carron et al.2017; Keohane et al.2019; Ellis et al.2024; Holsgrove‐West et al.2024) and 4‐week later at the post‐race laboratory assessment compared to pre‐race (−4.2 kg [−4%]). Although this was anticipated, it highlights the importance of nutritional planning for transatlantic rowing (Clark et al.2003), especially as large energy deficits are reported during the latter stages of a solo Atlantic crossing (Gordon2003). Post‐race resting HR and SBP also presented meaningful reductions compared to pre‐race levels (−6 b·min−1and −10 mmHg), potentially because of ∼4‐week recovery/detraining and/or heightened values pre‐race. These data support Ellis et al. (2024) who report limited acute and long‐term detriments to health after ultra‐endurance rowing events.

After the training period and transatlantic race, the rower's determinants of endurance performance demonstrated meaningful changes, both positive and negative, within submaximal and maximal domains (Table2, Figure2). At baseline and pre‐race, the rower’s relative V̇O2peakwas similar to (33.0 mL·kg−1·min−1[Ellis et al.2024]) or lower than that of previous rowers within the case study literature (49.6 [Gordon2003] and 48.2 mL·kg−1·min−1[Keohane et al.2019]). Rowers' pre‐race LTP power data (206 W [at 4.0 mmol·L−1and 157 b·min−1]) were also lower than previous reports (300 W [at 3.3 mmol·L−1and 153 b·min−1]) (Gordon2003), highlighting their amateur level and comparative training status to existing research investigating ultra‐endurance rowers. Nonetheless, after the 5 months of tracked training, improvements in LT (+20.9% ± 11.7%) and LTP power (+16.5% ± 17.3%) were observed, whereas V̇O2peakreduced (−7.7% ± 5.4%) and limited changes to maximal power occurred (+1.3% ± 3.1%). These submaximal improvements are common in rowers who complete high volumes of low‐to‐moderate intensity training (Tran et al.2015) and agree with the majority of rowing sessions being categorised as low intensity (∼75%). However, the V̇O2peakreductions contrast the improvements found elsewhere in the lead‐up to a transatlantic race (∼+7% [Ellis et al.2024]) and point to areas of training focus for future improvement (e.g., alterations in training intensity distribution and periodisation). The V̇O2peakreductions pre‐to‐post‐race (−2.9% ± 13.3%) do, however, support previous research (−13% [Gordon2003], −8% [Ellis et al.2024] and −3% [Keohane et al.2019]), where the race itself (i.e., prolonged low‐intensity exercise) and 4‐week of recovery/minimal training likely reduced maximal capacity. Furthermore, with the ‘leftward shift’ in lactate threshold and the observable higher HR and B[La] at submaximal intensities post‐race, it appears the rowers were still not recovered from the race 4‐week later. Demonstrable signs of cumulative fatigue and overtraining‐type symptoms have been previously reported (Keohane et al.2019) and could have been identified through an array of recovery and/or biomarker assessments to support/identify sufficient recovery.

Meaningful improvements in functional assessments (e.g., front plank time: +10%) and flexibility (e.g., sit and reach: +19%) were observed after training. However, reductions in flexibility were observed post‐race (−21%), likely due to prolonged stiffness/soreness and inadequate recovery, as self‐reported by all three participants. FMS also revealed that rowers were at a higher risk of injury (FMS scores < 14 A.U.) throughout the case study, with no meaningful change observed in total FMS scores after the training period nor race. This questions the strength and conditioning programme that was undertaken, whereby it is acknowledged the limited reported data on training prescription (e.g., session activity, sets, reps) prevent a comprehensive understanding of strength and/or functional changes. Nonetheless, these tests and screening methods are viewed as important preparatory tools that can support a variety of exercise and training domains. Despite limited literature on FMS and extreme endurance exercise, the battery of tests may provide data that can inform bespoke exercise programming to support future training and recovery via the identification of movement limitations and asymmetries (Minthorn et al.2015). In some cases, FMS has been utilised to predict the incidences of river rowing‐specific injuries (Clay et al.2016); however, additional research is required to substantiate this claim in multi‐day endurance rowing. Within this case study, it may have been beneficial to amend the training programme ‘in real time’ as opposed to only observing and evaluating. This is a notable limitation, although representative of the differing levels of support amateur athletes receive compared to their elite counterparts.

Our case study provides appreciation of the multiple commitments amateur athletes face (e.g., fitting training around employment, lack of funding and full‐time support) and demonstrates what training was feasibly possible in this cohort ahead of a transatlantic race. Training data present a range of durations, activities and frequencies during 5 months of monitoring (Table4, Figure3). During this time, 54% of training was land‐based (totalling > 40‐h and > 600 km) and intensity distribution was typically polarised, with most ergometer sessions categorised as low intensity (74.6%). Average total weekly training duration and distance covered were 2:08 ± 0:45 h:min and 30,692 ± 10,510 m·week−1, respectively. However, the rowers' ergometer training varied in duration (0:44–3:25 h:min) and distance covered per week (9721–48782 m·week−1). Training data in preparation for similar ultra‐endurance races are, however, rarely reported. Therefore, comparisons can only be made to elite rowers, who, as expected, undertake significantly higher durations (∼12–18 h) and distances (∼100–150 km) per week in preparation for 2,000‐m international rowing races (Steinacker et al.1998; Fiskerstrand and Seiler2004; Tran et al.2015; Zhong, Zheng, et al.2025; Zhong, Weldon, et al.2025). Nonetheless, land‐based rowing training was interspersed with single, short‐duration sea‐based daytime sessions (1:13–8:00 h:min) as well as consecutive day‐to‐day training/habituating on the sea racing boat (20:36–57:20 h:min).

Although, it is acknowledged these ‘durations’ on the sea boat do not correspond directly to training/rowing time and can only be used as an estimate of training duration. In addition to land‐ and sea‐based rowing, strength and conditioning sessions occurred twice per week for ∼1‐h per session, although specific strength training data are lacking for session type and activity. We acknowledge the limitations in self‐reported training data and only provide summary training information, where monitoring both external and internal loads would have been beneficial. However, this is one of the first case reports to characterise this type of training data, which is useful for other amateurs to use as a starting point in their planning for such events. Overall, we have characterised the total reported training within the 5 months prior to the race, whereby it appears in part lower than expected (ranging from 2:57 to 56:11 h:min per week), thus reiterating the amateur status of the rowers. Although training duration, distance, frequency and session type varied to some extent week to week, regular scores for average sRPE (5 ‘Hard’ and 7 ‘Very hard’) and wellness (14–19 A.U.) were recorded, suggesting a consistent subjective load and limited over‐reaching/training‐type symptoms.

After the race, the self‐reported health issues agree with previous literature for transatlantic races (Galsworthy et al.2022) and advocate rower education to prevent and/or manage musculoskeletal injury and illness incidence during extreme events (especially within the first week), alongside adequate rowing experience and equipment preparedness. Despite the rowers' relatively low training duration and inferior physiological characteristics (e.g., V̇O2peak) compared to well‐trained populations, they finished the transatlantic race first in the trio category and sixth overall. Although this is of interest to practitioners and amateur athletes considering this challenge, it is acknowledged there are many contributing factors to transatlantic rowing performance (e.g., navigation tactics, weather conditions and rower health/well‐being) and that increasing a rowers' training status, strength and/or preparedness would likely provide a greater experience (e.g., via improved enjoyment, fewer injuries) for this type of ultra‐endurance rowing. The physiological determinants of performance, health and well‐being, as well as the psychological constructs for these events, remain under‐investigated.

Data capturing psychological adaptations to 5‐month rowing training and the race itself highlight potential findings worthy of exploration. Psychological assessments recorded 1 month post‐race displayed meaningful increases compared to baseline and pre‐race timepoints, which likely indicate that the ultra‐endurance race contributed to the development of mental toughness and resilience. These findings agree with previous work (Aryanto and Larasati2020; Gameiro et al.2023; Méndez‐Alonso et al.2021; Roebuck et al.2018), where it is likely that rowers in our case study developed such benefits during competition as opposed to training. Indeed, Méndez‐Alonso et al. (2021) argue that each race, or in the context of theWorld's Toughest Row,each time a rower begins their repeated rowing cycle, acts as a way of training psychological factors of resilience and mental toughness through the precise nature of what is demanded of them. The observed increases in challenge and threat appraisals are less common, although there are likely explanations for this change. Traditionally, challenge/threat theory, which underpins most research, conceptualises these states as endpoints on a continuum (as one becomes more challenged, one becomes less threatened). However, current untested contemporary literature (Meijen et al.2020; Uphill et al.2019) positions challenge/threat as independent, co‐activated states, which our data tentatively support. It is possible that the co‐activation of both challenge and threat states is caused by the demanding nature of the race, where, unlike other sports that dominate the challenge/threat field (cricket [Jewiss et al.2023] and golf [Moore et al.2015]), there are increased possibilities of physical and psychological harm, which may contribute to higher appraisals of task demands. Our case study provides evidence that speaks to potential advantages associated with monitoring changes in challenge/threat states, resilience and mental toughness, which may allow practitioners to identify individuals with adaptive psychological mindsets and aid performance and/or well‐being (Sarmento et al.2018). In addition, it allows practitioners to identify precise timepoints where individuals may require psychological skills (e.g., cognitive behavioural techniques [Gustafsson et al.2017]) to protect against detrimental performance and wider health consequences associated with low resilience and mental toughness (Golby and Wood2016).

Although these findings may not be applicable to all male amateur rowers, they do provide comparative data for less‐trained individuals seeking to compete in future transoceanic trio rowing races. The training and race experience data provide insight, yet limitations to self‐reporting and limited detailed prescriptions of training load/metrics are acknowledged. Future research should seek to document training in more detail for session type (e.g., aerobic, resistance), location (e.g., open water and gym) and internal/external metrics (e.g., heart rate, load, volume, intensity) on a day‐to‐day basis over the course of a complete training cycle (1–3‐year) to comprehensively analyse data and, importantly, inform real‐time training prescription programming. Nutritional assessment/recommendations, both during training and the race, would be advantageous to assess potential dietary requirements and/or insufficiencies (Clark et al.2003). Likewise, the use of wearable technology during the training period and race to monitor health, energy expenditure, sleep and/or recovery may be useful for rowers to adapt real‐time training prescription and rowing and race strategies and inform diet/rest plans. Finally, the small sample size is likely to undermine the reliability of SWC analysis by increasing random error and reducing the ability to detect true, meaningful effects. Despite these limitations, this case study provides novel insight into the physiological and psychological characteristics, responses and training demands of rowers preparing for and winning the trio category transatlantic row.

To improve individuals' ‘readiness to row’ and support preparation strategies in the lead‐up to ultra‐endurance transoceanic rowing races, real‐world case studies, such as this study, that outline multidisciplinary support and translate science to practice are important (Halperin2018). Such studies may help practitioners, coaches and rowers to better understand the physical and psychological demands of the training and race and therefore improve education programmes (e.g., psychological techniques to manage changeable psychological characteristics such as resilience), training programmes and race strategies, which are particularly important as events grow in popularity in keen amateurs. This case study provides the physiological and psychological profile of amateur rowers who embark on such extreme challenges as well as reporting adaptations and training monitoring metrics. Improved awareness of the benefits of scientific testing and education on how to use laboratory‐based data to inform preparations in training and on the water is recommended prior to departure. Case study insights could also be useful to provide quantitative and qualitative data to minimise in‐team differences or to provide pertinent individual data that could impact team performance. The inclusion of laboratory assessment also provides a valuable motivational and educational tool to enhance training efficacy.

This case study details normative data and improved physiological status after 5 months of training in a trio team of amateur rowers preparing for a rowing race across the Atlantic Ocean. Both physiological (cumulative fatigue and overtraining symptoms) and psychological (improved mental toughness and resilience) responses are explored after the 38‐day race, whereby we advocate the use of scientific support and education for these ultra‐endurance transoceanic rowing events, not only to support individual progress, but also team dynamics and in‐race decision‐making.