The accuracy of intraoperative tumor margin assessment is the main challenge in breast conserving surgery (BCS). NIR-II fluorescence-guided surgery enables surgeons to visualize the tumor margins dynamically in real time and facilitate the precision of tumor resection. We develop an aptamer-conjugated NIR-II probe for intraoperative fluorescence imaging. Peglated indocyanine green (PEG-ICG) was conjugated with an aptamer SYL3C binding to EpCAM to synthesize the probe SYL3C-ICG. Human breast cancer cell lines with different expression levels of EpCAM were employed to assess its tumor-targeting capability. Tumor xenograft models were established to investigate the in vivo selectivity of SYL3C-ICG, and a segmental excision procedure was employed to evaluate the efficacy of the probe in navigating precise surgical resection under NIR-II imaging. In vitro and in vivo fluorescence imaging revealed that NIR-II provides superior imaging resolution and penetration depth compared to NIR-I, and SYL3C-ICG could selectively accumulate at the tumor site, which helps surgeons detect tiny residual malignant lesions invisible to the naked eye and reduce the postoperative recurrence rate.

Breast-conserving surgery (BCS), commonly used in early breast cancer treatment, requires complete tumor resection to reduce local recurrence. Patients treated with BCS have better oncologic outcomes than those treated with mastectomy, with the additional benefits of preserved breast appearance and function, as well as reduced rates of postoperative complications1–3. However, tumor resection with wide margins can compromise normal organ function and/or have cosmetic impacts4,5. The negative margin plays a critical role in the maintenance of the safety of the patients who undergo BCS6.

Different intraoperative margin assessment techniques during BCS have been developed to help surgeons decrease the risk of a positive margin occurrence, including frozen section, imprint cytology, intraoperative ultrasound, specimen mammography, and digital breast tomosynthesis7. However, all these techniques have drawbacks that limit their further development. For example, frozen section and imprint cytology are time-consuming, expensive, and cause tissue loss. Also, their sensitivity depends on the histological type of tumors8. Due to these deficiencies, a higher probability of false-negative results may result. Imaging technology, including intraoperative ultrasound, specimen mammography, and digital breast tomosynthesis can assess the tumor margins in real time9; nevertheless, these methods lack sufficient sensitivity and specificity10. Thus, development of a real-time dynamic method to accurately evaluate the resection margin remains a challenge.

Optical molecular imaging using near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence has been widely explored in pre-clinical studies for surgical navigation, and can potentially overcome the above limits and allow surgeons to obtain real-time feedback and precise identification of tumor margins11. For example, IRDye800CW (a prominent investigational NIR dye) was conjugated with bevacizumab to increase its tumor-targeting performance in BCS and has progressed to phase II clinical trials12,13.

Currently, indocyanine green (ICG) is the most widely used NIR fluorescent agent approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and has been applied to trace sentinel lymph nodes (SLN) in breast cancer and gynecological tumors. Also, ICG can be used to detect small tumors and guide hepatobiliary cancer surgery14–16. However, the clinical applications of ICG are still limited by its low stability and poor tumor targetability. In the past, the clinical application of ICG is limited mainly to the first NIR window (NIR-I, 750–900 nm), while the second near-infrared window (NIR-II, 1000–1700 nm) application with a fluorescence wavelength of 1000–1400 nm is far less exploited. Compared with NIR-I imaging, NIR-II fluorescence imaging significantly improves penetration depths and signal-to-noise ratios in bio-imaging because of its reduced light scattering, photon absorption, and auto-fluorescence qualities, which may be expected to provide more precise images for fluorescent surgical navigation17–20. On this basis, improving the tumor imaging performance of ICG by coupling an active targeting ligand and exploiting its potential for NIR-II fluorescence is highly needed for further application in imaging-guided surgery.

Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM, also known as CD326) is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein that is associated with cell signaling and further affects the invasion, proliferation, adhesion, and propagation of cancer cells. EpCAM is overexpressed 100- to 1000-fold in primary and metastatic breast cancer cells and much more highly expressed in epithelial cancers (97% of breast cancer, 100% of lung, pancreas, colon, ovarian, and prostate cancers) and their “cancer stem cells” than normal epithelia, making it an attractive target for full spectrum of breast cancer subtypes21–26.In this work, we constructed an ICG-based molecular imaging probe to target EpCAM for intraoperative tumor fluorescence imaging. Targeting moieties, such as antibodies, peptides, aptamers, and small molecules can be conjugated to the fluorescent dyes to increase selective binding to or uptake by cancer cells27. Compared to other targeting moieties, aptamers have several attractive features: low molecule weight, high stability, easy and reproducible synthesis, lack of immunogenicity, rapid tissue penetration, and low toxicity. Furthermore, the easy functionalization of aptamers makes it possible to design various aptamer chimeras, such as aptamer-dye, aptamer-drug, and aptamer-nanomaterial conjugates, to generate more efficient and diversified molecular probes in imaging and targeted therapy28,29. In a previous study, we generated the DNA aptamer SYL3C by SELEX (Systematic Evolution of Ligands by Exponential Enrichment) that specifically recognizes the EpCAM protein on cancer cells30. This nucleic acid aptamer sequence has evolved into a classical EpCAM targeting element and is utilized in various fields of cancer diagnosis and treatment31–33.

In this work, we aimed to guide surgical removal of breast cancer with an aptamer-based NIR probe in mouse models. We conjugated ICG with the DNA aptamer SYL3C by PEG (SYL3C-ICG), and we evaluated the tumor targetability of the SYL3C-ICG probe both in vitro and in vivo. We subsequently investigated whether the fluorescence probe could guide tumor resection with negative or closed tumor margins.

Figure1illustrates the fabrication process of SYL3C-ICG and the NIR-II imaging-guided breast tumor resection. The SYL3C-ICG probe was synthesized by chemical coupling of COOH-SYL3C aptamer (recognizing EpCAM) and NH2-PEG-ICG via an amide bond (Fig.2A) and the mean molecular weight of the probe is 20.2 KDa. The conjugation of SYL3C aptamer and ICG was confirmed using PAGE electrophoresis (Fig.2B). Compared with SYL3C aptamer, the SYL3C-ICG was shifted to higher molecular weight and showed ICG fluorescence, indicating the successful labeling of SYL3C aptamer with ICG. Further identification of SYL3C-ICG was confirmed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Supplementary Fig.1). The retention time of SYL3C-ICG was longer than that of SYL3C. To evaluate the stability of SYL3C-ICG, gel electrophoresis assay of SYL3C aptamer and SYL3C-ICG conjugation incubated with DMEM medium with 10% FBS at 37oC for different times was performed (Fig.2C). Compared with SYL3C aptamer, the degradation rate of SYL3C-ICG was obviously slowed, the retention rate for aptamer and probe is 36% and 64% respectively after 48 h incubation time (Supplementary Fig.2). In addition, no fluorescence intensity decay was observed when incubating SYL3C-ICG with different solutions (Supplementary Fig.5A–C), and SYL3C-ICG showed similar absorption peaks (780 vs 790 nm) and fluorescence emission peaks (820~825 nm) with ICG in NIR-I. The slight red shift in absorption (10 nm) further suggested the successful conjugation of ICG to aptamer, furthermore, a tail fluorescence emission signal (1000~1400 nm) was detected in the NIR-II window (Fig.2D). These results demonstrated the successful conjugation of SYL3C aptamer and ICG-PEG.

Including the synthesis of probe, the binding of probe to tumor cells, and their application in detecting tiny residual tumor lesions during animal surgery.

AThe details of the chemical conjugation of SYL3C-ICG.BCharacterization of conjugated probes by PAGE electrophoresis at different concentrations. (i) Gel Red for DNA characterization and (ii) fluorescence imaging for ICG analysis.CGel electrophoresis assay of SYL3C aptamer and SYL3C-ICG probe after incubating with culture medium for different times.DSpectra of SYL3C-ICG probe.

To investigate the targeting functionality of SYL3C-ICG, in vitro binding affinity of SYL3C-ICG to EpCAM-expressed cells was determined. First, the expression levels of EpCAM in EpCAM-positive cell lines (MDA-MB-231EpCAMinfected with lentivirus for EpCAM overexpression), and EpCAM-negative cell lines (MDA-MB-231) were validated by Western blot analysis (Supplementary Fig.3). Then different breast cancer cell lines were incubated with either SYL3C-ICG, ICG-modified peptide of random sequence (RS-ICG) or free ICG. Also, a group that only added an equal amount of PBS was set as a negative control (NC). RS-ICG and free ICG were used as negative controls. The binding affinity of SYL3C-ICG to EpCAM was evaluated with cellular fluorescence images and flow cytometric analysis. As shown in cellular fluorescence images, for EpCAM-positive MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231EpCAMcells, the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) in the SYL3C-ICG group was significantly higher than in the RS-ICG and free ICG groups (Fig.3A, B,P< 0.05). For EpCAM-negative MDA-MB-231 cells, the MFI difference between each group is not statistically significant. As shown in the flow cytometric analysis, SYL3C-ICG showed obvious fluorescence shifts compared with the control groups for EpCAM-positive cells (Fig.3C). These results indicated that the SYL3C-ICG can specifically bind to EpCAM-expressed cells and that the SYL3C aptamer maintained its targeting capability after NH2-PEG-ICG modification.

ARepresentative fluorescence microscopic images of different cells after incubation with either SYL3C-ICG, RS-ICG, or ICG.BThe corresponding mean fluorescence intensities (MFIs) of different groups in (A).CCorresponding cell targetabilty tested by flow cytometry.

To investigate the applicability of SYL3C-ICG for NIR-II imaging, we compared the spatial resolution and contrast of SYL3C-ICG in both NIR-I and NIR-II imaging. As shown in the fluorescence imaging of blood vessels in the hind limbs of mice, the boundary of blood vessel in NIR-II was sharper and easier to detect, while diffuse-like fluorescence imaging was detected in NIR-I, indicating the superiority of NIR-II over NIR-I (Supplementary Fig.4A). Mock tissue phantom depth penetration studies were performed to investigate the effect of an absorbing and scattering medium (intralipid) on probes in the NIR-I and NIR-II. With increased depth, there was an obvious loss of image clarity in NIR-I, which showed exponential decay at depths of 3 mm. In contrast, NIR-II emissions enabled a clear observation of a sharp image through intralipid with a depth of 8 mm (Supplementary Fig.4B).

In vivo tumor targeting capability of SYL3C-ICG was tested on EpCAM-positive (MDA-MB-231-lucEpCAM) tumor-bearing mice. RS-ICG was used as negative control. After injection of fluorescence probes, the NIR-II fluorescence signals were obtained at different time points (1 ~ 48 h). The fluorescence signals were initially spread throughout the whole body at 1 h post-injection. The strongest fluorescence signal was observed in the liver of the mice in as little as 3 h, with a weak signal observed in tumor. The tumor uptake started at 3 h and continually increased in both groups. Their SBR (signal-background ratio) reached the greatest value at 24 h after injection (Fig.4A), and the liver signal showed a decrease in intensity over time. Meanwhile, the SYL3C-ICG group showed a significantly higher SBR in tumor fluorescence imaging compared to the RS-ICG group after injection at 24 h (8.39 vs 3.99,P< 0.05) (Fig.4B). Also, A double xenograft model was employed to demonstrate the probe uptake in the MDA-MD-M231-luc model with different EpCAM expression. It can be seen that the fluorescence intensity of the transplanted tumor with high EpCAM expression (right) is significantly higher than that with low EpCAM expression (left) in the same mouse and the SBR in tumor fluorescence imaging after injection at 24 h is 4.31 in left and 7.43 in right (P< 0.01), respectively. And the changing trend of its fluorescence intensity is basically consistent with the above-mentioned single transplanted tumor model (Supplementary Fig.9).

ANIR-II Fluorescence imaging of representative mice injected with RS-ICG and SYL3C-ICG.BSBRs of tumor fluorescence imaging at different time points post-injection of RS-ICG and SYL3C-ICG.CRepresentative fluorescence distribution imaging of SYL3C-ICG and RS-ICG in tumors and different organs.DCorresponding MFIs in various tissures (C).

The CCK8 assays revealed that SYL3C-ICG did not significantly decrease MDA-MB-231 cell viability for 24 h, even at concentrations up to 40 mg/mL (Supplementary Fig.5D). To demonstrate the effective delivery of SYL3C-ICG to tumor sites, the in vivo biodistribution of SYL3C-ICG was evaluated in subcutaneous tumor-bearing BALB/c mice by calculating the MFI in organs and tumors. The tissues and organs were excised 24 h after the injection of fluorescence probes and were washed 3 times with saline to remove blood stains. Similarly, the SYL3C-ICG showed a better capacity of active accumulation in tumor tissue than RS-ICG, which can be attributed to the targeting ability of the aptamer SYL3C (Fig.4C, D). For normal tissues and organs, SYL3C-ICG concentrated mainly in the liver at 24 h post-injection, which is often considered as the main reticuloendothelial system (RES). Also, a moderate amount of probe enrichment was detected in the kidney. The liver and kidney have often been regarded as the main excretory organs. Besides, SYL3C-ICG hardly accumulated in other major organs and tissues like heart, brain, spleen, muscle and skin.

Furthermore, the toxicity of SYL3C-ICG was assessed in BALB/c mice. No apparent acute toxicity appearance was observed over 72 h post-injection, and the body weight fluctuation showed no significant difference between the two groups after injection (Supplementary Fig.6A). After the tail vein injection of SYL3C-ICG, the blood routine indexes and renal function indexes (BUN and SCr) of mice showed negligible changes in comparison with those of the PBS group (Supplementary Fig.6B, C). Although the liver function indexes (ALT, AST, ALP) were slightly elevated at one week post-injection, there were no statistical differences. They returned to normal level at 28 days post-injection (Supplementary Fig.6C). Moreover, according to the histopathologic analysis of major organs acquired at day 1, day 3, day 7, and day 28 post-injection, no obvious pathologic changes were observed in these major organs (Supplementary Fig.6D), indicating the good biocompatibility of SYL3C-ICG.

A residual tumor model was used to verify the capacity of SYL3C-ICG for fluorescence-guided surgery. To preserve the normal tissue as much as possible, the tumors were removed by multiple excision until the border was invisible by naked eye under white light. Residual tissue located in the deep tumor bed of the resection cavity was identified under fluorescence compared to white light. The probe fluorescence was able to highlight the anatomical and tumor lesions during surgery with the added advantage of guiding the operating surgeon to visualize the fluorescence signals of tumor deposits even if they were as little as 1 mm (Fig.5A–C). Additionally, probe fluorescence maximized the preservation of normal pericarcinomatous tissue, as demonstrated by pathological findings (Fig.5D). To further determine if tumors can be delineated from normal tissues by our probe, an animal model of a tumor infiltrated into the muscle was constructed by 4T1 cell line with endogenous EpCAM. The tumor and surrounding normal tissue were removed together and fluorescence imaging was performed, and finally compared with pathological results (IHC and H&E). It can be seen that the SYL3C-modified probe can be efficiently enriched in the tumor and form sharp imaging at the tumor boundary, and the results are highly consistent with the pathological results (Supplementary Fig.7), suggesting the reliability of NIR-II fluorescence imaging for tumor resection guidance based on SYL3C-ICG.

ARepresentative white light images before and after segmental resection of tumor in tumor-bearing mice.BCorresponding NIR-II fluorescence images of (A).CRepresentative white light and corresponding NIR-II fluorescence images of the tumor after segmental resection.DImages of representative pathological HE staining and corresponding fluorescence images of specimens in (C).ELocal recurrence of tumor-bearing mice after different surgical procedures.FOverall survival of tumor-bearing mice after different surgical procedures.

Local recurrence and overall survival of tumor-bearing mice were monitored to gauge the success of SYL3C-ICG fluorescence-guided surgery. In contrast to 30% of the ICG-treated mice (3/10) and 70% of the control mice (7/10), none of the 10 SYL3C-ICG-treated animals showed local recurrence until two weeks following surgery (Fig.5E). Overall survival varied similarly among the three groups: Compared to just 50% of the ICG-treated mice (5/10), 80% of the SYL3C-ICG-treated mice (8/10) survived within 5 weeks after the procedure. Within 30 days of surgery, the residual illness claimed the lives of 70% of control mice (7/10). In comparison to the control group, the SYL3C-ICG group demonstrated significantly improved overall survival (log-rank test, ***P< 0.01), as well as a tendency toward improved survival when compared to the ICG group (Fig.5F).

In the era of precision medicine, breast cancer treatment, particularly in BCS, has prompted us to develop new technology27,34. One of the challenges is to maintain safe margins while preserving as much normal tissue as feasible with the objective of reducing the probability of local recurrence35. With the goal of assisting surgeons to precisely remove tumors during BCS more efficiently and proficiently, traditional imaging techniques, such as intraoperative X-ray photography of specimens, intraoperative ultrasonography, and three-dimensional CT reconstruction methods, are used for intraoperative evaluation of surgical margins, based on the efforts of numerous researchers. However, these aforementioned technologies have limitations, such as low accuracy, complex operation, and the inability to evaluate dynamically in real-time36–38. NIR-II fluorescence imaging, an innovative imaging modality that combines superb imaging resolution and tissue penetration compared to NIR-I imaging, has been developed. Here, we demonstrate that the EpCAM-targeting aptamer conjugated with ICG, which emits in the NIR-II region, recognizes EpCAM-overexpressed xenograft tumors as tiny as 1 mm in simulated operations, indicating its capability to direct precise tumor removal with negative margins, resulting in decreased recurrence and improved overall survival.

ICG has been utilized in fluorescence imaging-guided surgery in humans, showing about 50% false-positive rate when evaluating BCS margins17,39. Conjugating fluorescent molecules with specific tumor-targeting elements actively targets tumor lesions at the molecular and cellular levels. This significantly enhances the precision of fluorescence imaging-guided surgery compared to bare ICG, enabling detection of tumors via the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect40. By modifying ICG with bevacizumab, tiny colon cancers can be tracked with an NIR-II endoscope imaging system, allowing identification of tiny malignant lesions invisible to the naked eye41. In the present study, by modifying ICG with an aptamer, we demonstrated the capacity of the probe to track tiny residual lesions in breast cancer animal models. Also, the superiority of ICG imaging in the NIR-II region was established by high-resolution images of blood vessels and deep penetration in intralipid.

Numerous studies have shown that EpCAM, which performs a versatile function in carcinogenesis, is overexpressed in primary and metastatic breast cancers compared to the normal epithelial cells of benign breast tissue and is associated with poor disease-free and overall survival. Based on this, it is increasingly used in an exponentially expanding research area dedicated to biomarkers for active tumor targeting strategies42,43. For example, beads conjugated with antibodies specifically against EpCAM are used to detect circulating tumor cells.

Aptamers, which exhibit various advantages over antibodies and polypeptides, including high affinity, low immunogenicity, small size, and easy scale-up preparation without batch-to-batch variations, have been approved by the FDA in the treatment of various diseases44. Furthermore, aptamers have been conjugated with a series of moieties, including dyes, drugs and nanomaterials, to generate more efficient and diversified molecular probes in imaging and targeted therapy45. In this study, 5’-COOH modified SYL3C aptamer was conjugated with NH2-PEG5000-ICG, which rapidly and specifically undergoes dehydration carboxylation without altering the spectral features of ICG or the aptamer structure for tumor targeting. SYL3C-ICG achieved a much higher SBR for in vivo tumor imaging compared to RS-ICG, with high resolution in recognizing residual lesions of about 1 mm, indicating its excellent specific tumor targeting ability.

Although a deleterious property of aptamers is their rapid clearance from the circulation as a result of nuclease degradation, the feasibility for in vivo application has been demonstrated by several earlier studies46. For example, the aptamer-PROTAC conjugate (APC) was designed by conjugating BET-targeting PROTAC to the aptamer AS141147. Moreover, the chemical modification of aptamers with PEG is widely used to escape degradation by nuclease and removal by RES48. In the present study, the probe was sufficiently stable in vivo for tumor imaging without rapid degradation.

Taking into account the prospective clinical translation, all components (ICG, PEG, and SYL3C) of the probe synthesized in this study have been approved by the FDA for clinical application. SYL3C-ICG exhibits exceptional biocompatibility without causing harm to vital tissues or organ functions. Besides, SYL3C-ICG is concentrated mainly in the liver, as the main RES, at 24 h post-injection. This is consistent with previous research showing that large pegylated aptamers (PEG > 30 kD) are cleared by the reticulo-endothelial system, while those conjugated with short PEG polymers are usually filtered renally49.

In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that EpCAM binding aptamer-based fluorescence probe exhibits excellent optical properties and can provide high-resolution NIR-II fluorescence images with efficient tumor targeting and potent penetrating power. Consequently, the probe exhibits a remarkable capacity for guiding tumor surgical margins and identifying tiny malignant residual lesions among normal tissues. Although our probes are not ready for clinical translation, all raw materials employed for probe synthesis are FDA-approved. This results in high biocompatibility and promises new perspectives in imaging-guided breast cancer surgery, which can ultimately reduce the local recurrence rate and prolong postoperative survival.

First, 5’-COOH modified SYL3C aptamer (0.69 nmol) was dissolved in 100 μL MES buffer (50 mM in water, adjusted to pH 5). Then the NH2-PEG5000-ICG (0.2 mg in 4 μL DMF) and 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethyl aminopropyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC; 3 mg) were added to the mixture in sequence (dye-to-aptamer ratio: 50:1). After reacting on a rotator in the dark for 30 min at room temperature, 3 mg EDC was again added to the mixture and the reaction was carried out in the dark for 80 min at room temperature. Then the products were dialyzed by using dialysis membrane (Biotech, RC, 8-10 KD) against 1 L of PBS to remove the unreacted EDC and NH2-PEG5000-ICG and perform buffer exchange. The different concentrations of aptamer-PEG-ICG conjugate were confirmed by 20% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). Finally, the aptamer-PEG-ICG was wrapped with aluminum foil and stored at 4 °C.

Human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231, MCF-7 and non-cancerous breast epithelial cell line MCF-10A were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, USA). The MDA-MB-231-Luc cell line was purchased from ZQXZ Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). All cells were cultured according to the vendors’ recommendations.

About 5 × 104cells per well were seeded in a 24-well plate with 0.5 mL culture medium per well. The frozen lentivirus (HANBIO Biological, Shanghai, China) was thawed on ice and 5–10 μL lentiviral was added to 250 μL fresh medium. Lentivirus infection occurred until the cells grew to about 50–60% of confluence. The growth media was removed, and fresh media containing lentivirus was added. After 4–6 h, the volume of culture medium was supplemented to 5 mL. The culture medium containing lentivirus was recycled after 24 h, and then the fresh culture medium containing puromycin (1 μg/mL) was changed every day for drug screening. The transfection efficiency was observed by fluorescence microscopy.

To observe and qualify the targeting efficiency of aptamer, the cellular uptakes of SYL3C- and random sequence (RS)- labeled probes were evaluated. The MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-231EpCAM, MCF-7 cells were seeded in 12-well plates at a density of 1 × 105cells per well for 24 h. Then the cells were treated with fresh medium containing 200 nM SYL3C-ICG or RS-ICG at 4 °C for 1 h in the dark. The supernatant was removed, and cells were washed with cold PBS (1–4 °C). Afterward, the cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with DAPI. The uptake of SYL3C-ICG was observed using a Leica DM2700 Portho fluorescence microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). The differences in cell uptake of SYL3C-ICG and RS-ICG were also quantitatively compared by flow cytometry. The cells were collected, washed and resuspended in PBS after 1 h culture.Then, flow cytometry was performed on a Beckman Coulter CytoFLEX S (BD, Franklin Lakes, USA). The mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of cells was measured by FlowJo vX.0.7.

MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate (1.5 × 104cells/well), and cultured with SYL3C-ICG at various concentrations for 24 h. The cytotoxicity of SYL3C-ICG was measured by a standard CCK8 assay (Promega, Beijing, China).

All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Xiamen University and were conducted in accordance with relevant guidelines. The mice were all purchased from the Experimental Animal Center of Xiamen University. Female BALB/c nude mice (6-week old) received subcutaneous injection of MDA-MB-231EpCAM-luc cells (5 × 106) in the right hind limb. Tumor volume was calculated as [p/6 × length × (width)2]. All the mice were examined to confirm the presence of tumor by bioluminescence imaging with 150 mg/kg D-luciferin (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, USA) via intraperitoneal administration.

When the tumor volume reached 80 mm3, BALB/c mice bearing subcutaneous MDA-MB-231EpCAM-luc cell tumors were randomly divided into two groups (n= 4). SYL3C-ICG and RS-ICG at doses equivalent to 1 mg/kg ICG were injected through the tail vein, respectively. Mice were anesthetized with 2% isoflurane and fluorescence was imaged in vivo using an IVIS Lumina II imaging system (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, USA)/NIR-II fluorescence imaging system (Series III 900/1700, purchased from Suzhou Yingrui Optical Technology Co. Ltd., Suzhou, China) at different time points (0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 24, 36, 48 h) under 808 nm laser irradiation with 1000 nm filter (exposure time, 500 ms, excitation power density, 0.1 W/cm2). Tumor-to-background ratio (TBR) was defined as the fluorescence intensity in the tumor divided by the intensity in the upper limb and obtained by PSLViewer software (Photonic Science, Saint Leonardson-sea, UK). A double xenograft model was employed to conduct an in vivo experiment that demonstrated the probe uptake in the MDA-MD-M231-luc model with and without EpCAM. MDA-MB-231-luc and MDA-MB-231EpCAM-luc cells were implanted on the left and right hind limbs of nude mice, respectively. Fluorescence images were then collected at different time points. The method for tumor implantation and fluorescence image collection was consistent with the procedure previously described.

Imaging of blood vessels was used to verify the higher spatial resolution and contrast of NIR-II imaging. BALB/c nude mice (female, aged 6–8 weeks) were intravenously injected with SYL3C-ICG or ICG after being anesthetized for imaging of hind-limb blood vessels (n= 1). NIR-II fluorescence imaging was collected under 808 nm laser irradiation with a 900 nm filter for ICG and 1000 nm filter for SYL3C-ICG (exposure time, 400 ms, excitation power density, 0.1 W/cm2), respectively. The widths of vessels were determined according to the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the cross-sectional fluorescence intensity (FI) via Gaussian fit using Origin software (Version 8.0, OriginLab, Massachusetts, USA). The analysis of the acquired fluorescence images was performed using PSViewer software.

SYL3C-ICG solution of 0.25 mg/mL was prepared for NIR-II fluorescence depth measurement. The solution was adsorbed in glass capillary tubes and placed in a transparent culture dish. Different volumes of 1% fat emulsion were added to the culture dish to form different thicknesses (0–7 mm) of shelter on tubes. The fluorescence images of glass capillary tubes at different depths were collected by using 900 nm and 1000 nm filters, respectively.

Another three subcutaneous tumor-bearing BALB/c nude mice were sacrificed for ex vivo imaging after injection with SYL3C-ICG. The major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, brain, muscle, skin) and tumor were dissected to determine fluorescence ex vivo at 48 h post-injection. The ex vivo NIR-II fluorescence images were acquired and the corresponding MFIs of these tissues were quantitatively analyzed to evaluate the biodistribution.

Three subcutaneous tumor-bearing BALB/c nude mice were intravenously injected with SYL3C-ICG and in vivo imaging was performed after 24 h post-injection (highest TBR time point). The tumor fluorescence signal was compared with its bioluminescence imaging signal. The segmental excision of tumors was performed under white light by visualization and palpation. To simulate breast-conserving surgery, the tumor was excised as close to its boundary as possible to maximize the retention of the normal tissue for each step. The residual tumor tissue was visualized by NIR-II fluorescence signal (parameters as above) each time until no residual fluorescence signal was detected, suggesting negative margin. All the tissues were collected for histological analysis.

4T1-Luc cells (1 × 107/mouse) were injected into the superficial muscle of the right hind leg of BALB/c mice (female, aged 6–8 weeks). When the volume of the tumor reached 300–400 mm3(6 days after injection), the mice were used for NIR-IIb fluorescence imaging-guided surgery. The tumor and surrounding normal tissue were removed together, and fluorescence imaging was performed, and finally compared with pathological results (IHC and H&E).

After excision of the specimen, ex vivo imaging was also performed with the hand-held near-infrared imaging system. Then, all the specimens were fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin blocks and made into 10-µm-thick tissue sections. The slides were imaged using the Odyssey CLx scanner (LI-COR Bio, Lincoln, USA). Microscopic assessment of the slides derived from HSA-ICG fluorescence signal was made to demonstrate the tracer distribution at a cellular level.

Thirty subcutaneous tumor-bearing BALB/c nude mice were divided into 3 groups (n= 10 per group). SYL3C-ICG or free ICG (1 mg/kg) or saline was injected 24 h before the operation, respectively. The tumor-bearing mice in SYL3C-ICG group and ICG group were subjected to fluorescence-guided surgery, and mice in the saline group experienced white light surgery. Local recurrence was observed every 2 days for 2 weeks and survival for 5 weeks. Mice were euthanized if the weight loss exceeded 20% or action was sluggish, or recurrence tumor volume reached 1500 mm3.

A total of 30 healthy female BALB/c mice (4–6-week old, Xiamen University) were randomly divided into two groups. Mice in the SYL3C-ICG group received an injection of probe (equivalent to 10 mg ICG per kg), whereas mice in the control group received a saline solution injection. On days 1, 3, 7, and 28, the mice were sacrificed (n= 3 per time point) to obtain blood samples and major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney). Routine blood test and serum biochemical indexes were determined. For histological study, the major organs were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Every other day during the observation period, the weights of the mice (n= 3) in each group were recorded.

All animals were euthanized by cervical dislocation after the experiment.

Statistical analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism (Version 8.0.1) and IBM SPSS Statistics (Version 22.0). The data were presented as the mean ± SDs and were compared by independent samples t test, one-way ANOVA, or two-way ANOVA between groups. The results were considered to be significantly different if thepvalue was less than 0.05.

This study is supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Xiamen--Youth Foundation(No: 3502Z20227120, 3502Z202372089), Youth Foundation of Xiang’an Hospital of Xiamen University: (No: XM01040002, XAH23002), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 32171363, 82103614), Fujian Major Scientific and Technological Special Project for “Social Development” (No. 2020YZ016002), Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (No. 2021J05007), Research Fund of Fujian Key Laboratory of Precision Diagnosis and Treatment in Breast Cancer & Xiamen Key Laboratory of Endocrine-Related Cancer Precision Medicine (XKLEC2020KF01). Figure1in this article was customized and provided by Changsha Atomic Creative Information Technology Co., Ltd., which has obtained the right to use the every elements in the image.