Pharyngeal collapse (PC) is a relatively common condition in brachycephalic dogs and often coexists with other airway collapses, including tracheal collapse (TC) and bronchial collapse (BC). However, the relationship between PC severity, clinical signs, and other forms of airway collapse is not well understood.

Evaluate the correlation between PC severity and clinical signs, the severity of other airway collapse, and demographic factors such as breed and age.

A retrospective review of medical records was conducted at Seoul National University Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital from April 8 to September 5, 2024. The severity of PC and TC, and the presence of BC, cervical lung lobe herniation, and tracheal kinking were evaluated using fluoroscopy. Medical records were reviewed for data on signalment, respiratory clinical signs, and body condition score. Correlations between PC severity and other factors were analyzed using Pearson's correlation coefficient.

Severity of PC had a significant positive correlation with clinical signs, particularly cyanosis or respiratory distress, as well as age and brachycephalic conformation (Pearson'sr, 0.26, 0.30, 0.46, respectively;pvalue, < 0.05 for all). No significant positive correlation was found between PC severity and TC or BC.

Fluoroscopic assessment of PC severity is clinically relevant, especially in older and brachycephalic dogs. Our study emphasizes the value of fluoroscopic evaluation as a tool for assessing the severity of PC, aiding in the diagnosis and management of affected dogs.

Pharyngeal collapse (PC) is a condition characterized by the dynamic narrowing or complete closure of the pharyngeal lumen, occurring as a consequence of dorsal displacement of the soft palate or ventral deviation of the dorsal pharyngeal wall [1]. Pharyngeal collapse is an important factor in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) syndrome in people, with a multifactorial pathophysiology that includes anatomical abnormalities and dysfunction of the pharyngeal dilator muscles [2,3,4]. Both structural weaknesses and increased negative pressure within the upper airway have been identified as potential contributing factors to this condition [5]. It remains unclear whether PC is a contributing factor or a consequence of increased pharyngeal pressures with OSA in people. Previous studies have reported the frequent coexistence of PC with other respiratory disorders, including tracheal collapse (TC), mainstem bronchial collapse (BC), and brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome (BOAS) [6,7]. PC identified by fluoroscopy is observed more frequently in brachycephalic dogs compared with non‐brachycephalic dogs, regardless of the presence of other sites of airway collapse [8]. In dogs, it remains unclear whether PC is a consequence of abnormal pharyngeal pressure caused by airway collapse of any origin or if it is a contributing factor [9].

In people, the Müller maneuver assesses PC using endoscopy, grading the collapse from 0 to 4: 0 (no collapse), 1 (25% collapse), 2 (50% collapse), 3 (75% collapse), and 4 (100% collapse) [10]. Additionally, this grading shows a significant positive correlation with the apnea‐hypopnea index, which indicates the severity of OSA in humans [10]. However, most veterinary studies have focused primarily on the presence or absence of PC, rather than assessing its severity and its relationship with clinical signs or other airway conditions. Limited research on the potential association between the severity of PC and other forms of airway obstruction, such as TC and BC, indicates a gap in our understanding of this condition. More detailed evaluation of PC severity in dogs is needed to understand its impact on clinical signs and interaction with other airway collapses.

We aimed to evaluate the correlation between PC severity and clinical signs and severity of other airway collapses, including TC and BC. By examining these relationships, we hoped to determine the clinical relevance of assessing PC severity using fluoroscopic evaluation. It was hypothesized that the PC severity would be positively correlated with the observed clinical signs. It was also hypothesized that dogs with more severe PC would show a higher frequency of concurrent airway collapses.

A retrospective study was performed on patients that underwent fluoroscopic examination at Seoul National University Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital between 8 April and 5 September 2024. Fluoroscopic examinations of the airways, including the laryngopharynx, trachea, and mainstem bronchi, were performed in dogs presented with respiratory signs such as cough or those scheduled for anesthesia. Cases in which tracheal stimulation was not performed or in which examinations were conducted under sedation were excluded from the study. Additionally, cases where fluoroscopic examinations were performed multiple times on a single patient were excluded to avoid confounding the results.

All owners consented to the use of their dogs' medical records.

After manually restraining the dog in the appropriate position, imaging was performed using a C‐arm (SPINEL 3G; GEMSS Healthcare Corporation, Paju, Republic of Korea) during both the normal respiratory phase and coughing phase (forceful expiration). For the evaluation of PC, TC, and BC, the dogs were positioned in right lateral recumbency. Coughing phase images were obtained by applying sufficient manual pressure to the trachea to induce a cough. When coughing could not be induced, another person attempted the procedure, and when a cough still could not be induced, only normal breathing was recorded. All animals were awake, with only a few requiring sedation. For the evaluation of cervical lung lobe herniation (CLLH), coughing phase images were obtained in a ventrodorsal view with forelimbs positioned caudally.

All digital images were assessed using INFINITT PACS (INFINITT Healthcare, Seoul, South Korea) at a frame rate of 15–30 frames per second, adjusted according to the respiratory rate of each dog. Evaluation criteria included grade of PC and TC by region and presence of BC, CLLH, and tracheal kinking. The grade of PC was determined by measuring the maximum and minimum diameter of the nasopharyngeal lumen during quiet breathing or panting, depending on the patient's condition, and the reduction ratio was used to grade the collapse. A diameter reduction of 0%–50% was classified as grade 0 (no collapse), 50%–100% as Grade 1 (partial collapse), and 100% as Grade 2 (complete collapse; Figure1) [6].

Fluoroscopic images during respiration of dogs diagnosed with pharyngeal collapse (PC) Grade 1 (A, B) and Grade 2 (C, D). (A) and (C) show the maximal diameter of the nasopharyngeal lumen (arrow), whereas (B) and (D) show the minimal diameter of the nasopharyngeal lumen (arrow) in each respective dog. SP, soft palate.

Tracheal collapse was evaluated in the cervical, thoracic inlet, intrathoracic, and carinal regions by measuring the maximum and minimum diameter of the trachea during forceful expiration. Diameter reductions of 0%–25% were classified as Grade 1, 25%–50% as Grade 2, 50%–75% as Grade 3, and 75%–100% as Grade 4 [11]. When no image was obtained during forceful expiration because cough could not be induced, the normal respiratory phase was evaluated. In such cases, a diameter reduction < 25% during the normal respiratory phase was classified as Grade 0, whereas a reduction ≥ 25% was considered indicative of TC. The TC total grade was the highest grade across the four regions, and TC total Grade 0 was categorized as no TC, Grades 1 or 2 as mild TC, and Grades 3 or 4 as severe TC.

Bronchial collapse was assessed when the diameter decreased ≥ 60% during forceful expiration [12]. Cervical lung lobe herniation was assessed when the apical level of the extruded lung lobe was cranial to the 7th cervical vertebra in a ventrodorsal view with forelimbs positioned caudally [13]. Tracheal kinking was noted when the trachea lost its linear shape and became curved.

The grade of PC and TC by region was evaluated by three observers, all of whom are veterinarians with one to 2 years of experience in veterinary radiology. The observers were blinded to each other's evaluations and the patients' histories. When the grade differed by ≤ 1 and ≥ 2 observers agreed, the majority grade was adopted. When the grades differed by > 2 or none of the observers agreed, the final grade was decided by discussion. All other assessment categories were determined by discussion among the three observers.

For each dog, signalment, respiratory clinical signs (such as presence of chronic cough, presence of upper respiratory sounds, and presence of cyanosis or respiratory distress), the presence of heart murmur, and body condition score (BCS) were recorded. A chronic cough was defined as a cough persisting for > 2 months. Because no objective quantitative standard for evaluating the severity of respiratory symptoms in veterinary medicine is available, respiratory clinical signs were scored as 1 when present and 0 when absent, and the values were summed to calculate a clinical sign score (scale 0–3, with 0 = no clinical signs and 3 = all clinical signs).

Statistical analysis was performed (L.S.J) using commercially available software (SPSS statistical program, IBM SPSS Statistics 27.0, IBC Corporation, NY). The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to assess the normality of the data. Pearson's correlation coefficients were used to evaluate the relationships between PC, TC, BC, CLLH, tracheal kinking, clinical signs, age, and breed. Statistical significance was considered at aPvalue of < 0.05. Inter‐observer reproducibility of the measurements was assessed using intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) analysis, and values < 0.4 were considered poor reliability, 0.41–0.6 as moderate reliability, 0.61–0.8 as good reliability, and > 0.8 as excellent reliability.

Ninety‐five cases met the inclusion criteria from the 113 fluoroscopic examinations conducted between April 8 and September 5, 2024. Twelve of the excluded cases were conducted in regions other than the airway, including the esophagus and urinary tract. One case was conducted only in the trachea and mainstem bronchi without evaluation of the laryngopharynx. Two dogs examined twice during the study period and one dog that underwent sedation were excluded. Of the 95 dogs, 53 were males (51 neutered, 2 intact), and 42 were females (41 spayed, 1 intact). The BCS was evaluated on a scale of 1 to 9, where 1 represents cachectic and 9 represents obese. Twelve dogs (12.6%) were classified as obese (BCS, 7 or 8), whereas five dogs (5.3%) were considered underweight (BCS, 3). The remaining 78 dogs (82.1%) had normal BCS (4–6).

The study population consisted of 16 different breeds, with the most prevalent breed being the Pomeranian (n= 22), followed by Maltese (n= 21), Chihuahua (n= 9), mixed breed dogs (n= 9), Bichon Frise (n= 8), Poodle (n= 8), Yorkshire Terrier (n= 4), Shih‐Tzu (n= 4), and Pekingese (n= 3). Welsh Corgi, Coton de Tulear, Schnauzer, Spitz, English Bulldog, French Bulldog, and Pug were represented by one dog each. Brachycephalic dogs accounted for 10.5% (n= 10) of the total population, including Shih‐Tzu, Pekingese, English Bulldog, French Bulldog, and Pug. The remaining 85 dogs (89.5%) were non‐brachycephalic.

The age of the dogs ranged from 1 to 15 years, with a median of 10 years (interquartile range [IQR], 7–12). A heart murmur was identified in 36 dogs (37.9%).

Fluoroscopic examination identified variable grades of PC and TC and the presence of BC, CLLH, and tracheal kinking (Table1). In the brachycephalic dogs, the majority of dogs (9/10, 90%) had PC Grade 1 or 2, whereas, in the non‐brachycephalic dogs, PC Grade 0 was more common and observed in two‐thirds (57/85, 67.1%) of the cases (Figure2). Twenty‐two dogs (23.2%) did not have forceful expiration images despite sufficient tracheal stimulation and were classified as TC Grade 0. Among the remaining cases, TC was classified into different severity grades based on the degree of tracheal narrowing observed during forceful expiration. The distribution of TC severity then was analyzed across different PC grades, with the proportion of each TC severity group calculated for PC Grades 0, 1, and 2 (Figure3).

Grades of PC and TC, and presence of BC, CLLH, and tracheal kinking evaluated by fluoroscopically.

Abbreviations: BC, mainstem bronchial collapse; CLLH, cervical lung lobe herniation; PC, pharyngeal collapse; TC, tracheal collapse.

Proportion of pharyngeal collapse (PC) severity by brachycephalic and non‐brachycephalic dogs. The stacked bar graph shows the distribution of PC severity (Grades 0, 1, and 2) among brachycephalic and non‐brachycephalic dogs. The higher prevalence of PC Grade 1 or 2 in brachycephalic dogs compared with non‐brachycephalic dogs is identified.

Proportion of tracheal collapse (TC) severity by pharyngeal collapse (PC) Grades 0–2. The proportion of TC severity (no TC, mild TC, severe TC) for each PC grade is shown. There is no significant relationship between PC severity and TC severity.

The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test determined that the data did not follow a normal distribution. The relationships between the PC severity and various factors were analyzed using Pearson's correlation coefficient, with the results presented in Table2. A significant positive correlation was observed between the PC severity and factors such as age (Figure4), brachycephalic group, and cyanosis or respiratory distress (p< 0.05 for all). In contrast, Pearson's correlation coefficients for TC grades (both by region and total grade) were negative. However, these correlations were not significant (p> 0.05), indicating no meaningful influence of TC on PC severity. Also, no significant correlation was identified between the PC severity and the presence of BC, CLLH, or tracheal kinking.

Pearson Correlation Coefficient value of PC with Age, breed, BCS, clinical sign, TC, and BC.

Abbreviations: BC, mainstem bronchial collapse; BCS, body condition score; CA, carina region; CE, cervical region; CI, confidence interval; CLLH, cervical lung lobe herniation; IT, intrathoracic region; PC, pharyngeal collapse; TC, tracheal collapse; TI, thoracic inlet region.

Comparison of age across pharyngeal collapse (PC) Grades 0–2. The boxplots display the median, interquartile range, outlier, and range of ages for each group. As the PC grade increased, the age also increased, indicating a positive correlation between PC grade and age.

The ICC was used to assess inter‐observer reliability for the grading of PC and TC. The ICC results indicated excellent inter‐observer reliability (ICC > 0.8) for most of the evaluations, supporting a high level of consistency among the three observers for both PC and TC grading (Table3).

Intraclass correlation values for interobserver reliability of PC and TC grade evaluation.

Note:ICC < 0.4 was considered poor reliability; ICC = 0.4–0.6 was considered moderate reliability; ICC = 0.6–0.8 was considered good reliability; and ICC > 0.8 was considered excellent reliability.

Abbreviations: CA, carina; CE, cervical; CI, confidence interval; ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; IT, intrathoracic; PC, pharyngeal collapse; TC, tracheal collapse; TI, thoracic inlet.

Our retrospective study identified an association between PC severity and clinical signs such as cyanosis or respiratory distress in dogs, supporting the clinical relevance of evaluating PC severity using fluoroscopy. The PC severity also had a significant association with brachycephalic dogs and age. This finding suggests that more severe PC is not merely an incidental finding but a critical factor contributing to respiratory compromise in affected dogs, especially in older dogs and brachycephalic breeds.

Clinical signs were evaluated based on the presence of chronic cough, upper respiratory sounds, and cyanosis or respiratory distress. The proportions of these symptoms for each PC severity group (Grades 0, 1, and 2) were as follows: Chronic cough was observed in 58.6%, 63.3%, and 71.4%, respectively; upper respiratory sounds in 60.3%, 60%, and 71.4%; and cyanosis or respiratory distress in 36.2%, 60%, and 71.4%. Overall, the proportion of dogs exhibiting clinical signs increased with PC severity. Notably, a significant positive correlation was found between PC severity and cyanosis or respiratory distress, suggesting the clinical relevance of evaluating PC severity using fluoroscopic examination.

Clinical signs such as cough, upper respiratory sounds, and cyanosis or respiratory distress were identified, with results similar to those of previous research with some differences. In a prior study involving 28 dogs with PC, the most commonly observed clinical signs were coughing (67.8%), followed by stertorous upper airway noise (17.8%), gagging (10.7%), regurgitation (3.6%), and sneezing (3.6%) [6]. Cyanosis or respiratory distress, identified in our study, was not reported in the earlier study. This difference may reflect variations in sensitivity to assess clinical signs or the effect of sample bias.

Nearly 11% of dogs with PC (4/37) were asymptomatic, including one brachycephalic dog (Shih Tzu) and three non‐brachycephalic dogs (Pomeranian, Chihuahua, and mixed breed). Similarly, previous studies have reported cases of brachycephalic dogs with PC that did not have respiratory signs [6,8,14]. This finding may have been influenced by the protocol for performing fluoroscopic examinations at our institution. This protocol includes not only patients presenting with severe clinical signs but also those with mild signs, often as part of a pre‐anesthetic evaluation. The observation of asymptomatic PC in dogs indicates that mild PC may not necessarily lead to noticeable clinical signs, and suggests that the presence of collapse alone does not always correspond with clinical disease. However, no dogs with PC Grade 2 were asymptomatic, suggesting that higher grades of PC are not incidental findings. This observation indicates the importance of assessing PC severity during clinical evaluations. Given that approximately 11% of our cases with PC were asymptomatic, further research is recommended to evaluate diagnostic criteria, particularly regarding the diameter reduction ratio identified by fluoroscopy that is clinically relevant.

In our study, PC severity was significantly correlated with brachycephalic conformation. The proportion of brachycephalic dogs within each PC severity group (Grades 0, 1, and 2) was 1.7%, 16.7%, and 57.1%, respectively, suggesting that severe PC is more likely to occur in brachycephalic dogs than in non‐brachycephalic dogs. PC was observed in 72% of brachycephalic dogs that underwent swallowing or airway fluoroscopy, compared with only 28% of non‐brachycephalic dogs, suggesting that PC is more common in brachycephalic breeds [8]. In humans, a significant correlation exists between facial morphology and the occurrence of OSA and PC [15]. Similarly, chronic upper airway obstruction caused by BOAS leads to increased inspiratory effort. This increased effort may impair pharyngeal dilator muscle function, thus increasing the risk of PC in affected dogs [16,17,18].

Among dogs with PC, 70.2% (26/37) also had TC and 67.6% (25/37) had BC, indicating that these are frequently concurrent conditions, which is in accordance with the findings of previous studies [6]. The presence of TC and BC increases airway resistance, increasing the negative pressure gradient between the upper and lower airways and progressively impairing the ability to breathe [19,20,21]. This sustained increase in negative pressure can result in dysfunction of the pharyngeal dilator muscles, which in turn increases the risk of PC [16]. However, our study did not identify a significant positive correlation between PC severity and other airway collapses, including TC and BC. Instead, a negative correlation coefficient was observed, although it was not significant. In healthy dogs, negative pressure activates a dual protective reflex that both stimulates the activity of airway dilators and inhibits that of the diaphragm, thereby maintaining airway patency. Thus, it is unlikely that negative pressure alone is the cause of PC [4,6,16,17,18]. Therefore, PC and TC should not be considered conditions that always progress together.

The positive correlation between PC severity and age suggests that older dogs are more likely to experience severe PC. Similar findings have been reported in humans, where age‐related changes, such as altered pharyngeal anatomy, decreased muscle function, decreased protective reflexes, and increased airway resistance, contribute to an increased predilection to collapse of the upper airway [4,22]. Although the exact mechanisms linking aging and PC in dogs are not fully understood, potential factors include age‐related muscle function decline, structural changes, and decreased neuromuscular control. Further investigation is required to examine these associations in dogs so that more effective management strategies for PC in older dogs can be established.

The methodological validity of our study is emphasized by the excellent ICC values obtained, indicating the strong reliability and replicability of our findings. These high ICC values emphasize the consistency of measurements across different observers, reinforcing the reliability of our evaluation methods.

Our study had some limitations. As a retrospective analysis, variability in clinical records is inherent, making it difficult to evaluate clinical signs in detail. However, by focusing on the presence or absence of specific clinical signs, we were able to assess their associations with PC severity. Additionally, other factors that could influence respiratory signs, such as heart disease or respiratory conditions other than collapse, were not fully considered. Notably, a heart murmur was identified in 37.9% of cases, and some dogs showed concurrent conditions such as rhinitis or pulmonary infiltrates, which may have impacted the respiratory signs observed. Future studies should aim to exclude or control for such confounding factors and minimize their influence on the results. The small sample size of the PC Grade 2 group (n= 7) also limits the assessment of findings for this category, suggesting that further research with a larger sample size would enhance the validity and reliability of the conclusions. Lastly, because our study was conducted at a tertiary care veterinary hospital, the sample population may not fully represent the broader canine population, which could limit the generalizability of the findings to a wider population of dogs. Future studies should consider a larger, more diverse population to validate these results.

In conclusion, results of our study support the clinical relevance of assessing PC severity using fluoroscopy in dogs. Severity of PC is associated with clinical signs such as cyanosis or respiratory distress. The correlation among PC severity, age, and brachycephalic conformation suggests that these factors play critical roles in the progression of PC. Although PC frequently coexists with TC and BC, our study found no significant positive correlation between their severities, suggesting that these conditions may not always progress in parallel. The presence of asymptomatic cases with mild PC indicates that the presence of PC alone does not always correspond with clinical disease. Therefore, careful evaluation of PC severity in clinical settings is necessary. Further research is warranted to establish diagnostic criteria for PC and explore the underlying mechanisms linking age and PC.

Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials.