Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a significant cause of blindness and visual impairment in preterm infants globally, particularly in low-income and middle-income countries. ROP is associated with prematurity, and with the increase in the survival of preterm infants, its global burden continues to rise. However, there is limited information available on health workers’ perspectives regarding ROP in Uganda.

This qualitative study explored health workers’ experiences regarding ROP in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) at Hoima Regional Referral Hospital. This study involved in-depth interviews with eight health workers working in the NICU. We examined individual, facility and national factors that could impact the health workers’ perspectives on ROP at the hospital. The data obtained were transcribed and coded, and themes were generated for further analysis.

We identified key barriers and facilitators to effective ROP care. Four major themes emerged from the analysis: (1) Knowledge and awareness of ROP, (2) Challenges and limitations in implementing the ROP screening programme, (3) Training and guidelines for ROP screening and treatment and (4) Recommendations for ROP prevention screening and management. ROP awareness, knowledge of ROP and witchcraft and ROP were identified as specific subthemes under the knowledge and awareness of ROP theme.

This study reveals significant gaps in health workers’ knowledge and awareness of ROP. Limited access to essential equipment and specialised personnel may further limit ROP screening capacity. We suggest implementing a multidisciplinary team approach, continuous professional development and establishing national ROP guidelines. We recommend developing a formal training structure and syllabus for ROP screening. The training can enhance task shifting among health workers in areas without specialised health workers. Addressing the identified barriers is crucial for improving the care and outcomes for preterm infants in Uganda and similar settings.

There is limited information about the knowledge and perspectives of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) among health workers in low-income and middle-income countries, which affects effective ROP management.

Health workers lack sufficient knowledge to manage preterm infants with ROP.

This study provides a basis for further exploring ROP knowledge among health workers in other settings and the need for ROP-tailored training.

Despite advances in neonatal care, ROP remains a significant public health concern, particularly in low-income and middle-income settings including Uganda.7 8Effective ROP management requires timely diagnosis and specialised interventions.9These requirements are constrained by limited resources, insufficient training in ROP screening and management pathways and a lack of ROP awareness, including knowledge regarding its’ screening, diagnosis and management, among health workers.10This leads to ineffective service delivery to preterm infants.6Therefore, the perspectives of health workers about ROP in the healthcare settings handling preterm infants are crucial.

However, there is limited research exploring the perspectives of health workers about ROP in Uganda. This study examined the perspectives and experiences of health workers regarding ROP at a regional referral hospital in Uganda. We also examined the barriers, facilitators and potential solutions to improve ROP care. Given the complexity of the factors that influence health workers’ practices, the social-ecological model (SEM) was employed in this study. The SEM asserts that behaviour is affected by multiple levels of influence, including at the individual, interpersonal, organisational, community and policy level.11 12The interaction of these layers helped us evaluate health workers’ perspectives on ROP care. By understanding health workers’ perspectives, we sought to inform strategies to strengthen ROP services, especially at the regional referral level, and enhance strategies to improve health workers’ awareness of ROP. We also sought to improve the overall visual outcomes for vulnerable preterm infants in Uganda.

The study was conducted at the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) at Hoima Regional Referral Hospital (HRRH). HRRH is located in Bunyoro Region in Mid-Western Uganda Hoima City, 200 km West of Kampala, the capital city of Uganda.13The hospital serves approximately 3 million individuals from the Bunyoro region, covering districts such as Hoima, Kibale, Masindi, Buliisa, Kiryandongo, Kyankwanzi and Kiboga.13About 180–190 infants are received at the HRRH NICU every month, with an average of 80 born preterm and around 10 referrals from lower health facilities. Most of the preterm infants admitted are of 28–32 weeks gestational age and in the very low birth weight category between 1000 and 1500 g. Admissions for extremely low birth weight of less than 1000 g occur occasionally. Respiratory support at the facility includes improvised fixed-pressure continuous positive airway pressure oxygen delivery and oxygen monitoring using portable pulse oximeters. Oxygen blending, saturation monitoring and intubation are not available. By June 2024, the NICU had 14 health workers: 1 neonatology fellow, 1 paediatrician, 4 midwives, 3 registered nurses, 2 intern nurses and 3 intern doctors.

We conducted a descriptive qualitative study involving in-depth interviews among eight health workers from June to July 2024. Study participants were recruited into the study where convenient according to their availability and proximity during the data collection. Inclusion criteria were set for health workers who had spent at least a month in the NICU and were directly involved in preterm care. Ophthalmic clinical officers (OCOs) who had screened the preterm infants for other eye conditions excluding ROP were included in the study. Written consent was sought and obtained from these health workers by two research assistants (RAs) who were initially trained in qualitative data collection. Confidentiality was achieved by eliminating the participants’ names and National Identification Numbers. Administrative approval was obtained from the hospital administration to access the facility’s health workers in the NICU department. The consented participants were interviewed for 30–80 min until saturation.

Eight health workers working in the NICU at HRRH, with a mean age of 34.6 years, a range of 26–50 years, and a 1:1 male-to-female ratio, were interviewed. Two were OCOs attached to the entire hospital, and three were intern doctors with one intern nurse, one nursing officer with neonatal training and one registered nurse. Four major themes emerged from the analysis: Knowledge and awareness of ROP, challenges and limitations in implementing the ROP screening programme, training and guidelines for ROP screening and treatment, and recommendations for ROP prevention screening and management, as shown intable 1.

The knowledge and awareness theme consists of three subthemes: ROP awareness, knowledge of ROP and witchcraft and ROP.

Health workers became aware of ROP while practising in the NICU. Most of them noted that ROP was a condition that was not prioritised during healthcare service. The majority (6 out of 8) lacked sufficient knowledge about ROP. They mentioned that awareness about ROP was minimal due to limited sensitisation in the facility and region. Two quotes from the health workers are noted below.

Health workers reported varying knowledge about ROP and its associated dynamics, such as screening, diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. The health workers vaguely knew that ROP happens among preterm infants, especially those who have been on unblended oxygen therapy for a long time.

Some (3 out of 8) health workers were aware of the weight criteria of preterm infants with the potential of developing ROP. Few (2 out of 8) recognised the different ROP stages that can occur among the preterm infants affected, highlighting stages from 1 to 5. However, those who knew the stages could not succinctly describe the pathological changes occurring during these stages.

Some health workers explained that ROP was perceived by locals as a condition arising from cultural practices and that it was associated with witchcraft.

Health workers highlighted multiple challenges hindering the effective management of ROP at the facility. Two subthemes emerged from this: ROP screening equipment and Human resources for health.

Health workers noted the absence of ROP screening equipment, such as screening cameras, an oxygen blender and other accessories. They reported that the lack of these resources significantly impacted the ROP screening process and programmes at the facility.

Health workers reported the absence of ROP-trained health workers at the hospital, such as paediatric ophthalmologists, neonatal nurses and neonatologists. This also significantly impacted ROP screening at the hospital.

Additionally, some health workers suggested that the perceptions around ROP of the parents and caretakers of preterm infants affected by it may reduce their health-seeking behaviours, which disrupts the intervention process and hence effective management.

Health workers described poor referral mechanisms and follow-up infrastructure within the healthcare system, further disrupting ROP management. Moreover, expert health workers being in the central business district made the management of patients in the regional and peripheral areas more difficult.

Two subthemes, ROP training and ROP screening guidelines, emerged under this major theme.

The participants suggested a range of improvements to enhance their knowledge about ROP. They said continuous training could help improve their knowledge and expertise, and continual refresher courses are necessary to keep them updated with any developments in the field. Furthermore, it was suggested that other stakeholders, such as organisations prioritising eye health, must continue to train health workers about early childhood blindness and ROP. Some recommended enhancing training in other peripheral facilities handling preterm infants to quickly identify the candidates for ROP and easily make the appropriate referrals.

Health workers described an absence of ROP guidelines at both the facility and in Uganda. They would manage patients according to material written in international textbooks which may not be generalisable to the local situation. Some health workers mentioned that they had never heard of ROP guidelines and were unsure of whether Uganda had any. While they pointed out that there were national guidelines instructing the screening, diagnosis and management of other conditions such as malaria and HIV, there was an insufficiency in guidance for ROP. Without this, their only option when encountering such cases was a referral to a specialist centre for further management.

Participants gave various recommendations for enhancing the screening and management of ROP among preterm infants. For example, creating locum vacancies for the appropriately trained personnel in facilities lacking such expertise, or training current staff on ROP screening and management. The health workers also recommended acquiring equipment facilitating the management of ROP.

Some health workers recommended having in-country guidelines specific to the Ugandan setting borrowing from the international standards. These could be based on the local conditions and situation in the different health facilities handling these infants, such as the availability of human resources and equipment used in ROP screening.

Health workers were concerned about the community’s lack of knowledge of ROP. They recommended different community sensitisation programmes to counter the myths and beliefs about the condition and help narrow the knowledge gap. Health workers believe that the community may appropriately seek health interventions if they are informed about ROP and the associated risk factors, screening and diagnosis.

Low-income and middle-income countries (LMICs) like Uganda are facing a rising epidemic of ROP which challenges healthcare systems in aspects such as screening, management and follow-up of affected preterm infants.16 17It is important that the respective healthcare systems overcome these challenges, seeking the appropriate equipment, trained staff and guidelines. Overall, health workers in this study reported limited knowledge and awareness about ROP. Most health workers were unaware of the condition’s staging, risk factors, diagnosis and management. The evidence provided in this study corresponds with the findings from a cross-sectional study from Uganda, which showed limited awareness of ROP among caregivers and medical professionals.18More evidence demonstrated limited understanding of the condition among nurses and paediatricians, warranting further capacity building.19 20Findings from our study show the need for continuous training through ward teachings and Continuous Medical Education sessions along with refresher courses in ROP. This training can enhance knowledge and skills about ROP among the health workers handling preterm infants.821,23They can offer up-to-date information concerning the management, screening criteria and different innovations, especially from high-income countries. A mixed-methods study from Uganda further demonstrated that just 24.6% of medical professionals across two national referral hospitals in Uganda had received ROP training. These results are minimal and confirm the need for regular training.18The absence of comprehensive training packages for ROP for the different cadres in Uganda’s healthcare system, such as neonatal nurses and OCOs, creates barriers to the effective management of ROP. Coupling ROP training with ROP management guidelines would benefit health workers in different facilities nationwide in effectively managing ROP.

The absence of national ROP management and prevention guidelines in countries across SSA, including Uganda, means that health workers have no standards to follow for treating patients with ROP.10Kenya and South Africa developed national ROP guidelines for primary and secondary prevention.4With the improvement of neonatal care services across some of these nations, preterm infant survival has progressively improved.24,27While there is survival improvement, certain risk factors such as ROP identification necessitate keen attention to minimise the risk of early childhood blindness. We recommend enhancing strategies for in-country ROP guidelines by collating multiple data from different facilities attending to preterm infants to improve neonatal outcomes and minimise the risk of early childhood blindness.

The health workers also noted the absence of equipment to manage preterm infants, such as oxygen blenders and ROP screening equipment. Approximately 60% of neonatal units in SSA offered blended oxygen to different preterm infants, and most NICU units lacked oxygen monitoring for these infants.28,30The administration of combined oxygen and utilisation of saturation targets is protective against ROP among preterm infants in multiple settings. These warrant an urgent need for implementation at the facility and other regional referral hospitals nationwide to improve neonatal outcomes.31 32The absence of equipment offers an avenue for innovation to develop customised equipment for local settings. Equipment, such as screening devices, can be designed to counter their shortage and the higher costs of procuring the current equipment on the international market.

Health workers recommended training local and available health workers in ROP management, such as nurses, midwives and OCOs. This phenomenon, known as task shifting, could be relevant in rural areas within Uganda which have limited human resources, such as ophthalmologists, neonatologists and paediatric ophthalmologists with ROP expertise.33The recommendation agrees with the findings from a qualitative study that emphasised the different benefits of task shifting in settings with under-resourced specialties.34Task-shifting in a specialised condition like ROP requires adequate and coordinated training about the different concepts, such as the screening of ROP.35This training can often be coupled with routine supervision of the trainees by an expert ophthalmologist to evaluate its effectiveness in knowledge and skills transfer.36Uganda has a training programme for OCOs, a lower cadre of ophthalmologists who can do essential eye services, such as visual acuity screening. OCOs can also identify basic eye conditions and refer patients where necessary.37OCOs could be trained in the different aspects of ROP as they are distributed countrywide.34 37However, comprehensive information is absent concerning task shifting of different ophthalmology services among OCOs beyond their scope and curriculum, such as ROP screening and management. The absence of this critical information can impact the delivery of these highly specialised services to populations that require them. Overall, this shows how individual, institutional and national factors determine the different perspectives of health workers about ROP identification and management. Addressing these factors at the appropriate level is crucial to enhancing the capacity of health workers in managing ROP in Uganda.

The study had a number of limitations, including the low number of health workers in the NICU of interest. The low recruitment of health workers at the facility was an administrative and staffing limitation arising from the limited resource envelope to cover the wages of new employees from the country’s Health Service Commission. This limitation was beyond the researchers’ control and may have constrained the diversity of perspectives despite achieving saturation. The absence of opinions from ROP experts at the facility, including a paediatrician, neonatologist and paediatric ophthalmologists, limited the collection of expert insights regarding ROP. These opinions could have enriched our findings, particularly regarding decision-making during ROP diagnosis and interprofessional and interdepartmental collaboration. This was a single-site study since it is the only facility in the region with a NICU. While it was the only facility in the region with a functioning NICU, the single site limits the generalisability of the findings to other settings. However, we believe that these results could reflect the situation in other regional referral hospitals across the country.

This study provides comprehensive perspectives about ROP from health workers working in the NICU of a regional referral hospital. This study highlights key impediments to the successful management of ROP in HRRH’s NICU, including inadequate knowledge about ROP among health workers, the absence of ROP guidelines, screening equipment and specialised health workers such as paediatric ophthalmologists, neonatologists and neonatal nurses with ROP training to manage the condition at the facility. Notably, information obtained from this study could represent the situation in the different regional referral facilities across Uganda that serve multitudes of preterm infants. We recommend the implementation of public awareness campaigns about ROP in the Bunyoro region and within Uganda. These campaigns must target the public, especially the parents of preterm infants. Enhancing their awareness can improve the health-seeking behaviours among the parents, thus enabling timely interventions.

We recommend drafting different ROP guides and training material to enhance the knowledge and skills of health workers working with preterm infants. The study further highlights workable recommendations from the health workers' perspective, such as establishing in-country ROP guidelines and continuous knowledge translations. We recommend multidisciplinary collaboration among professional experts and other health workers involved in managing preterm infants, such as midwives, neonatal nurses, hospital pharmacists, medical doctors and paediatricians.

We propose another evaluation among health administrators, such as hospital administrators, district health officers, commissioners of health and the different ministers responsible for neonatal health in Uganda. Their insights can offer a concrete position concerning ROP in the country, warranting policy change and approaches to managing the condition. We also recommend a country-wide evaluation of the incidence and prevalence of the condition to establish nation-wide data. This can inform further management, planning and policy development strategies in Uganda that can further be adopted by other LMICs.

We acknowledge the Mulago National Referral Research and Ethics Committee for reviewing and approving this study. We recognise the administration of HRRH for granting us permission to conduct this study within their NICU premises and to access the health workers. Further appreciation is rendered to the health workers who offered their precious time to respond to the 15 different questions about our topic of study. Your insights were valuable in developing this piece and informing the world about ROP in the region.

The views expressed in this paper are independent of the funders.