We introduced a case of a 69‐year‐old female patient with mitral valve prolapse with severe regurgitation who was transferred from the ICU to a regular ward after undergoing mitral valve replacement surgery. Routine ECG examination showed that the precordial leads were affected by the apical pulsation, leading to pseudo‐ST segment depression and prolonged QT interval. In clinical practice, ECG artifacts caused by apical pulsation, if not carefully distinguished, may lead to unnecessary examinations and treatments for patients. Our case emphasizes the importance of accurately identifying ECG artifacts.

We introduced a case of a 69‐year‐old female patient with mitral valve prolapse with severe regurgitation. Postoperative routine ECG examination showed that the precordial leads were affected by the apical pulsation, leading to pseudo‐ST segment depression and a prolonged QT interval. Accurate identification of such ECG artifacts is crucial to avoid unnecessary treatments.

A 69‐year‐old female patient underwent mitral valve replacement surgery due to mitral valve prolapse with severe regurgitation. On the 12th postoperative day, she was transferred from the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) to a general ward; the routine electrocardiogram (ECG) examination is shown in Figure1A.

(A) Atrial pacing rhythm, with ST segment of precordial leads V2–V5 showing depression of 0.1–0.3 mV with biphasic T waves, QT: 480 ms, corrected QT: 531 ms. (B) After adjusting the precordial leads, the rechecked ECG showed: Atrial pacing rhythm, with ST segments of leads V3–V5 depressed by only 0.05–0.1 mV, T waves inverted in leads V2–V5, QT: 394 ms, corrected QT: 445 ms.

Figure1Ashows atrial pacing rhythm, with ST segments of precordial leads V2–V5 depression of 0.1–0.3 mV with biphasic T waves, QT is 480 ms, and the corrected QT is 531 ms. The patient did not complain of chest pain or discomfort. Upon physical examination, the patient was found to be 160 cm tall and weigh 43.5 kg, with a thin build and thin chest wall. It was considered that the precordial leads were affected by the apical pulsation, so the position of the precordial leads was adjusted to avoid areas where the apical pulsation was prominent. The repeat Figure1Bshows that the ST segment of leads V3–V5 was only depressed by 0.05–0.1 mV, T waves in leads V2–V5 were inverted, QT is 394 ms, and the corrected QT is 445 ms. After being transferred to the general ward, the patient continued to receive treatment, including antiinfection, anticoagulation, antiplatelet aggregation, diuretics, expectorants for asthma relief, and nutritional support, and was discharged after 14 days.

The precordial leads are connected by the precordial exploring electrode (anode) with the indifferent electrode (cathode) and the limb leads to form the central terminal of the electrocardiogram. Wilson, based on the position of the heart in the thoracic cavity, determined the specific locations on the chest wall for leads V1–V6. Except for lead V1, which is located on the right edge of the sternum, the remaining leads are all situated on the left edge of the sternum. There is a certain pattern to the changes in the QRS complex of the precordial leads, with the R wave gradually increasing from leads V1–V4, and then the R wave decreasing sequentially from leads V4–V6. The electrocardiographic artifacts caused by apical pulsation do not affect the QRS complex because the QRS complex corresponds to the beginning of ventricular contraction, after which the ventricles begin to enter the systolic phase, corresponding to the ST segment and T wave on the ECG. Apical pulsation leads to artifacts in the ST segment and T wave. When the apical impulse has poor contact with the precordial electrodes, it can cause a sudden change in impedance leading to distortion of the electrical signals. These distorted signals manifest on the ECG as abnormal ST segment elevation or depression, large T waves, and unusually prolonged QT intervals.

Some scholars have reported that when limb lead electrodes are placed on arteries, electrocardiograms can produce artifacts. When the artifact originates from a single arterial pulsation, only one limb lead (I, II, and III) is unaffected (Xin et al.2023). The artifacts caused by apical pulsation in the precordial leads are distributed in areas that depend on the contact position, area, and angle between the electrode and the apical pulsation, (Duan and Zhang2023) and usually, lead V1 is not affected.

In this case, the patient had undergone cardiac surgery and had a low cardiac output, with multiple underlying diseases and a history of coronary heart disease. The precordial leads are affected by the apical pulsation, and the ECG shows severe ischemia‐like ST‐T changes and significant prolongation of the QT interval. If the patient's body type and chest wall factors are not taken into account, the degree of myocardial ischemia may be overestimated, leading to unnecessary treatment for the patient.

The ECG artifacts caused by apical pulsation do not affect the QRS complex but mainly affect the ST segment, T wave, and QT interval.

Artifacts related to apical pulsation can appear in any precordial lead except for lead V1.

For patients with a thin body and thin chest wall, precordial leads should be positioned to avoid areas where the apical pulsation is more pronounced.