Elevated oestrogen levels and pharmacotherapies targeting oestrogen receptors can reduce corneal biomechanical stability, and altered stromal collagenase activity has been identified as one the possible mechanisms. We wished to determine the impact of oestradiol and the selective tissue (o)estrogenic activity regulator (STEAR), tibolone, on corneal enzymatic digestion resistance.

Freshly prepared ex vivo porcine corneas (n=48) were divided into three groups. Group A corneas served as untreated controls. Group B corneas were incubated in 20 µmol/L oestradiol solution and group C corneas were incubated in 20 µmol/L oestradiol solution with 2.5 mg tibolone before digestion in 0.3% collagenase-A solution to assess digestion time until corneal button dissolution.

Group A control corneas showed the strongest resistance to collagenase digestion (31.38±2.03 hours). Corneas from group B that were preconditioned with oestradiol showed significantly lower resistance to digestion than group A control corneas (27.25±1.84 hours, p<0.01). Group C corneas that had been pretreated with both oestradiol and tibolone showed the least resistance to digestion (22.38±2.47 hours), with significant differences to group B (p<0.01) and group A (p<0.01).

Oestradiol significantly reduces corneal enzymatic digestion resistance. When combined with the STEAR, tibolone, there is a further decrease in stromal enzymatic digestion resistance. These results suggest that high oestradiol levels could have a significant impact on corneal conditions characterised by elevated collagenase activity, such as corneal ectasias (eg, keratoconus) and infectious keratitis. Importantly, the employment of STEAR therapy, such as tibolone, may amplify the effects of oestradiol.

Oestradiol upregulates matrix metalloproteinase expression, weakening corneal biomechanical stability and potentially exacerbating corneal ectasias, particularly during hormonal fluctuations such as pregnancy.

Tibolone, a selective tissue oestrogenic activity regulator (STEAR), exerts oestrogenic effects on connective tissues, but its impact on corneal stromal resistance and enzymatic digestion remains unclear.

Oestradiol, especially with the STEAR tibolone, significantly weakens corneal resistance to enzymatic digestion, highlighting hormonal modulation’s role in corneal stability and disease progression.

These findings underscore the importance of evaluating hormonal status in patients with corneal diseases to mitigate risks associated with elevated collagenase activity and ensure optimal treatment strategies.

Furthermore, a case report of a female patient with dormant keratoconus who experienced keratoconus progression after receiving 28 days of therapy with the selective tissue oestrogenic activity regulator (STEAR), tibolone, was published recently.23This study examines how oestradiol and tibolone influence the stromal capacity to resist enzymatic digestion, both alone and in combination with STEAR therapies.

Freshly enucleated porcine eyes (<6 hours postmortem) were obtained from a local slaughterhouse. Following epithelial removal using a hockey knife (FEATHER, pfm medical ag, Cologne, Germany), corneal buttons were created using Westcott scissors, leaving a 3 mm corneoscleral rim. The corneal buttons were then immersed in a 400 mOsmol/L phosphate-buffered saline solution for 10 min, followed by central trephination using an 8 mm biopsy punch (SMI, St. Vith, Belgium).

After trephination, the buttons were placed in 24-well plates (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), with each well containing 2.0 mL of 0.3% collagenase A solution (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The plate was placed on a thermoshaker (37°C with 150 revolutions per minute;figure 1) and underwent tissue culture in a 5% CO2environment, as previously described.3The corneal buttons were visually inspected and photographed every hour. The time until complete enzymatic digestion for each cornea was recorded. Complete digestion was defined by the complete dissolution of the button and the formation of a dust-like layer.

One individual recorded all images and was unblinded regarding the allocation of corneas to each group.

We randomly assigned 48 porcine eyes to one of three study groups, each consisting of 16 corneas.

Control corneas were subjected to digestion with 2 mL of 0.3% collagenase A solution diluted in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland).

Corneas were incubated in a 2 mL total solution containing DMEM, collagenase A at a final concentration of 0.3% (w/v) and β-oestradiol at a final concentration of 20 µmol/L (E2257, Sigma-Aldrich Chemie, Buchs, Switzerland).

Corneas were incubated in a total volume of 2 mL of a solution containing DMEM, collagenase A at a final concentration of 0.3% (w/v), β-oestradiol at 20 µmol/L and tibolone (Tibolon-Mepha Tablets 2.5 mg, Mepha, Aesch, Switzerland) at a final concentration of 2.5% (w/v).

The main outcome measure was the time (in hours) to complete the digestion of each corneal button. Statistical analysis was performed by using R Studio (V.2022.12.0), Prism 9 (V.9.5.1), and Microsoft Excel (V.16.70). The descriptive statistics were presented as mean±SD. Normal distribution was tested and confirmed for all groups using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Analysis of variance was therefore used to analyse the differences between the groups, with a p-value <0.05 indicating statistical significance.

This study included a total of 48 corneas that were evenly distributed into three groups (n=16 each). Digestion results are displayed infigure 2.

For group 1 control corneas, the mean digestion times were 31.38±2.03 hours. Corneas in group 2 (oestradiol group) showed a mean digestion time of 27.25±1.84 hours, displaying a significantly lower digestion resistance than group 1 control corneas (p<0.01). Finally, corneas in group 3 (oestradiol and tibolone) showed a mean digestion time of 22.38±2.47 hours, being significantly less resistant to enzymatic digestion than group 1 control corneas (p<0.01) but also showing significantly less resistance than group 2 (oestradiol) corneas (p<0.01).

Several ocular pathologies are associated with reductions in corneal biomechanical strength, such as the family of corneal ectasias, or inflammatory and infectious processes.26,29A significant contributor to this reduction is the upregulated activity of collagenolytic enzymes, especially the MMP family, which digest stromal collagen by binding and cleaving the collagen molecule at specific binding sites. Any factor interfering with the regulation of MMP expression can directly affect the biomechanical stability of the cornea.

Tibolone is a selective tissue oestrogen activity regulator with a chemical structure similar to oestrogen.40Tibolone is metabolised into 3α-hydroxytibolone and 3β-hydroxytibolone, both of which bind oestrogen receptors and display oestrogenic effects.41While the precise mechanism through which oestrogen impacts biomechanics remains unclear, in vivo studies have shown that oestrogen receptors possess the capacity to influence the biosynthesis of collagen and glycosaminoglycans.42 43These elements play a pivotal role in the composition of the corneal stroma and can therefore influence the biomechanics of the cornea. However, the reduced resistance to collagenase digestion observed in our in vitro experiments cannot be attributed to any active biological processes; instead, it is likely due to the direct structural effects of oestradiol and tibolone on the corneal stroma. Additionally, a direct inhibitory interaction between the hormonal agents and collagenase cannot be ruled out, as oestradiol and tibolone may alter enzyme activity or binding affinity, further affecting the rate of stromal digestion.

Clinically, tibolone is widely used as a hormone replacement therapy to mitigate osteoporosis and menopausal symptoms in postmenopausal women, and it is also used to treat endometriosis.40 44A previous case report of tibolone therapy described reactivation and exacerbation of a previously dormant keratoconus in a female patient aged over 50 years,23and this, combined with its widespread clinical use, was the reason for choosing tibolone as the agent under investigation.

This study has several limitations, including its ex vivo design and the lack of age and sex data for the porcine eyes, as this information was not available from slaughterhouse records. However, the clinical manifestation of tibolone-induced ectasia progression has already been documented in a previous case report. The aim of the present study was not to replicate this clinical observation, but rather to further characterise the stromal susceptibility to enzymatic digestion under controlled conditions following exposure to oestradiol and tibolone.

There is a clear interaction between heightened oestradiol levels and tibolone on corneal biomechanical strength, but the potential for this drug to alter corneal stromal resistance to collagenase enzymatic digestion was not fully understood until now. Our ex vivo porcine cornea digestion study demonstrates that oestradiol reduces this digestion resistance and that additional exposure to STEAR substantially weakens the ability of the stroma to withstand enzymatic digestion. These findings suggest that STEAR therapy may pose an additional risk for the progression of keratoconus and could worsen corneal melting in infectious keratitis. Consequently, assessing the hormonal status of keratoconus patients regarding STEAR therapy should be considered an essential part of the patient’s medical history evaluation.