The RMD (regulator of microtubule dynamics) protein family is conserved across various species but their activity and role in spermatogenesis is largely unexplored. Here we report developing an antibody against the two nearly identical proteinsC. elegansRMD-3andRMD-6. This antibody detectsRMD-3/6 in both immunocytology and western blots.RMD-3/6 colocalizes with the major sperm protein MSP to the fibrous bodies of spermatocytes, cytoplasm of spermatids, and pseudopods of spermatozoa.RMD-3/6 are sperm-specific, yet male fertility in triplermd-2/rmd-3/rmd-6knockout mutants is unaffected under conditions tested.

(A) Molecular phylogeny of RMD and RMDN related sequences from humans (Hs),C. elegans(Ce),C. briggsae(Cbr) and a non-CaenorhabditisnematodePristionchus pacificus(PP). The sequences were downloaded from Wormbase WS297, and the phylogenetic analysis was done using Clustal Omega (B-D) Isolated male gonads from wildtype and knock-out mutants co-labelled with DAPI (blue) and anti-RMD-3/6 antibody (red). (B-D) Scale bar = 10 microns. (E) Western blot of anti-RMD-3/6 antibody in sperm-onlyfem-3(q20) hermaphrodites and “wildtype”him-5andrmd-2;rmd-3;rmd-6(FM697), andrmd-2;rmd-6(FM694) males. Arrow indicatesRMD-3/6 band. (F) Cartoon of the meiotic and post-meiotic stages ofC. elegansspermatogenesis with MSP patterns in green (G)RMD-3/6 (red) labelling patterns in staged spermatocytes and sperm co-labelled with DAPI (blue). (H) Co-localization ofRMD-3/6 and MSP of staged spermatocytes and sperm. All images except the budding figure (BF) are deconvoluted max Z images. In 2X magnified image, arrows mark the FBs in longitudinal (yellow) and cross-sectional (cyan) orientations. (G-H) Abbreviations: early and late karyosomes (eK, lK), primary and secondary spermatocytes, budding figures (BF), spermatids (tid), and spermatozoa (zoa). Green arrow indicates newly budded immature spermatid. (G-H) Scale bar = 2 microns.

Conserved betweenC. elegansand humans, members of the RMD protein family are named for their role of bothC. elegansand humanRMD-1in regulating microtubule dynamics (Oishi et al., 2007;Fig. 1A). However, RMD proteins also function in non-microtubule roles. For example, humanRMD-3/PTPIP51, localizes to the mitochondrial outer membrane where it facilitates inter-organelle binding interactions with the ER-membrane protein VAPB (De Vos et al., 2012; Mórotz et al., 2022). FFAT motifs and a coiled coil domain within the extended N-terminal domain ofRMD-3mediate binding to the MSP-domain of VAPB, named for its homology to the nematode major sperm protein. Although humanRMD-3/PTPIP51 (Stenzinger et al., 2005) andC. elegansRMD-3/6 proteins (Ma et al., 2014) are both highly expressed in sperm, their sperm functions have yet to be described.

The functions ofC. elegansproteinsRMD-2/3/6 have not been well studied, but triple knockout (KO) males produce fertilization-competent sperm and hermaphrodites have similar fertility rates to control worms (Juanico et al., 2021). To directly test the fertility ofrmd-2;rmd-3;rmd-6triple KO males, we crossed single L4-stage males with three L4-stagefog-2“feminized” hermaphrodites which lack self-sperm. To assess full broods, adults were transferred to fresh plates daily. Control males sired an average of 647 +/- 21.8 (S.E.) viable progeny (n=5), and triple deletion males sired an average of 612 +/- 21.8 (S.E.) progeny (n=5), indicating thatRMD-3/6 are not required for sperm function under the conditions tested.

Despite the lack of a knockout phenotype, both the abundance ofRMD-3/6 within sperm and a potential connection to MSP remained intriguing. In sequence comparison studies, we found thatRMD-3andRMD-6are 98% identical (221/225) and 99% conserved. The molecular phylogenetic tree generated by Clustal Omega (Madeira et al., 2024) suggests thatRMD-3andRMD-6arose from a recent gene duplication. NamedC. elegansRMD proteins (RMD-1, 2, 3, 6) proved to be more similar to each other than to their human RMDN counterparts. OtherC. elegansproteins (C16C8.18andF33H2.6) may be closer homologs of the human proteins (Fig. 1A). The smallerC. elegansRMD-3/6 proteins lack the experimentally verified MSP binding domains within the N-terminal domain of humanRMD-3/PTPIP51, yet it remains possible that theC. elegansproteins have non-canonical MSP binding sequence motifs that have yet to be identified.

To better understand potentialRMD-3/6 functions, we generated an affinity purified, rabbit polyclonal antibody against a shared peptide sequence. In wildtype male germlines,RMD-3/6 was first detected in mid-pachytene spermatocytes (Fig. 1B). Similar patterns were observed in the germlines ofrmd-2;rmd-6double KO males (Fig. 1C) whereas no labelling was observed in germlines of triple KO males (Fig. 1D). In western blots, the antibody bound robustly to a protein that migrated slightly slower than the predicted 25.9 kD molecular weight band that was present in sperm-producingfem-3(gf) hermaphrodites,him-5males, andrmd-2;rmd-6males, but not in triple KO males (Fig. 1E). Although these experiments only directly confirm that our antibody recognizesRMD-3, it is likely that the antibody recognizes bothRMD-3andRMD-6as the identical peptide antigen is present in both proteins, and single-cell RNA seq data indicate that both proteins are expressed at high levels during spermatogenesis (Ghadder et al., 2023). Our finding, that both the immunofluorescence and western blot signals remain elevated inrmd-2;rmd-6males, suggests either thatRMD-6is expressed at much lower levels thanRMD-3or that these males compensate by upregulating the expression ofRMD-3. Within primary and secondary spermatocytes,RMD-3/6 antibodies labelled discrete structures throughout the cytoplasm that looked similar to that of MSP-containing fibrous bodies (FB) (Fig. 1F,G).RMD-3/6 subsequently segregated to spermatids in post-anaphase II budding figures (BF), dispersed through the cytosol in spermatids, and localized to the pseudopods of spermatozoa. Because the observed localization patterns suggested thatRMD-3/6 was co-localizing with MSP throughout spermatogenesis, we co-labelled male gonads with anti-MSP and anti-RMD-3/6 antibodies (Fig. 1H). Tight colocalization ofRMD-3/6 and MSP was observed at all stages of spermatogenesis. Notably, colocalization was observed in both longitudinal and cross-sectional views of FBs. As previously observed for other sperm proteins, the antibody labeling was brighter in newly budded spermatids than mature spermatids. In newly budded spermatids, MSP andRMD-3/6 showed tight co-localization to the still intact FBs. In mature spermatids, MSP andRMD-3/6 dispersed through the cytoplasm but their patterns showed only partial co-localization. In spermatozoa,RMD-3/6 co-localized with MSP in the pseudopods.

This study addsRMD-3/6 to the growing list of proteins that are packaged together with MSP in the FBs of developing spermatocytes and ultimately segregate to the pseudopods of motile spermatozoa (Morrison et al., 2021). Although triple KO males were fully fertile under conditions tested, future studies ofRMD-3/6 binding partners promise to reveal new insights regarding the role of RMD proteins in bothC. elegansand mammalian sperm.

Worm CultureWorms were cultured on MYOB plates (Church et al., 1995) and inoculated with theE. colistrainOP50, using methods similar to those described by Brenner (1974).

Fertility AssayFor the fertility analysis, three L4-stagefog-2“feminized” hermaphrodites were crossed to single L4-stage control or FM697 triple deletion males on single-spot 35 mm plates. All four worms were transferred to fresh plates daily until there were no more embryos produced. The total progeny sired by individual males was calculated from the sum of the progeny it sired over multiple days.

Antibodies and ImmunochemistrySperm spreads were obtained by dissecting 8-10 males per slide in 8 microliters of sperm media on ColorFrost Plus slides (Fisher Scientific, 12-550) coated with poly-L-lysine (Sigma Aldrich, P8290). Slight pressure was applied to coverslips to flatten out the samples. The samples were freeze-cracked in liquid nitrogen and fixed in −20°C methanol overnight. Specimen preparation and antibody labeling followed established protocols (Shakes et al., 2009). Antibodies used included 1:1500 4D5mouseanti-MSP monoclonal, 1:800 rabbit anti-RMD-3/6 polyclonal, 1:300 Alexa Fluor Plus 555 goat anti-rabbit IgG, and 1:150 Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouseIgG (H+L). Affinity purified rabbit antiserum against a sharedRMD-3andRMD-6epitope was generated by YenZym. Slides were mounted with Fluoro Gel with DABCO (Electron Microscopy Sciences #17985-02) containing DAPI.

Imaging and AnalysisImages were acquired with epifluorescence using an Olympus BX60 microscope equipped with an Orca Flash 4.0LT3 camera. The imaging software cellSens was used to capture, merge, and in some cases capture Z-stacks and deconvolute the images. For control studies (Fig. 1B-D), image exposures were kept constant with no further imaging processing. ForFig. 1G,image exposures were optimized for individual gonads, and the levels adjust function in Adobe Photoshop was used to spread the data containing regions of the image across the full range of tonalities.

Western BlotFor western blot analysis, 100 young adult male worms (him-5, FM697, and FM694) were collected in 10 μL of M9 buffer, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C. Samples were run on an SDS-PAGE gel and transferred to a PVDF membrane (Transblot Turbo, BioRED). Anti-RMD-3/6 antibody was used at a 1:1,000 dilution. HRP-conjugated goat-anti-rabbit secondary antibody was used at a 1:2,000 dilution, and the blot was visualized using an iBright chemiluminescent imaging system.

Rabbit antisera was generated by immunizing a rabbit against the aa 7-20 (DKTFGTKNRDQGYD with an added amide-C) which is common toC. elegansB0491.3RMD-3andR13H9.1RMD-6.

We would like to thank David Greenstein for supplying the anti-MSP antibody, and Francis McNally for supplying the FM697 and FM694 strains.