The contamination
of natural basins by agricultural or
industrial
activities, and the growing need for potable water due to climate
changes accelerate the drive to find versatile, fast, practical, and
easy-to-use methods for water analysis. A potentially versatile technique
suitable for water analysis is Raman Spectroscopy (RS). Featured by
good resolution but low sensitivity, RS detects molecular vibrational
modes of an analyte in water. Nitrate is an indicator of chemical
and/or biological pollution, it displays Raman active vibrational
modes affected by the interaction with other systems in solution,
allowing a wide range of applications. Concerning Nitrate analysis
in water, a general introduction to the Raman effect and the basic
instrumentation were herein discussed. RS is a potential solution
to wastewater analysis. This review first reports the theoretical
background of the technique and its basic working principles, then,
the state-of-the-art scientific contributions related to Nitrate detection
are investigated with a particular interest in the instrumental setup
and the chemometric techniques employed to improve its sensitivity.
In the studies hereby considered, instrumental setup (for example,
laser frequency, laser power, acquisition times) and different technical
solutions (for example, micro- versus macro-Raman instruments) to
increase the technique’s sensitivity on Nitrate detection are
described. Concisely, the use of deep-UV lasers, optically active
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) or Fiber-Enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (FERS) equipment, coupled with instrumental settings,
i.e. acquisition time, variable temperature of acquisition, use of
special sampling apparatus (cuvettes or immersion probes), or with
ion exchange resins for analyte enrichment, have been reported. Remarkably,
examples of large data correction of unwanted fluorescence by mathematical
processing or chemical quenching were reported too, suggesting solutions
for the Raman analysis of wastewaters. Finally, a short digression
on Machine Learning (ML) applied to RS is proposed, showing the promising
results reported in other fields. Data-driven methods could be a solution
to improve the low sensitivity of the RS for Nitrate detection. Hence,
an approach of ML methods for the typical RS spectra processing (spike
removal, baseline correction, fluorescence curve elimination, instrumental
noise correction) was hereby mentioned, suggesting an improvement
in the detection capability of Nitrate ion in water.

The quality of natural water resources
can be influenced by natural
effects or anthropological activities, and the most pervasive issue
is inadequate access to clean water and sanitation. The first step in facing this problem is determining the
overall composition and detecting specific pollutants. Various instrumental
methodologies are available, but mostly they are lab-centered. Particularly, traditional methods applied for
water quality detection involve enrichment
analysis, volumetric analysis, electrochemical analysis, spectrophotometry, atomic emission spectrum
analysis, fluorimetric spectroscopy, Atomic
Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS), infrared
spectroscopy, and chromatography. These classic instrumental methods can be applied
both to detect pollutants and for quantitative measurements in water;
however, most of these methods feature elaborate sample preparations
and no direct measurements. The propulsive need to get fast measurements
without complicated sample handling and preparation inspired the research
of new fast, reliable methods of measurement. The development of a
wide range of optical technologies and signal processing techniques
sheds light on RS as a modern method for the detection of substances
in water. Recent technological innovation and new detection devices
and optical fibers gave a strong impulse to water analysis by RS.−Cn. Moreover, it offers highly structured
information, high resolution with narrow bandwidths, and minimal sample
preparation. It is often coupled to fiber-based optics to achieve
in situ analysis by remote control, affording applications for continued
monitoring of flow processes. Considering
all these properties, upon the dawn of environmental awareness and
regulation, RS was soon evaluated for contaminant water analysis.
In this review, among all the possible contaminants, nitrate has been
selected as a case study for the relevance of its identification in
terms of water analysis and pollution detection. Some fundamental concepts of RS are presented, along with
current technological approaches for analyzing the Raman-active nitrate
anion. Considering the recent widespread
adoption of data optimization through artificial intelligence, a brief discussion is also included on cases
where ML data processing has facilitated Nitrate detection by RS.

The Raman effect
consists of components of scattered light obtained from a Raman-active
transparent sample caused by the irradiation with monochromatic Ultra
Violet (UV), visible, or Near Infrared Radiation (NIR) light from
a laser at frequency ν0; the scattered light is mainly
due to the input frequency ν0(Rayleigh scattering)
and also, to a much lesser extent, in narrow bands at other discrete
frequencies, namely the Raman shifts. These latter are at both lower
and higher frequencies than that of the laser, with the lower frequency
bands termed Raman Stokes bands (hν0–hν), and the higher frequency bands
(hν0+hν)
are termed Raman anti-Stokes bands (Figure). Removing the Rayleigh component, the Raman
Stokes bands are due to the vibrational modes of Raman active species
transitioning from the vibrational ground state to the first excited
vibrational state.

(Left) Raman scattering by a water solution upon laser
excitation
(hν0); (right) energy diagram for
elastic Rayleigh (hν0) and inelastic
Stokes (hν0–hν) and anti-Stokes (hν0+hν) scatterings.

The
intensity of the scattered photons
depends on the acquisition
time too, adding another purely instrumental parameter to the quoted
variables. Hence, the first two terms
ofeqare the most
significant for the intensity of the bands addressing a relationship
between the intensity and the adopted laser. Moreover, the frequency
of scattered light depends on the frequency of the laser; hence, short-wavelength
excitations promote high-energy scattered frequencies. Nevertheless,
the choice of high-frequency lasers may complicate the analysis, causing
the molecules to transit from a “virtual” excited state
to an “actual” excited state, leading to unwanted laser-induced
fluorescence, indeed, as much as the laser’s energy, as likely
this event is. Hence, high-frequency (low-wavelength) lasers increase
the scattered light intensity and the probability of observing unwanted
fluorescence or even sample detriment. Hence, the choice of the input
laser mostly affects the sensitivity of the Raman instrument, even
though many technological solutions can be selected in the instrumental
setup.

A basic Raman spectrophotometer
comprises five components: an excitation source, a light collection
system, a monochromator, a detector, and a data processing system
(Figure).

Schematic blocks
diagram for a generic Raman Spectrophotometer.
A = vial with the water solution, B = laser source, mirror, C = optical
filter, D = spectrograph, E = detector, F = data processor, G = spectrum.

A Raman excitation source should feature a narrow
monochromatic
bandwidth and high power,making lasers as suitable
and convenient sources. The most common
laser output characteristics are the wavelength, the emission bandwidth
and monochromaticity, the spatial collimation, the output power, the
coherence and the polarization. The wavelength range extends from
the UV to the NIR and does not account for other more exotic systems
that provide access from the soft-X-ray spectral region (less than
10 nm) to the Far-Infrared Radiation (FIR) (more than 100 μm).
The lasing wavelength (herein called ν0) is determined
by the laser gain medium (for example He: Ne (Helium–Neon);
He–Cd (Helium–Cadmium); Ar (Argon); Nd: YAG (Neodinium-YAG,
with YAG is a crystal of Y3Al5O12)), which provides the optical transition. The wide range of wavelengths
is attributable to the large variety of available gain media. Furthermore,
nearly all laser wavelengths can be converted or shifted to an alternative
wavelength from UV to NIR spectral regions. The monochromator is used
to discriminate scattered light based on wavelength and is the most
characterizing component of a Raman spectrophotometer. Gratings and
multistage monochromators are often chosen for dispersive RS, while
the Michelson interferometer is considered for multiplexing not-dispersive
Fourier Transformer (FT) Raman spectrophotometer. Multiplexing is
a technique of “composition” and “decomposition”
of light components that allows sending multiple digital data flows
in a single signal using a single communication channel. However,
the overwhelming shot noise of the Rayleigh line over the weak Raman
lines requires removal of elastic light scattering. Effectively, the
noise redistribution characteristic of Fourier spectroscopy spreads
the overwhelming shot noise of the “Rayleigh line” over
the weak Raman lines and makes them unobservable since the equivalent stray light rejection of a shot-noise-limited
Michelson interferometer is of the order of 10–3instead of the needed and desirable 10–10. The
detector is the device for collecting signals from the spectrograph
and inputting data into the data processor. CCDs are mostly applied
in Raman instruments because of the extremely low Raman cross sections
of nonresonant molecules, hence an efficient signal-enhancement technique,
or long integrations using multichannel detection to have monolayer
sensitivity, is needed. A CCD detector
consists of a metal oxide semiconductor capacitor array on a thin
silicon substrate. CCDs exhibit high
sensitivity, low detection noise, multichannel array, and high quantum
efficiency. For better performance, a CCD needs to be cooled and a
liquid-nitrogen-cooled CCD detector affords high-quality multichannel
even in unenhanced Raman scattering spectra. Afterward, data compression
and noise removal actions should be included to improve the feasibility
of information from the data. Data processing involves the adjustment
of the baseline and the removal of eventual fluorescence; for example,
the correction of a set of data by subtracting a polynomial baseline
to model the fluorescence affording to the “clean” Raman
peaks is reported inFigure.

Removal of the fluorescence background in confocal Raman microspectroscopy.
(a) The raw Raman spectrum (black) shows fluorescence interference.
(b) Spectrum correction by a polynomial baseline to model the fluorescence
(red). (c) The corrected spectrum (violet) reveals the “clean”
Raman signals. Reproduced or adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2012, Elsevier.

This introductory discussion emphasizes that RS
involves weak signals
and that the instrumental configuration is essential for obtaining
a diagnostic spectrum. The low sensitivity can sometimes be addressed
through the use of powered lasers and extended acquisition times,
low-temperature CCDs, as well as by incorporating additional instrumental
components such as in SERS, which enhances Raman signals through molecule
absorption on rough metal or other material surfaces, or by utilizing
specialized optical fibers in the setup, as seen in FERS.

Some anions like
nitrate, nitrite, sulfates, chromate, cyanide, fluorides, and phosphates
are significant environmental concerns due to their potential for
bioaccumulation and harmful effects on living organisms. Furthermore, anions are regarded as water pollutants
that cause harmful effects such as eutrophication, which can ultimately
result in the death of aquatic organisms. Excessive exposure to nitrate and nitrite poses risks for human
health, because it causes the formation of highly carcinogenic species
like nitrosamines. Focusing on nitrate
detection in water, it is essential in various contexts, ranging from
natural and potable waters to industrial, urban, and agricultural
water source. Currently, various techniques
are employed for nitrate detection, including potentiometric, chromatographic,
atomic absorption, and colorimetric methods. Due to its inherent ability to simultaneously detect multiple species
in solution with sufficient resolution, RS can be a suitable technique
for nitrate detection. Nitrate is a polyoxoanion,
and its salts are highly soluble in water. Additionally, it exhibits
notable anisotropic molecular polarizability, which enables Raman
inelastic scattering through interaction with UV or visible laser
light. RS can serve as a valuable method
for water analysis due to its inherent ability to detect multiple
species simultaneously with sufficient resolution. Free nitrate adopts
a trigonal planar geometry, exhibitingD3hsymmetry. It comprises three equivalent N–O
bonds, each with partial double-bond character, and carries an excess
negative charge distributed over the oxygen atoms. The symmetry operations
corresponding to theD3hpoint group are listed in the character table describing the Raman active vibrational modes.

In an aqueous medium, nitrate exists as a free anion and is
likely
to form hydrogen bonds with water molecules; these interactions may
reduce the anion’s symmetry and partially suppress the Raman-active
symmetric vibrational modes. However,
the linear regression between the peak intensity for the scattered
symmetric vibrational mode, ν1, and the concentration
of the anion is the key point in quantitative analysis. Many approaches
have been explored to gather analytical information, primarily relying
on dynamic experiments and computational analysis of the results;
inFigurethe integrated
peak at 1046 cm–1is reported against the concentration
of the nitrate ion in g L–1. As an example, in NH4NO3, the anion–cation interactions have
been studied at different temperatures by RS. In the spectra the changes
occurring in the N–O deformation modes (symmetric and antisymmetric
stretching modes) have been attributed to the weakening of the heteroionic
coupling between the NH4and the NO3ions, and have been distinguished in the 2D synchronous
and asynchronous Raman spectra (Figure). The comparison of the results of both methods enhances
the analysis of complex Raman spectra, providing deeper insights into
molecular structures, interactions, and dynamics. The 2D synchronous
technique identifies coupled vibrations or interacting modes by revealing
correlated intensity changes by recording peaks varying simultaneously
across two dimensions.

(a) The Raman spectra
of Nitrate in its fingerprint region; the
baseline of the Raman spectra is first removed, and the spectra are
normalized by the max intensity related to the contribution of water;
(b) a plot showing the relationship between the peak intensity and
Nitrate concentration in mg/L.

Analysis
of low-frequency modes of ammonium nitrate Raman
peaks,
(a) deconvolution of various low-frequency modes of ammonium nitrate
at three different temperatures (a(1) 30 °C, a(2) 54.5 °C,
a(3) 80 °C), (b) temperature dependence of the intensity of various
low-frequency modes of Raman spectra of ammonium nitrate. Reproduced
or adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2021, Elsevier.

Therefore, examining the Raman peak intensity,
shape, and shift
position provides valuable information for detecting nitrate and understanding
its potential interactions with other system (water or cations, for
example). Biswas and Allen studied hydrated trivalent metal nitrate salts,
Fe­(NO3)3·9H2O and Al­(NO3)3·9H2O, in solution and the solid
state by Raman and surface selective vibrational Sum Frequency Generation
(SFG) spectroscopy. These techniques specifically probe vibrational
modes of molecules adsorbed on or near a surface. These methods enhance
signals from surface-bound species, allowing detailed investigation
of surface chemistry, adsorption processes, and interactions at interfaces.
The combination of the surface-specific and chemically sensitive technique
with the RS was used to shed light on ion–ion interactions
and hydration in several spectral regions spanning low frequency (440–550
cm–1) to higher frequency modes of nitrate and water
(720 cm–1and 1050 cm–1, 1250
cm–1to 1450 cm–1, and 2800 cm–1to 3750 cm–1). These frequencies
span the metal water mode, nitrate in-plane deformation and symmetric
and asymmetric modes, and the OH stretch of condensed phase water
molecules. As a result, the spectral results indicated a nonlinear
water solvation behavior for iron and aluminum nitrates, unlike the
linear solvation observed for sodium nitrate; the results are consistent
with different solvation behaviors controlled by the concentration. Furthermore, an additional challenge in Raman
detection of nitrate lies in its quantitative analysis, which can
be achieved through either direct or indirect approaches. Continuous research on Raman instrumental setup
is currently ongoing to compensate for the low sensitivity of the
Raman effect and to achieve easy sampling, fast, and reliable methods
for the quantification of nitrate, for example, in drinkable water
or natural water basins.,In this regard, technicians
deal with the fact that drinkable waters should contain nitrate in
a law limit that is around 10 mg L–1to 100 mg L–1, depending on the national legislation. Hence, Raman
instrumental setup should display a Limit of Detection (LOD) upper
to these values. The next section reports some RS based methods recently
applied for the nitrate analysis.

The early efforts to detect and quantify polluting
anions in water, such as nitrate species NO3, using RS were documented in
the late 1970s. Furuya et al. established
a linear detection range of 6 mg L–1to 100 mg L–1for nitrate ions by dissolving pure NaNO3in deionized water, achieving a LOD of 2 ppm. This high sensitivity
was achieved using a 488 nm laser source with a substantial output
power of 200 mW, combined with a relatively long acquisition time
(1–3 h per spectrum). Additionally, the authors successfully
detected and quantified NO3species in other aqueous matrices,
such as treated sewage wastewater, within a concentration range of
8 ppm to 32 ppm. These excellent performances were accomplished by
mitigating the intrinsic luminescence of the samples via the addition
of Potassium Iodide (KI) at a concentration of 5% w/w, which acted
as a luminescence quencher. Similarly, Fontana et al. achieved detection
and quantification of NO3species in a deionized water solution obtaining a
linear range in the 500 mg L–1to 5000 mg L–1, by using a Kaiser RXN1 Raman spectrometer with an
excitation source at 532 nm (Figure). Furthermore, the authors successfully identified NO3even in the presence of phosphates
and sulfates, because the characteristic NO3vibration, centered around 1046
cm–1, can be distinguished from the typical vibrations
of phosphates at 890 cm–1and sulfates at 982 cm–1. Quantitative analysis using RS often faces sensitivity-related
limitations; to overcome these challenges, a variety of instrumental
and chemical methods are employed. Jin
et al. showed the application of a selective
ion-exchange resin that significantly amplified the standard Raman
signal of NO3ions in aqueous solutions. This enhancement facilitated the detection
and quantification of nitrate species within the concentration range
of 5 mg L–1to 10 mg L–1, which
aligns with the permissible limits for drinkable water in the United
States. The incorporation of ion-exchange
resin significantly improved the LOD, reducing it from 500 mg L–1to 2 orders of magnitude lower, when compared to
the direct Raman detection of nitrate species in solution. Kauffmann
and colleagues employed RS combined with chemometric methods, including
principal component analysis, to identify various ions in aqueous
solutions, specifically sulfates, phosphates, chlorides, and nitrates. Additionally, they utilized Partial Least Squares
Regression (PLSR) to effectively estimate the concentrations of NO3within
a range of 10 mg L–1to 38.7 g L–1in a multicomponent solution, achieving optimal prediction accuracy
at a NO3concentration of 15 g L–1. The presence of different
ions in solution causes the Raman band’s shift of nitrate,
as evidenced inFigurefor solutions containing only nitrate, or nitrate and sulfate, or
nitrate, sulfate, and nitrite. Additionally, another strategy may
involve the use of high-energy laser sources. For example, Ianoul
et al. employed deep UV-resonant RS employing lasers with excitation
wavelengths at 229 or 204 nm to detect nitrates and nitrites simultaneously
in pure water, and real urban sludge samples after biological wastewater
treatment. The method achieved a LOD
of 14 μM (approximately 1 mg L–1for nitrates
and nitrites) and it demonstrated a linear intensity range corresponding
to concentrations from 14 μmol to 3.5 m mol (approximately 1
mg L–1to 220 mg L–1for nitrates
and nitrites) in pure water samples. Moreover, the authors conducted
direct quantification of both species in real urban sludge samples
(post-treatment), successfully quantifying nitrite at a concentration
of 0.3 m mol (14.8 mg L–1); in the analyzed samples,
the NO3species was not present as confirmed by using the Hach method. Consequently, the use of deep UV-resonant spectroscopy
allows the detection of nitrate and nitrite species (and possibly
other species), in pure water and real biologically treated samples,
because it is possible to enhance the signal intensities of the inorganic
species (by excitation at their resonance band) while minimizing fluorescence
interferences primarily caused by organic substances dissolved in
water. Additionally, the relatively short acquisition time of 10 min
renders this system potentially suitable for routine online and offline
monitoring of surface water samples.

Splitted
Raman spectra of aqueous salts solutions with the peaks
of the Raman active ions NO3, SO4and NO2around 1000 cm–1, recorded for solutions containing only nitrate, or nitrate and
sulfate, or nitrate, sulfate, and nitrite. Recorded by Horiba iHR320,
20 mW 532 nm laser, acquisition time 10 s, 5 accumulations.

In addition to instrumental
methods,
chemical–physical techniques such as SERS have been utilized
to improve detection (and quantification) limits in nitrate sensing.
In SERS RS, the strong electromagnetic field at the surface of metallic
nanoparticles due to plasmonic effects is used to magnify the weak
Raman cross-section. Mosier-Boss and
Lieberman utilized SERS with silver nanostructures coated by cationic
thiol-based organic ligands to detect and quantify nitrate ions in
aqueous solutions, achieving a LOD of approximately 10 mg L–1. However, applying this method to real-world samples is challenging
due to the presence of similarly sized and charged anions, such as
chloride ions. These anions can interact with the charged thiols,
displacing NO3ions and thereby reducing the sensitivity of the technique. Furthermore,
the sensitivity of this SERS approach is approximately 2 orders of
magnitude greater than that of conventional RS, which has an LOD of
260 ppm (260 mg L–1) when utilizing a near-infrared
laser source (785 nm). Moreover, a near-infrared laser source is advantageous
as it limits the luminescence interference in real-world samples.,Hu and colleagues employed a commercially
available gold nanostructured system known as Klarite, which consists
of gold nanoclusters deposited on a silicon substrate. This system
has been shown to serve as an effective SERS substrate for the detection
of nitrate ions. The researchers successfully identified NO3with a
LOD of 0.5 mg L–1, which is approximately 4 orders
of magnitude lower than conventional non-SERS Raman techniques. They
established a linear detection range from 1 to 10,000 mg L–1, facilitating the quantification of NO3in both water and wastewater
samples (water containing multiple species), with a percentage error
of 8.8%. This error margin is closely aligned with the error percentage
found by using standard ion chromatography (5.7% to 7.3%), and the
concentration values obtained with both techniques were consistent.
Furthermore, the analysis was completed in a total time of just 15
min, utilizing a near-infrared laser at 852 nm, which could be ideal
for analyzing real samples due to its nondestructive nature, in contrast
to ultraviolet lasers. In addition, a near-infrared laser source also
reduces the risk for interference from intrinsic fluorescence, particularly
relevant in real-world samples with high content of organic substances. Almaviva et al. have recently introduced a SERS method capable of detecting NO3in both
deionized and drinking water samples. Their approach contemplated
the use of a portable micro-Raman system, which was outfitted with
a Gallium Aluminum Arsenide (GaAlAs) diode laser operating at a wavelength
of 785 nm with a line width of less than 0.3 nm. The system operated
at a power of 150 mW with an acquisition time of merely 10 s for deionized
water samples, and at 210 mW with a 30 s acquisition time for drinking
water samples. The SERS technique involved incubating water samples
with gold nanoparticles at a concentration of 5 × 10–1mg L–1. Part of this mixture was then extracted
and deposited onto an inert aluminum substrate, which was allowed
to dry, thereby concentrating the samples (coffee ring effect). The
authors successfully detected [NO3] concentrations of 1 mg L–1in deionized water and 19 mg L–1in drinking water
(Figure). The higher
LOD observed in drinking water can be attributed to the presence of
competing anions that diminish the availability of SERS “hot
spots”, which are critical for the amplification of the NO3signal
and the overall sensitivity of the detection method for specific ions. This technique, nonetheless, enables the detection
of NO3ions at concentrations lower than the legal limits.

(a) Raman spectrum of ammonium nitrate crystal. Laser spot 40 μm,
laser power 150 mW, integration time 10 s (b) Raman spectrum of ammonium
nitrate in drinking water (20 mg L–1) by applying
the protocol of measurements involved scanning the ring-shaped residue
formed by the substance in a drop of water (coffee ring) after its
evaporation. The volume of the drops was between 2 and 5 μL,
with an evaporation time of 15–20 min (RT 20°) and a residual
coffee ring of 1–2 mm diameter. In the case of SERS measurements,
the drops were deposited in two different ways: (1) on planar, nanostructured
SERS substrates or (2) added with an aliquot of suspended gold nanoparticles
(Au-NPS), then deposited on the Al-covered microscope glass slide.
Laser spot 40 μm, laser power 300 mW, integration time 10 s.
Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons CC BY-4.0 from ref . Copyright 2022, MDPI.

The methods discussed so far utilize direct detection
of nitrate
species in solution, by exploring the characteristic Raman-active
bands. Additionally, other strategies integrate the increased sensitivity
provided by SERS with the selectivity achieved through specific reactions
that can identify a particular substance in solution. This approach
is especially advantageous for complex mixtures, such as those found
in real-world samples, including wastewater, drinking water, and water
treated for agricultural purposes. In this context, Correa-Duarte
et al. successfully detected and quantified
both nitrites (NO2) and nitrates (NO3) simultaneously present in real-world
samples (spring water, tap water, and plasma) by integrating a modified
classical Griess assay with SERS. The authors employed silver Nanoparticles
(NPs) functionalized with thiol groups, specifically 4-amino benzenethiol
(ABT), and 1-naphthylamine (AC) to react with the NO2species, resulting in
the formation of a stable aza-compound, subsequently identified using
Resonant Raman Spectroscopy (RSS). Since the (modified) Griess assay
detects specifically NO2with the NO3present in aqueous solutions, it was
quantified indirectly by running the experiments twice: once analyzing
directly the NO2and the second time by reducing all the NO3present in the sample using cadmium
pellets. The concentration of NO3was then calculated by subtracting
the NO2concentration obtained from the first experiment from the total
NO2concentration
measured in the second experiment. By illuminating the reaction products
at the resonance wavelength of the stable aza-compounds (512 nm),
they achieved remarkable sensitivity, with a Limit of Quantification
(LOQ) of 2 ng L–1, which is nearly 2 orders of magnitude
greater than the sensitivity obtained through standard ionic chromatography,
which served as a comparative benchmark. Using RS to detect and quantify nitrates in real samples, especially
following the characteristic nitrate signal around 1046 cm–1, faces considerable difficulties, particularly at low concentration
levels. This difficulty persists even with the employment of nanoparticles
and Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) techniques, primarily
due to the limited selectivity of gold or silver substrates. In this
context, Li et al. investigate a system
in which gold NPs (55 nm diameter) are decorated on their surfaces
with thiol-functionalized β-cyclodextrins. These modifications
enable the targeted encapsulation of Benzotriazole (BTAH), which is
the product resulting from the complete reaction (in an acidic environment)
ofo-phenylenediamine (ODP) with nitrites present
in an aqueous solution. SERS signal amplification is achieved when
all the BTAH formed is accommodated inside the cavities of thiol-modified
β-cyclodextrins. Calibration is performed by considering the
intensity of the typical Raman shifts of the BTAH species with different
concentrations of nitrite ions. By calibrating in deionized water
solutions, the authors found the detection limit at around 0.1 μmol
L–1and a linear range was achieved in the range
0.1 μmol L–1to 30 μmol L–1(0.06 mg L–1to 1.8 mg L–1)
concentrations in laboratory setup (Figuresand ). Finally,
after calibration, four kinds of real-world water samples, such as
tap water, aquaculture water in fish tanks (carp), aquaculture water
in land-based factories (grouper), and seawater, were prepared to
validate the present method.

Characterization of the detection process. (a)
SERS of OPD (100
μmol L–1); (b) SERS of NaNO3solutions
(10 μmol L–1); (c) SERS of NaNO2solutions (10 μmol L–1); (d) NRS of BTAH
derived from the reaction between the Nitrite ion and OPD; (e) SERS
of BTAH on AuNPs; (f) SERS of BTAH based on SH-β-CD@AuNPs. In
this latter spectrum, it is more noticeable Raman characteristic peaks
appeared in the SERS of BTAH after mixing with SH-β-CD@AuNPs.
Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons CC BY-4.0 from ref . Copyright 2024, MDPI.

SERS spectra of BTAH at different concentrations of nitrate
ions:
(a) 0.1, (b) 0.3, (c) 0.5, (d) 0.7, (e) 1, (f) 3, (g) 5, (h) 7, (i)
10, (j) 30, (k) 50 μmol L–1. Adapted with
permission under a Creative Commons CC BY-4.0 from ref . Copyright 2024, MDPI.

The authors found that they could quantify both
nitrite (and indirectly
the nitrate) concentration in all these real samples, obtaining statistically
very close results compared to standard spectrophotometric methods,
down to a concentration of 5 μmol (0.3 mg L–1) of NO3. Since the conversion from the substrate ODP to BTAH species is
achieved only when NO2(and not NO3) is present in the reaction mixture,
to find the NO3concentration, the experiment is performed twice, once analyzing
directly the nitrites contained in real samples, and once analyzing
the nitrites after the reduction of all nitrates present in solution
by reaction with VCl3(reductant). Then, the NO3concentration
is determined by subtracting the NO2concentrations obtained in the previous
experiments from those in the current set. In summary, the authors developed a highly sensitive and selective
method to quantify both nitrates and nitrites to a concentration down
to 5 μmol (0.3 mg L–1). However, the method
is not particularly fast because it involves the preparation of the
gold NPs grafted system and the reaction between ODP and nitrites
to obtain the SERS-active species BTAH. Furthermore, to quantify both
nitrites and nitrates, it is necessary to perform two sets of experiments,
in which in one of the (real) samples all the NO3are converted into NO2. The SERS
technique is suitable for submicron ambient aerosol particles if aided
with electrospray technical support. A new approach to measuring the
surface chemical compositions of atmospherically relevant particles
was based on surface-sensitive SERS RS by electrospraying Ag nanoparticle
aerosols over analyte particles. Spectral
features at υ­(SO4), υ­(C–H), and vibrational modes were
observed from the normal Raman and SERS measurements of laboratory-generated
supermicron particles of ammonium sulfate and ammonium nitrate mixed
with succinic acid or with sucrose. SERS measurements showed strong
interaction (or chemisorption) between Ag nanoparticles and surface
aqueous sulfate or nitrate. Enhanced spectra of the solid particles
revealed the formation of surface-adsorbed water on their surfaces
at 60% of relative humidity.

FERS
combines the unmatched analytical process of RS with the sophisticated
use of hollow-core optical fibers. Consequently, FERS is highly selective
and sensitive as a label-free, noninvasive, fast optical technique.
Hollow core photonic crystal fibers and metal-coated capillaries provide
enhancement based on the confinement of laser light. Unlike the SERS technique, a few works are dedicated to
nitrate detection. In a recent paper, the authors refer to a method based on FERS suitable for solution
analysis consisting of liquid-filled capillaries, enabling quantitative
measurement of polyatomic anions in solution. In this work, quantitative
measurement of nitrate concentrations in water was assessed by multivariate
analysis with partial least-squares regression, with a LOD of 8 mg
L–1for a measurement time of 30 s, by using FERS
in a TeflonAF 2400 capillary. Inside the optical fiber, the laser
beam goes in and out of the liquid-filled capillary. The measurement
parameters for the acquisition of Raman spectra for calibration and
quantitative analysis of nitrate solutions were determined by preliminary
characterization and testing of the setup by estimating the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) of the intensity of the Raman peak of nitrate ions at
1047 cm–1. The intensity of the Raman peak was extracted
from a fit to the Raman spectrum measured between 921 cm–1and 1950 cm–1. The peaks at 1047 cm–1(NO3) and that of water at 1637 cm–1(H–O–H
bending mode) were simulated and fitted. InFigurethe Raman spectrum of a solution of 11.74(5)
mM of NaNO3alongside the effect of mathematical elaborations
to remove noise and to adjust the baseline are reported. This Raman
method was compared with gravimetrically measured concentrations with
good agreement and reproducibility. The spectrum was subjected to
baseline corrections and deconvolution analysis, leading to a good
linear regression between the peak intensity and concentration. Moreover,
studies on the effect of laser power and signal-to-noise responses
have been correlated. A 10× magnification microscope objective
focuses the excitation laser into the capillary and gathers the backscattered
Raman light, which is then processed to analyze the Raman peaks.

(a)
Raman spectrum of a solution of 11.74(5) mM of NaNO3(black
line) with fit (red dashed line) and polynomial baseline
(green dotted line). Raman peaks of NO3at 1047 cm–1and water at 1637 cm–1(H–O–H bending
mode) are fitted with pseudo-Voigt profiles. A zoom-in on the Raman
peak of NO3after baseline removal is shown in (b) with a pseudo-Voigt fit (red
dashed line). Blue and gray arrowed lines illustrate noise and signal
amplitudes, respectively. Optical power at the sample was set at 0.85
m W. (c) Signal, noise, and calculated LOD for measurements of 11.74(5)
mM of NaNO3as a function of optical power at the sample.
Vertical error bars represent standard deviations estimated from three
measurements for each power level. Horizontal error bars correspond
to ±3% uncertainty of the power meter reading according to specifications.
Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons CC BY-4.0 from ref . Copyright 2021, MDPI.

Azkune et al. described a novel FERS platform based
on the use
of Hydrogel-Core microstructured Polymer Optical Fibers (HyC-mPOF)
the Hydrogel-Core microstructured Polymer Optical Fibers (HyC-mPOF). Sodium alginate was used for hydrogel formation,
due to its cross-linking capability with calcium cations to form stable
Ca-alginate hydrogel, allowing its complexation once the hollow core
of the fiber is filled. The hydrogel is inside the core of the Hollow-Core
microstructured Polymer Optical Fiber (HC-mPOF) (seeFigure) enabling FERS measurements
in a functionalized matrix, with high-selectivity Raman measurements.
The hydrogel is formed in three complex and delicate steps, and during
the Raman spectrum acquisition, the hydrogel formation was continuously
monitored and quantified using Principal Component Analysis to verify
the coherence between the components and the Raman spectrum of the
hydrogel. The study was applied to nickel nitrate detection, which
is highly affine for hydrogels or potassium ferricyanide, which is
less affine than nickel nitrate. Once the probes had the hydrogel
created within their cores, the lower end-faces of the probes were
immersed in different solutions for several hours, and Raman spectra
were recorded every 5 min. Nickel nitrate exhibits a prominent peak
near 1050 cm–1; by monitoring this peak during immersion
and relating its intensity to the solution’s concentration,
the nitrate measurement was achieved.

Cross-section microscope picture of the hydrogel-filled optical
fiber HC-mPOF microstructure. Adapted with permission under a Creative
Commons CC BY-4.0 from ref . Copyright 2021, MDPI.

Recently, ML- and Deep Learning (DL)-assisted RS is a field with
growing interest due to the ability of ML and DL algorithms to automatically
process the highly complex and dynamic Raman spectrum.−The adoption of ML and DL approaches relates to two tasks: classification
and regression. In the former, the output is discrete and categorical,
whereas for the latter, the output is continuous. An example can be
seen inFigure.

Example
of the two main tasks of ML and Deep Learning in Raman
spectroscopy.

In the field of Raman analysis,
the typical method
to recognize
the presence of specific analytes in the examined substrate involves
a laborious manual pattern matching with an existing database of the
wanted analyte. Thus, the requested expertise in RS is high, and there
are possibilities of erroneous reading of the spectra. ML is a solution
to the problem of objective recognition of substances because it can
be trained on large existing data sets of Raman spectra for automatic
recognition of substances.

The
classification algorithms in artificial intelligence applications
to RS are either ML or DL alternatives. ML algorithms are a common
choice as they are less complex and require a reduced training time,
compared to DL algorithms. On the other hand, they have limitations
due to the necessity of an intense preprocessing of the spectra to
obtain an adequate result. The preprocessing includes typically cosmic
ray removal, smoothing, and baseline correction, followed by feature
extraction and dimensionality reduction techniques, such as Principal
Component Analysis (PCA). The choice of a baseline correction increases
the complexity of the final algorithm. For this reason, DL is often
the preferred alternative to remove preprocessing. A DL algorithm
can take the raw spectra and learn the proper preprocessing and feature
extraction through a training process.

In this subsection, a brief technical
analysis of the typical and
most common ML and DL models applied in the RS field is proposed.
Starting from traditional ML, an explanation of Linear and Logistic
Regression (LR) because they are at the basis of the development of
the more complex deep learning models, such as multi-Layer Perceptrons
(MLP) and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which are thereafter
analyzed. For a more comprehensive analysis, the reader can check
the source material employed for the explanation.

Multilayer fully connected
neural networks, or multilayer perceptrons (MLP), are functions composed
of linear and nonlinear operations. The input is a feature vectorx(i)associated with a labely(i), which could be a discrete
class or a number. The basic operation of MLP is a single neuron,
which is a simple linear regression, followed by a nonlinear activation,
which could be potentially any function adding nonlinearity to the
operations. The aforementioned sigmoid function is an example of nonlinear
activation; however, the most typically employed function to add nonlinearity
in neural networks is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), which can
be formalized asf(x) = max­(x, 0), meaning that the negative values obtained from a
linear regression are set to zero. A schematized representation of
a single neuron can be viewed inFigure.

Single neuron; the input feature vector is
multiplied by weights
and a bias is added; the result is passed to a nonlinear ReLU activation
function.

The output of theNneurons can then be given
as input to another layer of neurons performing the same linear matrix
multiplication followed by a nonlinear activation, and this can be
repeated to a higher order of complexity. A schematized example can
be seen inFigure.

Deep Multilayer perceptron. The input feature vector passes through
L hidden layers withNlneurons each. As a visual simplification, the nonlinear activations
are not visible, but they are applied after each layer. Eventually,
an output layer with the desired dimension gives the results of the
neural network. If a classification is performed, the last values
go through a softmax activation layer.

The process by which the neural networks learn
the adequate weights
and biases to perform their basic operation is an optimization problem
where an objective function is minimized. The typical algorithm employed
for the optimization is the stochastic gradient descent coupled with
a backpropagation of error algorithm.

CNNs are composed of a series of convolutional
kernel operations that act as filters of the input raw data. The kernel
learns how to filter, preprocess, and extract the necessary features
to achieve the final task. A schematized representation of the convolutional
filter operation is inFigure.

Usually, the kernel blocks are followed by max-pooling
operations,
nonlinear activations, such as the aforementioned ReLU, and batch-normalization. The max-pooling operations downsample the output
by choosing, in a sliding window, that is smaller than the overall
output feature map, the highest value in that window.

Even though
CNNs were initially proposed to handle images, their
ability to capture local patterns can be translated to one-dimensional
input, such as in the case of Raman spectra, by using a one-dimensional
kernel. A schematized example of 1D-CNN can be seen inFigure.

Example of 1D CNN. The
red rectangle represents the convolutional
filters, usually followed by a max pooling operation to reduce the
dimensionality of the data and a nonlinear activation, such as a ReLU.

The recent trend is to employ one-dimensional
CNN as shown inFigureto process and
classify Raman spectra. One of the first efforts to introduce 1D-CNN
in the field of applied RS is given by the approach proposed by Liu
et al., where the DL approach is compared
to typical ML algorithms with improved performance for both baseline-corrected
and raw spectra on the RRUFF data set with top-5 accuracy as high as 96.3% over 1671 different classes
and top-1 accuracy of 88.4%.

Nevertheless, the deep learning
approach is data-driven and needs many examples to produce adequate
results. Consequently, it is not an easily accessible method for novel
fields that should start a massive data collection process. For example,
the RRUFF data set is one of the largest existing Raman data set with
5168 spectra and 1671 classes of minerals, therefore it is often used
to train and test 1D-CNNs with success,,but it is
the result of a multiyear project to which different university worldwide
are collaborating.

The issue of having a small data set is usually
solved by employing
transfer learning, data augmentation, or both. The topic of transfer
learning was deeply investigated in two recent reviews regarding ML
and deep learning approaches in applied RS.,Transfer learning in the field of deep learning can be broadly defined
as improving the capacity of a learner neural network by transferring
information from a related domain. Using
the taxonomy of a recent review on deep transfer learning, it is possible to distinguish three modalities
for network-based transfer learning as can be observed inFigure.

Transfer learning modalities. (a)
Freezing describes the transfer of pretrained model weights to a new
model where only the last classification/regression layers are trained
from scratch on the target domain. (b) Fine-tuning describes the process
of fine-tuning where all the pretrained model weights are updated
by training on the target domain to achieve better performance. (c)
Progressive learning describes the method of freezing a part of the
network to maintain important feature extractors and then adding new
layers trained from scratch on the target domain.

The great advantage of transfer learning is that
it is possible
to transfer knowledge acquired by a network over a large source domain
data set and pass it down to a novel task and target domain, solving
the issue of small examples in the target domain.

Synthetic
data set generation or data augmentation is another way
to address the challenge of data scarcity affecting this field. Synthetic
spectrum generation aims to build a data set from scratch, replicating
the common appearance of Raman spectra by producing a predetermined
pattern of Gaussian profiles with different heights, widths, and mean
wavelength corresponding to a class of analyte. Usually, this generation is employed to validate and benchmark
different model performances or to pretrain a model to recognize patterns
in a spectrum. Once a spectrum is generated, peak heights, widths,
and positions are slightly altered by introducing noise to replicate
the distortions caused by instrumental artifacts. Some alterations
could include adding a baseline, dark noise, and cosmic ray spikes. On the other hand, data augmentation is a technique
employed to increase the training data set size starting from known
spectra that are slightly altered to produce meaningful variations.
Common ways to augment training set size are the addition of noise,
slight wavelength and peak shifts, and summation of different spectra.

Regarding identification of Nitrates, Raman
spectrum analysis is
applied to two main studies,,where a 1d-CNN replicated
from and trained on the RRUFF data set
was fine-tuned on a small set of acquired spectra to improve the performance
of detection of many substances, including Nitrate. Even though the
typical preprocessing of Raman spectra can be avoided when using a
DL approach, both studies include a standard
processing pipeline with baseline correction, spectra smoothing using
the Whittaker-Henderson algorithm, cosmic ray spike removal, normalization
from 0 to 1, and removal of noisy spectra. Regarding the regression
of the concentration of nitrate, there is only one preprint study, showing the recency of the research line on
Nitrates’ concentration regression; the study employs SERS
and 2D-CNN to a bidimensional representation of spectra obtained by
relative position matrix combined with the normal one-dimensional
spectra processed by a Long–Short-term Memory.

Given
the recency and the limited amount of works on Nitrate detection and
quantification through Raman measurements and ML, there is still a
gap in the scientific literature concerning the possible steps to
perform to achieve either a classification or a regression. Thus,
we propose possible pipelines based on previous works in complementary
and similar fields that could be applied to Nitrate analysis. Before
using any learning algorithm, a data collection phase is necessary,
recording the examples needed to train, validate, and test the algorithm.
The data set, composed of the different spectra, should first be divided
into a training set, a validation set, and a test set. The training
set is composed of a collection of examples and their labels (e.g.,
class or concentration of a substance) that are given to the learning
algorithm to produce an adequate predictor with the optimal weights
and biases to minimize an objective function. Then, the validation
set is employed to tune the choices of hyperparameters, which can
be chosen by the user. They include the type of architecture, the
number of layers, the dimensions of the layers, and parameters such
as the learning rate and the number of iterations or epochs of update
during the optimization of weights. Eventually, a testing set composed
of spectra that are not seen by the learning algorithm and the user
is employed to produce generalized metrics on new, unseen data.

For what concerns the algorithms, a summarization of the possible
pipelines from the input raw Raman spectra to the wanted output is
presented inFigure.

For deep learning, the preprocessing steps are
optional and dependent
on the size of the training data set. Deep learning approaches can
potentially be trained to implement all the steps from the preprocessing
to the feature extraction and final classification or regression.
For machine learning, the complexity of the spectra should first be
reduced with a preprocessing method, including baseline correction,
normalization, and smoothing; then, the high dimensionality of the
spectra should be reduced with a feature extraction step, which could
include a crop to highlight certain regions of the spectra (e.g.,
the fingerprint region of the Nitrate), a Principal Component Analysis
and a feature engineering step; eventually, a machine learning model
can be chosen to maximize the performance of classification and/or
regression.

Performance
of ML and DL with increasing amount of data in the
training set. Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons CC
BY-4.0 from ref . Copyright 2019, MDPI.

DL could be an option
if the data set is larger,
having the advantage
of a reduction or absence of preprocessing steps. On the other hand,
more complex architectures need greater computational resources for
both the training phase and the deployment phase, leading to possible
concerns when aiming for real-time processing of the spectra. Moreover,
the interpretability of DL techniques is usually limited to the visualization
of heatmaps of activation layers.

This review considers
the case study of nitrate detection and concentration
measurement in water by RS. A general description of RS features this
technique with the following remarkable key bullets: it is a light
scattering technique with scatters related to molecular vibrational
modes, is generally poorly sensitive, gives highly resolved spectra,
is sensitive to fine structural molecular changes, is suitable for
aqueous samples, needs easy sampling, affords nondestructive analysis,
displays wide versatility, exhibits many applications by infinite
instrumental components matches, applies from micro to macro analysis,
measures through transparent containers allowing flow analysis. Remarkably,
the intensity of the scattered light strongly depends on both the
power and wavelength of the laser, the light path thickness, and the
molecular cross-section, hinting linear correlation between the intensity
and the concentration. The symmetric vibrational mode of nitrate anion
is Raman active and is detected by this technique. Besides, in situ
water analysis, flow water analysis, or prompt analysis by handling
instruments in sudden situations are current targets in the research
of innovative methods for detecting and measuring nitrate (or other
pollutants) in aqueous matrices. In this review, some RS instrumental
setups aimed to enhance the sensitivity of the Raman technique in
nitrate detection are described. TheTablereports a list of the main papers herein
discussed, the results in terms of LOD and LOQ, and brief notes of
the technical setups.

In general, the proposed solutions
display good sensitivity,
ranging
from a few to hundreds of mg L–1. The main strategies
to increase the nitrate signal intensity are based on (i) pretreatment
of the sample to enrich the nitrate concentration by, for example,
ion-exchange chromatography, (ii) selection of low wavelength lasers,
(iii) usage of high-power lasers (iv) increase of the acquisition
time until hours, (v) application of surface materials acting as signal
enhancers SERS and/or (vi) of special instrumental assemblies using,
for example, specialized optical FERS, (vii) chemical quenching of
fluorescence. So far, the best results in terms of detection sensitivity
and peak intensity/concentration linear regression are represented
by those cases matching high-energy UV laser and Resonant Raman spectroscopy
(UVRRS) or Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. For these latter,
linear relationships between peak intensities and concentration were
found both in laboratory tests and even in wastewater sludges. Unfortunately,
using UV excitation, an increase in Raman signal intensity can be
achieved with shorter acquisition times, but molecules excited by
UV laser light frequently emit fluorescence that far surpasses the
Raman signal. However, the hardware of a UVRS instrument requires
expensive special optics and fibers suitable for this high-energy
light, downgrading this choice. In the last part of the review, the
aid of computational AI methods in data processing has been considered
too. ML methods have been taken into consideration. Beyond the classic
data processing (baseline correction, noise removal, smoothing), data
classifications or regression operations by ML might be useful to
refine sets of data or to obtain indirect parameters such as concentration,
respectively. This field of research has just opened; few works have
been dedicated to the applications of these methods in Raman spectroscopy,
and just one has been dedicated to the classification analysis of
minerals with nitrate anion. A significant challenge in applying these
methods appears to be the availability of large data sets and the
selection of appropriate algorithms. However, considering the substantial
potential of ML techniques, optimizing the signal-to-noise ratio in
remote sensing responses for nitrate analysis seems to be a promising
strategy that could be extended to other analytes as well.

The various technical approaches outlined
above demonstrate that
a broad range of analytical methods exists for detecting nitrate ions,
leveraging the combination of instrumental techniques with chemometric
methods and/or chemical treatments to eliminate any interfering effects.
Indeed, even when focusing on a single analyte, such as the nitrate
ion, remote sensing does not lead to a narrow set of solutions but
rather reveals a wide range of possibilities, each with its own value
and scope for analysis. In this context, ML techniquesboth
for classification and as “intelligent” tools for processing
output datacan add significant value to Raman spectroscopy-based
analysis. First, it has been shown that ML can more effectively extract
meaningful information from spectral data, opening new avenues for
analytical science and consolidating dispersed data related to a specific
analyte into a valuable knowledge base accessible to many. Second,
by leveraging existing data, ML can enhance the processing of Raman
signals, thereby improving detection capabilities. To achieve this,
large Raman data sets are necessary to train the ML models effectively.

This work was partially supported
by the Italian
Ministry for Enterprise and Made in ItalyDM 31/12/2021 and
Agreements for Innovation 16/11/2023, Project “AAIWAS: Application
of Artificial Intelligence to the Water and Air quality Sensing”F/350142/01-03/X60,
CUP (UNIVPM): B39J24000570005 and CUP (UNICAM): B19J24000430005.

CRediT:Lorenzo Lucianiconceptualization, data curation, writing
- original draft;Antonio Noceraconceptualization, data
curation, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing;Michela Raimondidata curation, software;Gianluca Ciattagliaconceptualization, data curation;Susanna Spinsanteconceptualization;Ennio Gambiconceptualization, funding
acquisition, project administration, writing - original draft, writing
- review & editing;Rossana Galassiconceptualization,
data curation, funding acquisition, project administration, writing
- original draft, writing - review & editing.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.