To investigate the clinical and computed tomography (CT) features of nodular pulmonary amyloidosis (NPA) to enhance our understanding of the disease and improve the ability to differentiate it from other similar conditions.

A retrospective analysis was conducted on the clinical data, chest CT imaging findings, and pathologic characteristics of 13 patients with NPA in our hospital from April 2014 to April 2024. All 13 patients underwent chest CT plain scan examination. The basic data, medical history, clinical manifestations, and lung lesion features on chest CT imaging were analyzed and summarized.

Among the 13 patients, there were 3 males (23.08%) and 10 females (76.92%). Their ages ranged from 37 to 68 years, with a mean age of (57.85±8.40) years and a median age of 59 years. Three (23.08%) patients had cough and sputum, while the others (76.92%) had no clinical symptoms. Before surgery, 6 patients underwent chest CT scans, and NPA changes in size, shape, and density were observed. Six cases (46.15%) were located in the left lung (4 in the upper lobe and 2 in the lower lobe), and 7 cases (53.85%) in the right lung (3 in the upper lobe, 2 in the middle lobe, and 2 in the lower lobe). Seven cases (53.85%) of NPA were round or oval, while 6 cases (46.15%) were irregularly shaped. Out of the NPA cases, 11 (84.62%) were solid nodules with well-defined boundaries, including 2 cases of solid nodules with surrounding calcification. In addition, 2 cases presented as solid nodules with cavities. Ten cases (76.92%) had multiple cystic lesions in the bilateral lungs, in which 7 cases had more than 10 cysts with obvious cyst walls, and 1 case showed a solid nodule on the cyst wall. During the postoperative follow-up, 1 patient experienced an increase in the size of the original nodule and the appearance of new solid nodules. Subsequent surgery revealed mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma (MALT). The remaining patients were followed up regularly, and their conditions remained stable.

NPA is more common in middle-aged and elderly people and is more likely to occur in women. Most cases are asymptomatic, and bilateral lungs can be involved. For nodules with multiple pulmonary cysts found by chest CT, the possibility of NPA should be considered, and further histopathologic examination is needed to confirm the diagnosis. Most patients with NPA have a good long-term prognosis after surgical resection, but some patients require further investigation and close follow-up due to underlying causes.

With the widespread use of chest CT examination, the screening for pulmonary nodules has been further improved, and some rare case reports have gradually increased. Nodular pulmonary amyloidosis (NPA)1is a rare disease in which an amyloid substance composed of polysaccharide and protein deposits in the lungs and forms nodules or masses. The cause of the disease is currently unclear, and the clinical symptoms and imaging lack specificity. To our knowledge, NPA is often misdiagnosed, and there are only case reports, with no systematic in-depth research and summary. Herein, this paper reports 13 cases of NPA treated by surgery in our hospital and reviews related literature. It describes the clinical data, CT manifestations, and pathologic characteristics of the disease to improve the recognition of this disease by clinicians, pathologists, and radiologists.

The clinicopathological and CT data of 13 patients with NPA through surgical pathology were collected in our hospital from April 2014 to April 2024. Chest CT examinations were performed in all patients, and their findings were retrospectively summarized in this study, which received approval from the Ethics Committee of our hospital. Informed patient consent was waived.

The CT examinations were conducted using a 128-row CT scanner (Somatom Definition Flash, Siemens Healthcare, Forchheim, Germany) with the following parameters: tube voltage set at 120 kV, tube current at 163 mAs, slice thickness of 5.0 mm, slice interval of 5.0 mm, image matrix: 512×512, pitch: 1.2, and rotation time: 0.5 s. All scans were performed at the end of inhalation and breath-holding, with a scan range from the supraclavicular fossa to the level of the lung bases. The original data obtained from the scanning were reconstructed in transverse, sagittal, and coronal planes with a slice thickness of 0.6 mm and an increment of 0.6 mm, adjusted to appropriate window levels for the lung parenchyma (window width: 1600 HU, window level: −600 HU) or the mediastinum (window width: 360 HU, window level: 60 HU), respectively. All patients underwent preoperative non-enhanced CT scans.

The images of the enrolled patients were jointly reviewed by 2 radiologists with 8 and 10 years of experience in chest imaging diagnosis. In case of discrepancies in image findings, a radiologist with 20 years of experience in chest imaging diagnosis made the final determination. The analysis of lesion imaging includes location (lung lobe), nodule types, maximum diameter, morphology (round-shaped, irregular), border (clear, blurred), internal signs (calcification, cavity), and accompanying signs.

The electronic medical records were reviewed and the patient’s age, gender, smoking history, relevant clinical symptoms, coexisting conditions, surgical procedure, and laboratory and physical examinations were documented. In addition, preoperative and postoperative follow-up times were recorded.

All data analysis in this research was performed with SPSS (version 25.0; IBM Corp Armonk, NY). Quantitative variables such as age, maximum tumor diameter, preoperative and postoperative follow-up time were expressed as the means±SD, median, and ranges. Qualitative variables, including sex, smoking history, coexisting conditions, surgical procedure, and CT features, were described with counts and percentages.

Among the 13 patients with NPA in this group, there were 3 males (23.08%) and 10 females (76.92%). Their ages ranged from 37 to 68 years, with a mean age of (57.85±8.40) years and a median age of 59 years.

Three (23.08%) patients had intermittent cough and sputum, while the others (76.92%) had no clinical symptoms. All 9 patients underwent chest CT follow-up before surgery, with a median follow-up time of 12 months. Among them, 6 cases of NPA showed increased volume, irregular shape, and increased density of solid components. Three cases showed no significant changes. Three patients were diagnosed with Sjogren’s syndrome (36 to 180 months) before NPA was identified. The preoperative examination of 1 patient showed syphilis infection without related symptoms, which was considered as latent syphilis. CT scan of 3 patients indicated that in addition to NPA, there were also hamartoma, adenocarcinoma in situ, and pulmonary bullae in the lungs, and they all underwent a thoracoscope surgery resection together with the NPA. Only 2 patients (15.38%) had a history of smoking (Table1).

Data are presented as the mean±SD [range], median, or number (%).

Preoperative follow-up results were not available in 4 of 13 subjects.

Preoperative and postoperative follow-up time are expressed in months follow-up time.

Postoperation follow-up results were not available in 1 of 13 subjects.

In all NPA patients, 6 cases (46.15%) were located in the left lung (4 cases in the upper lobe and 2 cases in the lower lobe), while 7 cases (53.85%) were located in the right lung (3 cases in the upper lobe, 2 cases in the middle lobe, and 2 cases in the lower lobe). The maximum diameter of NPA ranged from 7 to 33 mm, with an average of 15.54±8.05 mm. Out of the 13 cases, 7 (53.85%) were round or oval, while the remaining 6 cases (46.15%) were irregular. In 1 case (7.69%), the lesion boundary was fuzzy, and the remaining 12 cases (92.31%) had clear boundaries. Nine (69.23%) cases showed complete solid nodules, 2 (15.38%) cases showed solid nodules with calcification, and 2 (15.38%) cases showed solid nodules with cavity. Ten cases (76.92%) were accompanied by multiple cystic lesions in bilateral lungs, among which 7 cases had more than 10 cysts with obvious cystic walls, and 1 case had obvious solid nodules in the cyst wall. One case (7.69%) had no cysts but multiple calcified nodules scattered in the lung. Two (15.38%) cases presented as solitary solid nodules in the lung (Figs.1–6).

A 68-year-old female presented with intermittent cough and expectoration for more than 3 years, and chest CT showed pulmonary nodule for 2 years. In June 2018, a chest CT showed an irregular solid nodule with a cavity in the medial segment of the right middle lobe of the lung, with indistinct border and a longest diameter of 18mm (white arrow, A). In June 2020, the nodule was found to have enlarged compared with the previous examination, with the longest diameter of 26 mm, as well as increased density (white arrow, B). A thoracoscopic lung lobectomy was performed, and HE staining showed nodular amyloidosis (original magnification 200×) (C).

A 66-year-old female patient was diagnosed with pulmonary nodule by physical examination for 1 month. The lung window of the chest CT showed an irregular, lobulated, well-circumscribed solid nodule, approximately 12 mm in longest diameter, in the apical segment of the right upper lobe near the mediastinal pleura (white arrow, A). The mediastinal window showed a slightly smaller lesion than the lung window, and no calcification density was seen within the lesion (white arrow, B). A thoracoscopic wedge resection of the lung was performed, and HE staining showed nodular amyloidosis (original magnification ×200) (C), Congo red staining (+) (×100) (D).

A 65-year-old male presented with pulmonary nodules on physical examination 1 week earlier. In November 2021, chest CT showed a classically round solid nodule in the upper lobe of the left lung, with clear border and a longest diameter of about 13 mm (white arrow, A). A wedge resection was performed using a thoracoscope, and HE staining showed nodular amyloidosis (original magnification x200) (B). In November 2021, a chest CT image showed a solid nodule in the anterior segment of the right upper lobe, with a longest diameter of about 4 mm, which was not treated at the time (white arrow, C). After 18 months, a subsequent chest CT scan revealed an increase in the size of the nodule located in the anterior segment of the right lung, measuring approximately 9 mm in its longest diameter (white arrow, D). In addition, there was a new solid nodule found in the medial segment of the right middle lobe (white arrow, F), while the cystic cavity in the anterior basal segment of the right lower lobe remains unchanged (white arrow, E and F). Both nodules were treated with wedge resection under thoracoscopy, and postoperative pathology showed that they were MALT.

A 59-year-old female patient was diagnosed with pulmonary nodules by physical examination for 15 months. The chest CT shows multiple cystic lesions in both lungs and irregular solid nodules can be seen in the lower lobe of bilateral lungs, with clear boundaries (white arrow, A and B). The nodules are closely related to the cystic lesions, and the nodule in the lower lobe of the right lung is larger, with the longest diameter of about 16 mm. A wedge resection was performed using a thoracoscope, and HE staining showed nodular amyloidosis (original magnification x200) (C).

A 59-year-old female patient was diagnosed with pulmonary nodule by physical examination for 12 months. The chest CT showed an irregular, lobulated, well-defined, solid nodule in the anterior segment of the right upper lobe with a maximum diameter of approximately 13 mm(white arrow, A). A wedge resection was performed using a thoracoscope, and HE staining showed nodular amyloidosis (original magnification ×100, ×200) (B and C), Congo red staining (+) (original magnification ×100) (D).

A 59-year-old female patient was diagnosed with pulmonary nodule by physical examination for 18 months. The chest CT showed an irregular solid nodule with cystic formation in the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe of the lung, with a clear boundary (white arrow, A). The longest diameter of the solid part is about 14 mm, and it grows in a lobulated manner. A wedge resection of the lung was performed by thoracoscope, and HE staining showed nodular amyloidosis (original magnification ×200, ×100) (B and C), Congo red staining (+) (original magnification ×100) (D).

All 13 cases of NPA had a preoperative misdiagnosis on CT. The preoperative imaging diagnosis was 1 case of inflammatory granuloma, with 3 cases being unclear and 9 cases of malignancy (Table2).

Data are presented as the mean±SD [range] or number (%).

All 13 cases of NPA showed no malignant cells under light microscopy. In 13 cases, amyloid nodules were found in lung tissue with localized, amorphous, red-stained material. Congo red staining was positive. No immunoglobulin gene rearrangement was detected, and EBER in situ hybridization was negative.

During the postoperative follow-up process, 1 patient died (the specific cause and time remained unknown), and the remaining patients were followed up for a period ranging from 1 to 57 months, with a median follow-up time of 18 months. One patient underwent a chest CT examination 18 months after surgery, and it was found that the size of the right upper lobe anterior segment paratracheal nodule had increased, with the longest diameter increasing from 4 mm to 9 mm. In addition, a new solid nodule was discovered in the inner segment of the right middle lobe, with a longest diameter of 13 mm. Subsequently, he underwent a thoracoscopic wedge resection of the right upper lobe and middle lobe, and the pathologic examination diagnosed the 2 nodules as MALT. The remaining patients were followed up regularly and showed stable conditions.

Amyloidosis is a metabolic disorder in which abnormal fibrous structures of proteins deposit outside the extracellular matrix, affecting target organs locally or diffusely, leading to related pathologic changes with a low incidence rate and no specific symptoms.2These proteins react with iodine or sulfuric acid in a way similar to starch, hence it was named amyloidosis. Amyloidosis can affect virtually every organ in the body, with localized amyloidosis affecting only a single organ (10% to 20%) and systemic amyloidosis affecting multiple organs (80% to 90%). The prevalence of systemic amyloidosis is 14 cases per 100,000 individuals, whereas localized amyloidosis is exceedingly rare, and its prevalence remains unknown. 50% of amyloidosis affects the respiratory tract, with pulmonary amyloidosis having 3 forms: nodular amyloidosis, diffuse interstitial amyloidosis, and tracheobronchial amyloidosis.3Among them, NPA is even rarer.4Its pathogenesis may be caused by air obstruction and deposition of amyloid protein, leading to ischemic necrosis of the alveolar wall.5The clinical and imaging manifestations of this disease are diverse and often nonspecific, making the diagnosis of NPA a challenge for clinicians, pathologists, and radiologists.

NPA can occur at any age, with an average age of 67 years, with a male-to-female ratio of 3:2, and most patients have no obvious clinical symptoms. They are often discovered incidentally during CT screening or the detection of other diseases. Only a few cases are accompanied by symptoms such as coughing and producing sputum.8In this group of patients, the age ranged from 37 to 68 years, with a median age of 59 years, and women were the majority. Most patients had no history of smoking. In this study, all 10 patients were found by physical examination, and 1 of them was found accidentally during a chest CT examination in the hospital due to leucopenia caused by Sjogren’s syndrome. The other 3 patients had respiratory symptoms such as cough and sputum. In this study, 3 patients had reduced lung diffusion function, 3 patients had mild obstructive ventilation dysfunction, and 1 patient had ventilation-diffusion dysfunction. Eight patients had mild elevations in tumor markers, including neuron-specific enolase (NSE), ferritin, and cytokeratin 19 fragments. All of the patients had normal electrocardiograms before surgery. There is no mention of these tests being of any guidance value in previous literature.

Amyloidosis can be primary, but it is more commonly seen as a secondary condition resulting from a wide range of pathologic processes, from chronic infections to malignant tumors.9There have been case reports of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma, Sjogren’s syndrome, and syphilis infection associated with NPA in previous studies.10–12Grogg13followed up on 18 patients with NPA and found that 5 of them developed pulmonary or other site amyloidosis again, and 2 developed Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type lymphoma (MALT), suggesting a relationship between NPA and indolent B-cell lymphoma. It is worth noting that low-grade lymphoma can coexist with amyloidosis, which is prone to misdiagnosis, and immunohistochemical staining and gene rearrangement methods should be used to confirm the diagnosis. The presence of NPA should raise suspicion of underlying or concurrent lymphoma. In this study, 1 patient had an 18-month follow-up chest CT after NPA surgery, showing that the original lung nodule had enlarged and a new solid nodule had emerged. A thoracoscopic secondary surgery was performed, and the postoperative pathologic results were diagnosed as MALT, suggesting that the disease had progressed and transformed into a lymphoid proliferative disease. For patients with a history of Sjogren’s syndrome and syphilis, it is possible that they may produce structural abnormalities due to chronic inflammation and various antigen stimulation of immune cells, such as excessive normal immunoglobulin beyond the body’s self-elimination function, granules secreted by macrophages for translocation to the extracellular accumulation or disintegration and local deposition, thereby forming amyloid nodules. In this study, 3 patients had a history of Sjogren’s syndrome, and all patients were diagnosed with lung NPA after the diagnosis of Sjogren’s syndrome. After a period of follow-up, 2 of the lesions showed a trend of growth, and then surgery was performed. One patient with positive syphilis antibody was diagnosed with lung nodule on physical examination and followed up for 15 months, showing an enlargement of the NPA, and then underwent surgery. Therefore, the discovery of NPA may suggest a specific cause and help inform further testing.

Currently, there are few imaging reports on NPA, most of which are case reports. The imaging summary of the 13 cases of NPA in this study indicates that all lobes in bilateral lungs can be involved. In the literature,14the reported range of NPA varies from 0.5 cm to 15.0 cm; however, in this study, we observed relatively small lesion volumes with a maximum diameter ranging from 7 mm to 33 mm and an average value of (15.54±8.05) mm. The authors suggest that this phenomenon can be attributed to the widespread adoption of chest CT scanning and increased patient awareness of pulmonary nodule screening, resulting in earlier detection of NPA. NPA often presents as a well-defined round or oval solid nodule but may also be irregular in shape. Only 2 patients had peripheral calcification, which is not consistent with the 50% of cases reported in the literature.15A few lesions have cavities, with the edges and surrounding pulmonary fields often containing multiple cystic lesions with obvious cystic walls. Some of the cysts have solid wall nodules forming. The presence of a cavity within the lesion and around the edges or in the pulmonary fields may be attributed to the deposition of amyloid material, which destroys the integrity of the alveolar wall. In addition, inflammatory cells infiltrate into the small airways, causing stenosis and subsequently forming a one-way valve effect.16In this study, 2 cases had internal cavity formation, 10 cases had cystic cavities in the lung, 7 cases had more than 10 cystic cavities with obvious cystic wall, and 1 case had an obvious solid nodule in the cyst wall. The authors believe that the presence of pulmonary nodules with cystic lesions is a specific sign of NPA, which is of great significance for the diagnosis of NPA.

There are several limitations in this study. First, all patients did not undergo bone marrow aspiration, renal biopsy, and comprehensive systematic hematology and rheumatology to rule out systemic amyloidosis or other potential causes. Second, this study is a single-center retrospective study with a small sample size, so it is necessary to accumulate cases for observation, further collect data and postoperative follow-up, and conduct a prospective study.

In conclusion, NPA is more common in middle-aged and elderly people and is more likely to occur in women. Most cases are asymptomatic, and bilateral lungs can be involved. For nodules with multiple pulmonary cysts found by chest CT, the possibility of NPA should be considered, and further histopathologic examination is needed to confirm the diagnosis. Most patients with NPA have a good long-term prognosis after surgical resection, but some patients require further investigation and close follow-up due to underlying causes.