Psychological resilience is defined as an individual's ability to utilize strategies to cope with and grow because of stress or adversity; it is an individual's subjective belief about the amount of control he or she has over the environment or outcome. This study aimed to investigate the association between resilience, perceived control, and intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines among healthcare students, using the knowledge of the COVID‐19 vaccine and infection‐preventive behaviors as a mediating role.

We conducted a cross‐sectional study through an online survey when the fourth wave of vaccinations started in Japan in 2022. The participants were nursing undergraduate and graduate students, and healthcare graduate students who had received at least one vaccine at four universities. Hayes' SPSS PROCESS and structured equation modeling were used for the analyses.

The data of 1139 students were used for the analyses. Direct effect from resilience to intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines accounted for 67.3%, indirect effect via knowledge accounted for 19.4%, and preventive behaviors accounted for 12.2% of total effects. Direct effect from perceived control accounted for 43.5%, indirect effect via knowledge accounted for 4.8%, and preventive behaviors accounted for 51.6% of the total effect.

The resilience of healthcare students plays a significant role both directly and indirectly in increasing their intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines, by increasing knowledge of vaccines and increasing infection‐preventive behaviors. Perceived control is also important in having higher preventive behaviors, which were associated with higher intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines.

Vaccinations prevent 2–3 million deaths per year, and an additional 1.5 million deaths can be avoided if the global coverage of vaccinations is improved (World Health Organization,2023). Vaccination played a great role in controlling COVID‐19. On May 5, 2023, the World Health Organization declared that the COVID‐19 pandemic is no longer a global health emergency; however, it does not mean COVID‐19 is not a global health threat. New cases are still being reported in 2025 (World Health Organization,2025). Vaccine hesitancy is the reluctance or refusal to be vaccinated despite the availability of vaccines. Vaccine hesitancy is strongly negatively related to vaccine uptake (Kimhi et al.,2022). Lazarus et al. (2022) reported that country vaccination rates negatively correlate with vaccine hesitancy. Vaccine hesitancy was defined as having reported “no” for the question about if they received at least one dose of a COVID‐19 vaccine and “unsure/no opinion,” “somewhat disagree,” or “strongly disagree” for the question about if they would receive a COVID‐19 vaccine when it is available (Lazarus et al.,2022). Vaccine hesitancy is related to a lack of trust in COVID‐19 vaccine safety and to science and skepticism regarding its efficacy across all countries (Lazarus et al.,2022). Unwillingness to accept influenza shots was also closely related to COVID‐19 vaccine hesitancy (McCready et al.,2023). Other pandemics and similar infectious diseases can occur in the future. Therefore, it is always important to prepare for infection prevention.

Asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic healthcare workers are likely vectors of the virus, which spreads the infection to clinically vulnerable patients, elderly people, family members, and coworkers, thereby increasing active infections (Asad et al.,2020), and healthcare students who have clinical practice also belong to the young age groups who are contracting new infections (de Miguel‐Arribas et al.,2022). Nevertheless, previous studies have identified healthcare workers and students as subgroups with significant hesitancy to accept the COVID‐19 vaccine (Biswas et al.,2021). Therefore, understanding the factors that lead to vaccination hesitancy and implementing effective strategies to address this issue will help reduce infection transmission, increase vaccination uptake in the general population, and ensure safety.

According to an umbrella review among healthcare students worldwide (McCready et al.,2023), factors related to COVID‐19 vaccine hesitancy are vaccine‐related factors (worries and concerns about adverse side effects, safety and effectiveness or efficacy of the vaccine, price, and perceived benefits), insufficient information (insufficient information about the vaccine, side effects, and COVID‐19 information from social media), health factors (previously infected with COVID‐19, perceived good health status, prior hesitancy toward other vaccinations, and use of alternative medicine), sociodemographic factors (female, black/African American ethnicity, young age, low socioeconomic status, geographical location/country, and marital status), education factors (dental students, nonmedical students, low school years, and place of residence), lower levels of trust in social actors (government, mass media, social media, healthcare systems/agencies, public health experts, health promotion strategies, scientists, and pharmaceutical companies), belief factors (perceived low risk and perceived low concern about COVID‐19 infection and death, general opposition toward vaccination, conspiracy beliefs, and perceptions of barriers), and social factors (no close social network of infection, no family members vaccinated, and no social distancing from friends during pandemic isolation).

Psychological factors play a vital role in dealing with pandemics. Psychological resilience is defined as an individual's ability to utilize strategies to cope with and grow because of stress or adversity (Gillman et al.,2015; Tugade & Fredrickson,2004). Resilience is a measure of stress‐coping ability and an important target for treating anxiety, depression, and stress reactions (Connor & Davidson,2003). During the COVID‐19 pandemic, among healthcare workers in China, higher resilience was associated both directly and indirectly with higher intention to receive a COVID‐19 vaccination: indirectly through two mediators (higher life satisfaction and lower stigma and higher life satisfaction) (Mo et al.,2022). Mo et al.'s question was “If the government provides free vaccination services in the first six months of the COVID‐19 vaccine in China, how likely are you to be vaccinated if the vaccine is shown to have 80% effectiveness?” Among Muslims in Malaysia, resilience was positively associated with vaccination attitudes, and resilience weakened the negative association between conspiracy beliefs and vaccination attitudes (Rosli et al.,2022). In Israel, low levels of societal and individual resilience were associated with vaccine hesitancy among the general population (Kimhi et al.,2022). Participants who received at least one dose of vaccination varied from less than 30% (Rosli et al.,2022) to nearly 90% (Kimhi et al.,2022) in these studies.

Perceived control is defined as “an individual's subjective belief about the amount of control he or she has over the environment or outcome.” Conversely, “actual control describes the objective amount of control the individual has over the environment or outcome” (Villarreal & Heckhausen,2017) (p. 254). Studies have reported that perceived control is an important predictor of infection‐prevention behaviors (Abuliezi et al.,2022; Goodwin et al.,2021; Ștefan et al.,2021). Infection‐prevention behaviors are health behaviors that aim to prevent COVID‐19 infection (e.g., wearing a mask in public and avoiding crowded, closed, and close‐contact settings) (Abuliezi et al.,2022). Healthcare students who had less frequent infection‐preventive behaviors were not receiving the third or more vaccines in Japan (Kondo, Abuliezi, Ota, et al.,2023). However, the association between perceived control and intention to receive a booster COVID‐19 vaccine among adults who had already received the COVID‐19 vaccine in Egypt was not significant (El Tantawi et al.,2024).

The major factors of COVID‐19 vaccine hesitancy were insufficient information about vaccines and concerns about their adverse side effects. Higher levels of both resilience and perceived control were associated with higher knowledge of COVID‐19 and its vaccine and higher infection‐preventive behaviors among healthcare students; however, neither resilience nor perceived control was related to vaccination uptake (Kondo, Abuliezi, Ota, et al.,2023). Vaccination uptake may be closely related to the plans and social norms of different organizations rather than individual resilience or perceived control (Kondo, Abuliezi, Ota, et al.,2023). An individual's self‐view is related to how an individual deals with challenges. This self‐view is made up of many interrelated elements, including values, perceived ability to overcome challenges, and perceived locus of control (Szanton & Gill,2010). Perceived control can be regarded as one element of resilience. Resilience during admission for acute coronary syndrome predicted perceived control at 3 months among Japanese older adults (Kondo et al.,2022). However, the different roles of resilience and perceived control on vaccination intention among young adults are unknown.

In this study, we clarify the different roles of resilience and perceived control on the intention to receive additional vaccines. The specific aims were to investigate: (1) the association between resilience, perceived control, and intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccine, and (2) the mediating ways via knowledge of the COVID‐19 vaccine and infection‐preventive behaviors on the associations.

Healthcare students who have higher levels of resilience have higher knowledge of the COVID‐19 vaccine, which is related to higher vaccination intention.

Healthcare students who have higher levels of resilience have higher infection‐preventive behaviors, which are related to higher vaccination intention.

Healthcare students who have higher levels of perceived control have higher knowledge of the COVID‐19 vaccine, which is related to higher vaccination intention.

Healthcare students who have higher levels of perceived control have higher infection‐preventive behaviors, which are related to higher vaccination intention.

We conducted a cross‐sectional study using online surveys. The participants were nursing undergraduate and graduate students, and healthcare graduate students from four universities in the Tokyo metropolitan area, Japan, who volunteered to participate. Students who had never received the COVID‐19 vaccine were excluded.

We used Google Forms in both Japanese and English in the survey to include Japanese students, as well as international students who did not understand Japanese. Participants were provided with verbal and/or written information about the study at the end of the class and/or received an email invitation to access a form explaining the purpose and methods of the anonymous survey. The participants consented to participate in the study by clicking the “I agree” button on the survey form. The data were collected from June to August 2022, when Japan's fourth vaccination program began.

The survey questions included the number of COVID‐19 vaccines received, intention to receive additional vaccines, sociodemographic data (11 items), experience with COVID‐19 (4 items), individual resilience (21 items), psychological effects of the pandemic (4 items), perceived infection control (3 items), perceived knowledge of COVID‐19 and its vaccine (2 items), and individual infection‐preventive behaviors (16 items). These items were determined theoretically based on the vaccination intention/hesitancy reports in previous studies on healthcare students (McCready et al.,2023) and other populations (Cleofas & Oducado,2022; Kimhi et al.,2022; Roy et al.,2023), and from discussions among the authors. Eight healthcare students were asked to participate in a pilot test on face validity with several discussions and revisions, and they were not invited to this survey.

The number of vaccines received ranged from 0 to 4. The intention to receive an additional vaccine was determined by asking the following question: “If you need to receive an additional COVID‐19 vaccine, will you receive it? (0 = do not want to receive, 1 = not truly want to receive, 2 = receive if necessary, or 3 = definitely want to receive it).” We asked “If you need to receive…” rather than “If you are provided….” because healthcare students were required to receive vaccination to join the clinical practice. They could refuse, but they had to submit proof that they were negative after a polymerase chain reaction test before joining the practice.

Sociodemographic data included nationality, university, academic major, age, sex, religion, academic status, chronic conditions requiring regular check‐ups, housing situation, and employment status. Experience with COVID‐19 included COVID‐19 infection and experience with COVID‐19 patients (Table1).

Participants' sociodemographic factors, experience with COVID‐19, knowledge, and association with intention to receive additional vaccines (N= 1139).

Hirano's bidimensional resilience scale was used to measure individual resilience (Hirano,2010). The Connor‐Davidson Resilience Scale (CD‐RISC) (Connor & Davidson,2003) is widely used to measure resilience, which was developed in the United States (US). However, the score of Japanese adults was much lower than that of the US general population and psychiatric patients, which was considered to be a cultural difference (Nakajima et al.,2010). In Japan, social support is a more important element of resilience rather than independence (Hirano,2010), while strong self‐esteem/confidence is an important element in the US (Connor & Davidson,2003). Hirano's bidimensional resilience scale was created based on Japanese young adults considering the Japanese culture; therefore, we chose Hirano's scale in our study. The resilience scale consists of seven factors: four innate resilience factors (control, optimism, sociability, and vitality) and three acquired resilience factors (self‐understanding, understanding others, and attempting to solve a problem). Each factor was assessed using three questions for a total of 21 questions. Each question was answered on a five‐point scale: 1 = strongly disagree ~5 = strongly agree. The scores were summed to obtain a total score ranging from 21 to 105; higher scores indicated greater resilience. The Cronbach's alpha for the scale was reported to be 0.90 by the creator (Hirano,2010). The scale can be freely obtained from the creator's homepage (Hirano Laboratory,2018).

The psychological effects of the pandemic were determined by asking the following questions: “To what degree are you worried about academic (study/research) delays due to the COVID‐19 pandemic?”, “To what degree has the COVID‐19 pandemic affected your daily life and work (including part‐time job/study)?”, “To what degree has the COVID‐19 pandemic affected you financially?”, and “To what degree do you have the confidence to overcome the impact of COVID‐19 on your life?” Each question was answered using a four‐point Likert scale (1 = not at all, 2 = slightly, 3 = moderately, or 4 = strongly).

Perceived infection control was assessed at three levels: the community (area) in which the participants lived, the university, and the individual. The following questions were posed for each level: “Do you think that COVID‐19 infection‐prevention management is adequate in your area? (5=strongly agree ~ 1=strongly disagree),” “Do you think your university has adequate COVID‐19 prevention management? (5=strongly agree ~ 1=strongly disagree),” and “How much control do you have in avoiding viral infection? (1=no control, 2=little control, and 3=significant control)”.

The perceived knowledge of COVID‐19 and its vaccine was rated using a five‐point Likert scale (1 = extremely low ~5 = extremely high). The individual infection‐preventive behavior questionnaire included 16 items regarding actions to decrease the transmission of COVID‐19 (e.g., washing hands or using hand sanitizers after touching objects and surfaces in public, limiting the usage of public transportation only to the essential). Participants were asked to respond to each item by selecting one option from a four‐point frequency level (0 = never, 1 = sometimes, 2 = often, and 3 = always). The total score for the preventive health‐behavior questions ranged from 0 to 48, with higher scores indicating more frequent practices of preventive behaviors. The first and second authors initially created health‐behavior questionnaires based on questions from Kamenidou et al. (2020) and the Japanese government's recommendations for the preventative protocols of the Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare. All other authors, who were Japanese nursing experts, reviewed the content and agreed that the questions covered the necessary preventive health behaviors. In this study, Cronbach's alpha for the preventive health behaviors questionnaire was good (0.836).

G‐Power 3.1.9.7 (Heimrich Heine Universitat Dusseldolf,2007) was used for post hoc power analysis. With a sample size of 1139 students, an effect size of 0.11 was detected, given an alpha level of 0.05 (two‐tailed) and a power of 0.95 for the Spearman correlation analysis.

SPSS version 28 (IBM, 2022) was used for the statistical analysis. Data duplications were detected using SPSS and were excluded (n= 7). Missing values were treated as missing. While the variable “intention to receive additional vaccines” could be an ordinal scale, the distribution did not widely deviate from normality (within ±2: skewness = −0.598 and kurtosis = 0.759). The means and standard deviations of the variables were calculated because the medians were similar among the categories. Spearman's correlation coefficients were used to explore the association between the intention to receive additional vaccines and ordinal or continuous variables (e.g., age, resilience, perceived knowledge, and total score of preventive behaviors). The Mann–Whitney U test or Kruskal–Wallis test with Bonferroni adjustment was performed to compare the ordinal variables (e.g., intention to receive additional vaccine and perceived knowledge) between two groups (e.g., graduate or undergraduate program) or three or more groups (e.g., nationality, university, major, four age groups, and religion).

The factors related to the intention to receive additional vaccines (p< .05) in bivariate analyses were entered into a linear regression. Model fit was assessed using adjustedR2, the Durbin–Watson ratio (within 1.5–2.5), and variance inflation factors (VIF <2.0). Hayes' SPSS PROCESS (Model 4) was used to test the regression models with mediating effects by adjusting for covariates (Hayes,2022). The statistical significance of the indirect mediation effect of knowledge and preventive behaviors on the intention to receive additional vaccines was tested in the 5000‐times bootstrapping method with a 95% confidence interval. Interactions of resilience and knowledge, preventive behaviors, or perceived control and preventive behaviors on the intention to receive additional vaccines were also analyzed. Additionally, structured equation modeling (SEM) was used to test the association between resilience and perceived control among the variables. Chi‐square test (p> .05), goodness‐of‐fit index (>0.9), comparative fit index (>0.9), and root mean square error of approximation (<.05) were regarded as good model fit.

The Medical Research Ethics Committee at the Institute of Science Tokyo (formerly Tokyo Medical and Dental University) approved this study (No. M2021‐231, Date: March 22, 2022), which was conducted according to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. We explained to potential participants the voluntary nature of the survey and the confidentiality of the data and that their participation and responses would not affect their grades. Informed consent was obtained from all participants. As a token of our gratitude to the participants for their time, we sent a 500‐yen (~3.5 USD) Amazon gift card to those who registered their email addresses. Email addresses were collected through a separate Google Form unrelated to the survey form.

We invited 3131 students to participate in this study, 1169 of whom completed the questionnaire (response rate = 37.3%). Among them, 30 (2.6%) had never received a vaccine and were excluded from the study. The data from 1139 students were analyzed (Table1). The mean age was 25.1 ± 7.7 years, and most respondents (82.4%) were female. One student (0.1%) had received one vaccine, 114 (10.0%) had received two, 997 (87.5%) had received three, and 27 (2.4%) had received four. Regarding the intention to receive an additional vaccine, 28 students (2.5%) answered, “Do not want to receive,” 129 (11.3%) answered, “Not truly want to receive,” 676 (59.4%) answered, “Receive if necessary,” and 306 (26.9%) answered, “Definitely want to receive it.” Majority of students (>60%) answered that their knowledge of COVID‐19 and vaccines was moderate. Mean preventive behavior score was 52.3 ± 6.6.

Average resilience scores were 78.0 ± 9.9 for total, 43.5 ± 6.7 for innate resilience subtotal, and 34.5 ± 4.2 for acquired resilience subtotal. Regarding perceived control, median (min‐max) was both 4 (1–5) for community and university and 2 (1–3) for individual levels.

In bivariate analyses, international students had a significantly greater intention to receive additional vaccines than Japanese students. Students who had experience with COVID‐19 patients had a significantly lower intention to receive additional vaccines (Table1). Table2presents the associations between intentions to receive additional vaccines and other ordinal and continuous variables. Factors related to high intention to receive additional vaccines were high perceived control (individual) to avoid infection from the virus, worrying about academic delays due to the COVID‐19 pandemic, an increased number of vaccines received, increased knowledge of COVID‐19 and the COVID‐19 vaccine, and a high preventive behavior total score. Regarding resilience scores, high resilience total scores, innate resilience factors (sociability, optimism, and vitality), and acquired resilience factors (understanding others and attempting to solve a problem) were correlated with a high intention to receive additional vaccines.

Correlation with the intention to receive additional vaccines.

Table3presents the factors related to the intention to receive additional vaccines in the linear regression. Since knowledge of COVID‐19 and its vaccine (ρ = .737,p< .001), as well as total and two factors of resilience scores (ρ > .8,p< .001) were highly correlated, only knowledge of vaccines and total score of resilience with higherρvalues were entered into the linear regression. Similarly, “Nationality” and “international students” were very close (VIF > 10), so we chose “international students” without missing values. Consequently, international students (β = .105,p< .001), total resilience score (β = .066,p= .028), knowledge of vaccines (β = .082,p= .006), frequent exhibition of preventive behaviors (β = .094,p= .003), and number of vaccines received (β = .194, p < .001) were positively related to intention to receive additional vaccines. Having experience with COVID‐19 patients (β = −.114,p< .001) was significantly related to low intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines. The VIFs of all variables were lower than 1.3.

Factors related to intention to receive additional vaccines.

Note: Linear regression; Religion (reference: no religion); † AdjustedR2; Durbin–Watson ratio = 1.943.

Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; VIF, variance inflation factor.

Table4presents the direct and indirect effects of resilience and perceived control on the intention to receive additional vaccination. Higher resilience scores (β = .235,p< .001) and having experience with COVID‐19 patients (β = .118, p < .001) were significantly related to higher knowledge of the vaccine. Higher resilience scores (β = .132,p< .001), higher perceived control to avoid infection from the virus (β = .342,p< .001), and domestic students (β = −.213,p< .001) were associated with higher preventive behaviors.

Direct and indirect effects of resilience on intention to receive additional vaccines.

Higher resilience scores (β = .066,p= .028), international students (β = .105,p= .001), not having experience with COVID‐19 patients (β = −.114,p< .001), a greater number of vaccines received (β = .194,p< .001), higher knowledge of COVID‐19 vaccines (β = .082,p= .006), and higher preventive behaviors (β = .094,p =.003) were associated with a higher intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines. None of the interaction terms were significant and included in the final model.

Direct effect from resilience to intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccine accounted for 67.3%, indirect effect via knowledge accounted for 19.4%, and preventive behaviors accounted for 12.2% of total effects (Table5). The direct effect from perceived control to intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines accounted for 43.5% without significance. Indirect effect via preventive behaviors accounted for 51.6% of the total effect, and via knowledge accounted for 4.8% without significance.

Effect path from Resilience/Control to Intention to receive additional vaccines.

Figure1summarizes the association among resilience, perceived control, intention to receive additional vaccines, and two mediators analyzed by SEM. In this model, there were no significant direct associations between resilience or perceived control and intention to receive additional vaccines. Knowledge of COVID‐19 vaccines significantly mediated from resilience to intention to receive additional vaccines. Preventive behaviors were significantly mediated by both resilience and perceived control to intention to receive additional vaccines. All criteria of model fit were met adequately. Resilience and perceived control were significantly correlated (β = .135,p< .001). When the arrow was drawn from resilience to perceived control or from perceived control to resilience, both models showed the same correlation coefficients of all variables and model fit scores. Therefore, the two‐headed arrow between resilience and perceived control was used for the final model.

Association among resilience, perceived control, the intention to receive additional vaccination, and two mediators through structured equation modeling.

We examined the different roles of resilience and perceived control on intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines among healthcare students and identified the direct and indirect associations. Knowledge of the COVID‐19 vaccine mediated from resilience to intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines, and infection‐preventive behaviors mediated from both resilience and perceived control to intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines. Hypotheses 1, 2, and 4 were confirmed. Resilience played a stronger role in higher vaccination intention. Resilience and perceived control are significantly correlated with each other.

COVID‐19 vaccine acceptance rates varied among countries (Sallam & Al‐Sanafi,2022). Among 114 countries/territories, 72 had acceptance rates of 60% or higher. In East and Southern Africa, it ranged from 50%–92%. Asia and the Pacific region had generally high rates. However, acceptance varied within each region and association with culture was unclear. According to an umbrella review (McCready et al.,2023), the acceptance rate among healthcare students ranged from 34%–82.4%, with 60% of nursing and dental students. A study conducted with university students in the northern part of Japan reported that vaccine intention was higher among healthcare majors (75.1%) than non‐healthcare majors (50.4%) (Miyachi et al.,2022). In our current study, 86.2% answered, “Receive if necessary,” or “Definitely want to receive it.” Participants in this study were healthcare students, who had been vaccinated at least once. Therefore, they had a relatively high acceptance rate for additional vaccination.

Resilience enhances the process of positive adaptation in the presence of challenges. While high individual resilience was not associated with vaccination uptake (Kondo, Abuliezi, Ota, et al.,2023), it was associated with a high intention to receive an additional vaccine, which is consistent with studies by Kimhi et al. (2022) and Mo et al. (2022). Vaccination uptake is important for sociability, which is one factor of innate resilience related to a high intention. Among the acquired resilience factors, understanding others, rather than self‐understanding, was associated with high intentions, which can be a specific feature of collectivistic rather than individualistic societies in Japan (Abuliezi et al.,2022).

Perceived control is a subjective belief about the amount of control an individual has over the environment or outcome. Healthcare students who believe that they have control over their behavior can actively engage in preventive behavior to avoid infection (Abuliezi et al.,2022). However, perceived control may not directly control their levels of intention to receive vaccines, which aligns with the result from El Tantawi et al. (2024). The total effect from resilience to the intention was stronger than that from perceived control (β = .098 vs. 0.062). Therefore, resilience may play a stronger role in vaccination intention.

Resilience was indirectly related to a higher intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines through higher knowledge of the vaccine. Healthcare students with relatively high levels of resilience should have actively searched for information about vaccination and confirmed safety, which can be a measure of stress coping (Connor & Davidson,2003), and could lead to a higher intention. Perceived control was not related to knowledge of the vaccine after adjusting for other factors. Socioeconomic status, including education, is a predictor of perceived control, which leads to performance via behavioral skills (Robinson & Lachman,2017). Although education can be related to knowledge, knowledge of vaccines would not be a mediator between perceived control and vaccination intention.

While knowledge of the vaccine was not associated with vaccination uptake (Kondo, Abuliezi, Ota, et al.,2023), it was associated with a high intention to receive additional vaccines, which aligned with previous studies (McCready et al.,2023). During the investigation in this study, vaccines were provided at the universities of the participants or affiliated hospitals for free, and students were strongly encouraged to receive vaccines; therefore, the majority of students would have received vaccines regardless of their resilience or knowledge (Kondo, Abuliezi, Ota, et al.,2023). However, vaccinations were not available at their universities from the fifth shot. Therefore, high individual resilience and knowledge can be important factors for receiving a vaccine voluntarily from the fifth shot.

Experience with COVID‐19 patients was associated with higher knowledge of vaccines. However, it was negatively associated with the intention to receive an additional vaccine, which contradicts the results of a previous study on young Filipino adults (Cleofas & Oducado,2022). While continuous experience with COVID‐19 patients and COVID‐19 infection were not associated with the intention, the effect size of having experience with COVID‐19 patients was relatively high (β = −.114). The reason for this is not clear from this study, but students who met COVID‐19 patients during clinical practice may have had a negative initial impression.

We identified a second pathway by which resilience was associated with a higher intention to receive additional vaccines through higher infection‐preventive behaviors. Sun et al. (2020) reported that higher levels of preventive behaviors among nursing students were associated with lower anxiety. Healthcare students with higher levels of resilience should have had more frequent infection‐preventive behaviors, which can be an important target in treating anxiety (Connor & Davidson,2003). Since receiving a vaccine can help prevent infection, it makes sense that students with frequent infection‐preventive behaviors also have a higher intention to receive vaccines.

Higher individual perceived control to avoid infection was associated with higher preventive behaviors, which aligned with previous studies (Abuliezi et al.,2022; Goodwin et al.,2021; Ștefan et al.,2021). The association between perceived control and preventive behaviors was stronger than that of resilience and preventive behaviors. However, perceived control was not directly related to the intention to receive additional vaccines in mediation analysis or SEM. Therefore, preventive behaviors were regarded as a total mediator between perceived control and intention to receive additional vaccines, while preventive behaviors and knowledge of vaccination can be partial mediators between resilience and intention to receive additional vaccination.

Similar to resilience, culture is one factor related to perceived control (Robinson & Lachman,2017). Perceived control of Japanese people was the lowest among 38 countries, which was considered to be related to Japanese culture (Hornsey et al.,2019). Although preventive behaviors were higher in Japanese students, their perceived control was lower than that of US students (Abuliezi et al.,2022). International students had lower preventive behaviors than Japanese students, which aligned with a previous study (Abuliezi et al.,2022), but had higher intentions to receive vaccines. International students received significantly fewer vaccines (Kondo, Abuliezi, Ota, et al.,2023). International students who do not understand Japanese may have had difficulty receiving the vaccine because not all healthcare staff who provide the vaccine speak English or other languages well in Japan (Kondo, Abuliezi, Ota, et al.,2023; Soneta et al.,2021). Possibly, international students have lower accessibility even though they have a high intention to receive the vaccination.

This is the first study that reports the association between resilience, perceived control, and intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccination in detail. This study was conducted at four universities in the Tokyo metropolitan area of Japan and had a relatively large sample size and power. However, approximately half of the participants were undergraduate nursing students. The number of international students was low. The response rate was less than 40%. Students who had higher vaccination intentions may have participated, and self‐reported data could have introduced bias. Additionally, the question “If you need to receive an additional COVID‐19 vaccine, will you receive it?” could lead to the answer with a higher intention to receive vaccination. Therefore, our results are not generalizable to all healthcare students. Thus, larger surveys with more universities, healthcare majors, and international students are necessary. Moreover, β coefficients andR2were not high. There should be other unknown factors related to vaccination intentions. Since this is a cross‐sectional study, the causal association cannot be proven. Further research should focus on 1) whether or not high resilience and control can lead to actual high vaccination uptake when free onsite vaccination is not available, and 2) how experience with COVID‐19 patients influences vaccination intentions. Longitudinal studies can provide more insights into the association between resilience, perceived control, experience with COVID‐19 patients, vaccination intentions, and actual vaccination uptake over time. In addition, it is necessary to conduct a study to confirm the role of resilience and perceived control for the intention and actual uptake of other vaccines, including seasonal influenza.

Resilience is a very important quality to deal with challenges. Our study suggested that promoting resilience might help healthcare students have information regarding vaccines and increase infection‐preventive behaviors, which can lead to higher intention to receive additional vaccines. According to a review and meta‐analysis (Joyce et al.,2018), many programs can increase individual resilience, which was classified into three: (1) cognitive behavioral therapy‐based interventions, (2) mindfulness‐based interventions, and (3) mixed interventions.

Although resilience was found to be more strongly associated with intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccine than perceived control in this study, perceived control plays a very important role in preventing infection and minimizing the mental effects of stress/depression or feeling apart from society (Kondo, Abuliezi, Niitsu, et al.,2023). Lower perceived control can be related to Japanese specific culture (Hornsey et al.,2019), but it is a subjective feeling rather than actual control (Villarreal & Heckhausen,2017). Therefore, it is worth encouraging having higher subjective control, even though they may not have actual control. We appeal to policymakers to include training programs to strengthen resilience and perceived control not only in the healthcare curriculum but also even earlier in basic school education.

We reported that the resilience of healthcare students plays a significant role both directly and indirectly in having a higher intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccine, by increasing knowledge of vaccination and increasing infection‐preventive behaviors. Perceived control was indirectly associated with a higher intention to receive additional COVID‐19 vaccines via higher infection‐preventive behaviors. Enhancing resilience and perceived control of healthcare students can decrease their vaccine hesitancy.