Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) is a rare and life-threatening condition, and long-term patient outcomes remain to be fully explored. This registry-based national cohort study including all Danish children born with TAPVC between 2000 and 2018 aimed to evaluate the survival rates of Danish children receiving a TAPVC repair procedure. Additionally, the prevalence of early morbidity, severe chronic diseases, and mental and/or behavioral disorders in children diagnosed with TAPVC was investigated using Danish health registries. A total of 89 children with TAPVC were identified, of whom 65 underwent primary repair. Among those receiving surgery, the survival rate was 88% at 3 months, decreasing to 78% at 20 years. In the cohort of children with a TAPVC primary repair, 26% had one or more hospital visits with primary or secondary chronic somatic diagnoses, and 8% had one or more hospital visits with a mental and/or behavioral disorder. In comparison, 6% of all Danish children born during the same period had similar hospital visits for somatic diseases, and 3% for mental and/or behavioral disorders. The survival rate of our TAPVC cohort aligns with that reported in the literature. Furthermore, this study highlights the need for additional research into the physical and mental health of these children, as they require hospital care more frequently than their peers.

Using registry data in a national population-based cohort design, including all Danish children born and diagnosed with total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) between 2000 and 2018, we present an investigation of survival and the prevalence of chronic somatic and mental, and/or behavioral disorders. TAPVC is a rare complex congenital heart disease accounting for approximately 7–9 of 100,000 live births, as reported in literature1–4. While the incidence of complex congenital heart disease in live-born infants has declined in Denmark, decreasing from 0.22 to 0.14% between 1996 and 2013, this trend is attributed to enhanced prenatal detection and increased termination of pregnancies following prenatal diagnosis, rather than a change in the underlying occurrence of disease5. However, TAPVC remains poorly detected prenatally, with rates as low as 2.4% of cases detected prenatally6. As a result, most children with TAPVC are diagnosed when they become symptomatic, and the overall incidence of TAPVC remains unchanged.

TAPVC occurs when the pulmonary veins fail to connect normally to the left atrium. Instead, the pulmonary veins connect to the right atrium or to veins that drain into the right atrium, causing oxygenated blood from the lungs to mix with deoxygenated blood in the right heart chambers6–11.

TAPVC is categorized into four types based on the site of the anomalous connection: supracardiac, cardiac, infracardiac, and mixed12. Each type has distinct clinical implications and varying degrees of complexity in terms of surgical repair11. All infants born with TAPVC will need surgical repair shortly after diagnosis, with the primary intervention being a surgical connection between the pulmonary venous confluence and the left atrium. Advances in pediatric cardiac surgery have markedly improved the prognosis for infants with TAPVC, and most frequently complications are seen within the first year after the primary surgical repair. In the literature, TAPVC remains a condition with significant early-life morbidity and mortality and a risk of long-term health consequences9,13–16.

The causes of early life morbidity depend on patient demographics, anatomic characteristics, and most frequently and well-described complications due to postoperative pulmonary venous obstruction (PVO) with an incidence of 5 to 18%3,15,17–19. Preoperative pulmonary hypertension, surgical method, and preoperative pulmonary venous obstruction have been identified risk factors for PVO, and tools to predict the risk are currently under development15. While early outcomes and cardiac complications following TAPVC repair are well described in the literature, there is limited documentation on the long-term prevalence of non-cardiac comorbidities, including severe chronic somatic diseases and mental and/or behavioral disorders. This gap is a focus of the present study.

Although long-term comorbidity patterns specific to TAPVC are not well characterized, evidence from broader congenital heart disease (CHD) populations indicates an elevated risk of developing non-cardiac chronic conditions, such as hypertension, thyroid dysfunction, psychiatric and neurologic disorders, and chronic lung disease20–22. These comorbidities often emerge early and may accumulate over time, particularly in more complex CHD cases, impacting survival, healthcare utilization, and quality of life. As survival rates among CHD patients continue to improve, understanding these long-term health trajectories becomes increasingly important.

In recent years, healthcare research has been transformed by the use of comprehensive, national, population-based registry data, where entire populations, such as those in the Nordic countries, are followed as a complete cohort under study23. Registries, which systematically and structurally collect information, have become invaluable tools in understanding the epidemiology and outcomes of various medical conditions24. The availability of registry data on children with congenital heart disease has enabled the identification of critical patterns, thereby enabling improvements in their care25.

This national registry-based cohort study aimed to evaluate the survival rates of Danish children diagnosed with TAPVC who underwent surgical repair. Additionally, we assessed morbidity and examined the long-term prevalence of severe chronic diseases and mental and/or behavioural disorders. These outcomes were identified using definitions and coding frameworks previously established by Madsen et al. and Jensen et al.26,27. The study addresses a gap in the literature regarding long-term somatic and mental health outcomes in children with TAPVC and aims to support a broader understanding of their potential health trajectories beyond early surgical recovery.

Identification of the cohort is based on the ICD-10 classification for TAPVC: Q262. The related primary surgical repair and redo surgical and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty procedures are classified according to the Nordic Classification of Surgical Procedures (ICD-10-PCS NOMESCO)28. The primary surgical repair includes supracardiac TAPVC (KFFG00), surgery for cardiac type TAPVC (KFFG10), surgery for infracardiac type TAPVC (KFFG20), surgery for mixed type TAPVC (KFFG30), and other surgery for TAPVC (KFFG96). The redo procedures include surgery for previously corrected TAPVC (KFFH10), percutaneous transluminal angioplasty on the pulmonary vein (KFFH22), percutaneous transluminal angioplasty on the pulmonary vein with placement of a stent (KFFH25), and other surgery for pulmonary vein stenosis (KFFH96). In this study, we refer to the first surgical correction as the primary surgical repair. For the group of patients who need either further surgery or percutaneous interventions this second procedure will be referred to as redo procedures.

The study consists of a cohort of children born in Denmark between 2000 and 2018 diagnosed with TAPVC (Q262), who underwent one or more TAPVC procedures. Subpopulations based on gender and prematurity were established. Prematurity was defined as a gestational age of less than 259 days.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria were defined as follows: For the general population comparison group used in comorbidity and mortality analyses, we included all children born in Denmark between 2000 and 2018 with at least one hospital contact registered in the Danish National Patient Registry (DNPR)29, including birth. From this population, we identified a TAPVC diagnosis cohort consisting of all children with at least one hospital contact registered with the TAPVC diagnosis code, regardless of any other co-occurring congenital cardiac or non-cardiac diagnoses. For the subgroup of children who underwent one or more TAPVC-related procedures, we included only those children from the diagnosed cohort who had a registered TAPVC-repair-related procedure code. Again, no exclusion was applied based on the presence of other cardiac diagnoses or procedures.

To collect data for our analyses, we used several nationwide Danish health registries, all of which are population-based and can be linked at the individual level using the unique personal identification number assigned to all residents of Denmark at birth or immigration.

From DNPR29, which served as our primary source, we extracted information on on hospital admissions and outpatient contacts for all Danish children diagnosed with TAPVC. This registry includes diagnostic codes (ICD-10) and surgical procedure codes (NOMESCO classification) recorded during hospital contacts, and captures virtually all somatic hospital activity in Denmark since 1977.

We also used the Danish Medical Birth Register30, which includes data on all live births in Denmark since 1973. From this registry, we obtained information on date of birth, gestational age, and gender. Mortality and migration status were obtained from the Danish Civil Registration System31, which contains continuously updated information on vital status, place of residence, and emigration for all Danish residents.

Linkage across these registries was achieved using the unique personal identification number. Within the DNPR, individual hospital contacts were further linked using a record number, which allowed us to connect diagnoses, procedures, and admissions related to the same hospital episode.

Data was retrieved from these registries for analysis between June and December 2024.

The study was carried out in accordance with all applicable guidelines and regulations. In Denmark, ethical approval is not required for research using pseudonymized registry-based health data. To ensure compliance with GDPR, data with less than five observations was excluded from all analyses. All analyses were conducted on a secure analysis platform approved by the Danish Health Data Authority (Copenhagen, Denmark).

To assess the event-free survival, defined here as survival without undergoing a redo procedure, we utilized the Kaplan-Meier estimator32. Moreover, we employed the Cox proportional hazard model to explore the influence of multiple variables on the overall survival outcome33. These survival analysis tools and statistical methods were performed using the R package “survival”34.

For examining the prevalence of severe chronic diseases in children with a TAPVC primary repair procedure registered, a primary or secondary diagnose code was defined as severe chronic using the definition presented by Madsen et al.26. In this context, a primary diagnosis refers to the main reason for a hospital contact, while a secondary diagnosis indicates any additional condition noted during the same admission. A primary or secondary diagnose code was defined as a mental and/or behavioral disorder if it was included in the ICD-10 group F. All congenital malformations of circulatory organs were excluded from the list of chronic diseases, as well as diseases of circulatory organs (ICD-10 group I), to avoid an over-representation of TAPVC children with related heart conditions.

where CI(t) is the cumulative incidence at time t, and S(t) is the Kaplan-Meier estimate of the survival function at time t.

In our Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox regression analysis, we designated December 31, 2022, as the censor date. This date was chosen because it marks the latest point at which mortality data could be retrieved from the Danish Civil Registration System.

For data management and subsequent analysis, we employed the statistical software R35.

Between 2000 and 2018, 89 unique children out of 1,197,842 live births in Denmark were diagnosed with TAPVC and followed at a Danish hospital, corresponding to a prevalence of approximately 0.007%, which aligns with previously reported estimates3,4. Of these, 24 children (27%) were not registered as having undergone a TAPVC repair. Among them, 12 children (13% of the total cohort) were registered as deceased within 13 months of birth, likely before receiving surgical repair. The remaining 12 children (13%) were neither registered as deceased, migrated, nor as having undergone a TAPVC-related procedure. These children had a total of over 1,000 hospital contacts between 2001 and 2018, with the TAPVC diagnosis (Q262) registered between 2005 and 2015. In five of these cases, TAPVC was recorded as the primary diagnosis during a hospital contact. Additionally, 234 of their hospital contacts involved congenital diseases, including 128 related to congenital heart disease.

The remaining 65 children (73% of 89) underwent primary surgical repair for TAPVC. A small subpopulation also underwent a redo procedure; however, to comply with data confidentiality regulations from Statistics Denmark based on the EU GDPR36,37, and due to our use of subgroup analyses, we applied a conservative reporting threshold and do not disclose exact counts below five.

In Table1, we present the characteristics of children diagnosed with TAPVC and those who underwent primary repair. By 2023, 22% of the 65 children who received surgical repair had died. Among the small group who underwent redo procedures, most had their reoperation within a median of 99 days after the initial repair, and 83% had died by 2023.

Characteristics of the total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC, ICD-10 code Q262) populations in Denmark for children born between 2000 and 2018.

Data on redo procedures are not shown in the table due to data protection regulations (GDPR), as the population was too small to report without risk of reidentification.

When assessing the prevalence of chronic diagnoses unrelated to heart conditions26, 26% (17 out of 65) children in the TAPVC cohort who had undergone primary surgical repair had one or more hospital visits registered with a primary or secondary chronic diagnosis. This is notably higher than the corresponding proportion of 6% (71,901 out of 1,197,842) observed in the general population of children born in Denmark between 2000 and 2018 with at least one hospital contact.

Among the TAPVC cohort, the most frequently observed chronic conditions fell within ICD-10-chapter Q, covering congenital malformations, deformations, and chromosomal abnormalities unrelated to cardiac defects. The most common diagnoses included congenital malformations of the respiratory system (Q3), other specified congenital malformations (Q8), and unspecified chromosomal abnormalities (Q9), with a total of 32 Q-chapter diagnoses registered. Additionally, six cases involved diseases of the digestive system (chapter K), while conditions related to the nervous system (G), respiratory system (J), and perinatal period (P) each occurred in fewer than five individuals.

In the general population of children, similar diagnostic patterns were observed, with chapter Q conditions being the most frequent (38,210 cases), followed by nervous system disorders (G: 29,259 cases) and digestive diseases (K: 21,081 cases). Among these, episodic and paroxysmal disorders (G4: 17,595 cases), diseases of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum (K2: 13,997), and congenital malformations of the respiratory system (Q3: 10,885) were the most prevalent subcategories.

Mental and behavioral disorders were also more frequent in the TAPVC cohort, where 8% (5 out of 65) had at least one hospital contact with a relevant diagnosis, compared to 3% (31,367 out of 1,197,842) in the general population. The TAPVC cases were mainly classified under F9, indicating behavioral and emotional disorders typically arising in childhood or adolescence. Other diagnoses, such as those related to substance use (F1), stress-related disorders (F4), and behavioral syndromes with physiological disturbances (F5), were each present in fewer than five cases. In the general population, the most frequent mental and behavioral diagnoses included F9 (22,414 cases), developmental disorders (F8: 13,322), and stress-related disorders (F4: 10,498).

All comorbidity analyses were based on data from DNPR, which includes all contacts at Danish hospitals29.

Figure1shows the cumulative mortality rates based on Kaplan-Meier survival rates for children undergoing primary surgical repair. The procedures analyzed include surgeries for supracardiac, cardiac type, infracardiac, and mixed type TAPVC. The survival rates for supracardiac TAPVC surgery (KFFG00) remain relatively stable from 3 months to 20 years, decreasing slightly from 89 to 82%. Cardiac type TAPVC surgery (KFFG10) shows a decrease from 88% at 3 months to 75% from 6 months onwards. Infracardiac TAPVC surgery (KFFG20) demonstrates a gradual decline from 91% at 3 months to 77% at 20 years. Mixed type TAPVC surgery (KFFG30) has consistent survival rates of 67% across all valid time points, with all patients censored before reaching 20 years of follow-up. Other surgery for TAPVC (KFFG96) is not presented in Fig.1to avoid disclosure of microdata. Likewise, we have not separated short-term and long-term mortality outcomes, due to the limited number of patients in each subgroup.

Cumulative incidence based on Kaplan Meier for children born between year 2000 to 2018, having had one of the four total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) primary repair procedure presented at a Danish hospital between 2000 and 2018 (both included). The green bar presents the KFFG00 procedure (surgery for supracardiac TAPVC), the yellow bar the KFFG10 procedure (surgery for TAPVC of cardiac type), the blue bar the KFFG20 procedure (surgery for infracardiac TAPVC), and the orange curve the KFFG30 procedure (surgery for mixed type TAPVC). Children are censored out either at the time of a possible TAPVC redo procedure, possibly death, or when reaching the censor date of 2022-12-31, why also no KFFG30 procedures are represented for Time = 20 years. The cumulative mortality for this group remained consistently at 33%.

Table2represents the Cox regression analysis, where premature birth was associated with a significantly higher risk of mortality (Hazard rate (HR) = 6.28, 95% CI: 1.53–25.76,p= 0.01). Gender did not significantly impact survival (HR = 1.40, 95% CI: 0.40–4.91,p= 0.60), nor did age at the time of repair (HR = 1.00, 95% CI: 0.99–1.01,p= 0.98). TAPVC repair subtypes were not included in the final Cox regression model, as some groups had very few observations and complete censoring, resulting in non-available hazard ratios.

Presenting Cox-hazard ratio and significance level of the different predictors for children undergoing a total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) primary repair procedure registered regardless of a later registered Redo procedure.

The 95% confidence interval is presented for the Hazard Ratio.

Figure2presents the cumulative mortality rates derived from Kaplan-Meier analysis for children who underwent primary surgical repair procedures, and/or a redo procedure, all born between 2000 and 2018. The results indicate that for children undergoing TAPVC primary surgical repair, the survival rate starts at 88% at 3 months and remains at 78% at 20 years. In contrast, children who underwent redo procedures exhibited a more significant decline in survival rates, from 67% at 3 months to 17% at 20 years from the time of the redo procedure.

Cumulative incidence based on Kaplan Meier for children for children born between year 2000 and 2018 and registered with having had a total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) repair procedure (primary repair) and/or a redo procedure at a Danish hospital between 2000 and 2018. Children are censored out either at the time of a possibly TAPVC redo operation (for the primary repair population), possible death, or when reaching the censor date of 2022-12-31.

In this national population-based cohort study we have identified all children registered in DNPR, born with the complex congenital heart disease TAPVC over nearly two decades. This is the first study on this specific patient population in Denmark, and our findings are consistent with previously published studies9,16which report a survival rate of approximately 78% following standard primary surgical repair. Very few children in this cohort received a redo procedure due to PVO. However, those who did had significantly lower survival rate of 17% compared to those who only had a primary surgical repair. This is in accordance with former findings in the literature13.

Regarding the specific technique used, the literature suggests that the sutureless technique is beneficial in primary surgical repair by reducing the risk of postoperative PVO and the need for redo procedures15,38. In Denmark, the specific techniques are not registered in DNPR, but current clinical practices are that primary surgical repairs for TAPVC are performed using the standard technique, while redo procedures are typically conducted using the sutureless technique.

The different subtypes of TAPVC have varying prognoses in the literature19. In accordance with this, we found variation in survival rates depending on the subtype following the primary surgical repair (Fig.1). Furthermore, our Cox regression analysis identified predictors of survival for patients following primary surgical repair. Premature birth was associated with reduced survival, while gender and age did not affect survival.

When analyzing the prevalence of chronic diseases, we found that 26% (27 out of 65) of patients following primary surgical repair had one or more hospital visits for chronic conditions, compared to 6% (71,901 out of 1,197,842) in the general population of Danish children. Most frequently the TAPVC patients were diagnosed with other congenital malformations or with diseases in the digestive organs. Moreover, 8% (5 out of 65) of TAPVC patients had hospital visits for mental or behavioral disorders, compared to 3% (31,367 out of 1,197,842) in the general population. These results are important and indicate that patients surviving the primary surgical repair still are vulnerable and may need further attention and care to prevent comorbidity and behavioral disorders. Given the small TAPVC population, we refrain from concluding on these results, however, if replicated in other studies, we find this tendency towards a higher prevalence of chronic and mental and/or behavioral disorders in TAPVC children of potential importance.

In the context of employing registry data for health research, some challenges are noteworthy. Variability in codes and diagnostic criteria, coding disparities among different healthcare institutions, and registration errors can curtail the utility of data for long-term comparisons and in-depth analyses24. We encountered such issues, where the discrepancy in recorded cases may stem from either inaccurately registered TAPVC diagnoses or incorrectly registered TAPVC repair procedures. In our study, 24 of the 89 children in the TAPVC population were not registered with any TAPVC procedure code. While a small group of these children died before receiving the primary repair, the remaining cases could not be accounted for. Since no children in the cohort were identified as immigrants, procedures performed abroad can be ruled out as a cause of this discrepancy. Notably, these 12 children had extensive hospital contact histories, including diagnoses of congenital and congenital heart diseases, and in several cases, TAPVC was recorded as the primary diagnosis. This may instead reflect reporting errors in assigning either the disease diagnosis code or the procedure code. Although these cases represent a small subgroup, they highlight limitations in registry-based data for rare and clinically complex populations. Additionally, a small group of fewer than five children appear to have undergone a redo procedure without being previously registered with a primary surgical repair. These were excluded from the study population, not knowing if the missing primary repair registration was a result of the children having had their first repair procedure outside of Denmark, or, more likely, an error in registration of the primary surgical repair procedure or the redo procedure. It should also be noted that parents may have declined surgery for their child, and such instances would not be recorded in the DNPR, potentially introducing a selection bias in the data.

The national health registries provide valuable data for epidemiological research but come with inherent limitations such as population size and wrongful registrations. These limitations - missing data, erroneous registrations, or misclassification - are not exclusive to Denmark but are recurrent in many countries with varying healthcare systems24. Thoughtful data analysis and interpretation are essential for obtaining meaningful insights from registry-based research.

In conclusion, our study reveals survival challenges for Danish children registered with TAPVC and related procedures. Those undergoing a primary surgical repair show a long-term survival stabilizing at 78%, while children undergoing redo procedures exhibit a more substantial decline, with survival rates dropping to 17% over 20 years. In contrast, among all children born in Denmark between 2000 and 2018 with at least one hospital contact, only 0.5% (6574 out of 1,197,842) were registered as deceased during the same period. Furthermore, patients with TAPVC appear more prone to comorbidity and mental and/or behavioral disorders, and further investigation in this area is recommended.

The authors would like to thank Dr. Klaus Juul, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.