We used stimulated emission tomography (SET) to assess
the efficiency
of spontaneous four-wave mixing (SFWM) from a plasmonic nanoantenna
under pulsed excitation. We characterize the SFWM photon generation
rate by measuring stimulated degenerate four-wave mixing. We produce
a map of the SFWM joint spectral density that characterizes the biphoton
state, which we find has a broad bandwidth due to the absence of phase
matching. The joint spectral density retrieval via SET is fast and
straightforward compared to traditional coincidence measurements.
By calculating the number of stimulating and generated photons along
with the frequency mixing efficiency, we have determined the power-independent
intrinsic SFWM generation rate to be on the order of 103photon pairs per second per mW squared per particle, while the power-independent
extrinsic generation rate is approximately 1 photon pair per second
per mW squared per particle. There is scope to increase the nonlinear
response by scaling up to large area metasurfaces using low-loss dielectric
materials that would allow the produced photon pairs to exceed background
fluorescence. Such an SFWM metasurface could be a potential alternative
to parametric down conversion, which requires rarer second-order nonlinear
materials that are also challenging to integrate with photonic structures.

Keywords:stimulated emission tomography, spontaneous four-wave
mixing, four-wave mixing, plasmonics, nonlinear
optics, photon-pair generation.

Plasmonic nanoantennas and metasurfaces
are extensively used for
nonlinear frequency mixing due to their strong electromagnetic field
enhancement and femtosecond-scale time response.−Similar nonlinearity has been demonstrated in dielectric structures,−and while dielectric antennas generally possess a higher damage
threshold, plasmonic antennas have the advantages of smaller feature
sizes and thus stronger field enhancements.,,By engineering nanoantenna resonances and
geometries, researchers have demonstrated effective control over a
variety of nonlinear processes.

Illustration of four-wave mixing using multiresonant gold nanoantennas.
(a) Energy diagram for four-wave mixing. Two pump photons at a frequency
ωpare annihilated to produce an idler photon with
frequency ωiand signal photon with frequency ωs. (b) In four-wave mixing, the signal/idler photons have higher/lower
energies than the pump. (c) Illustration of a gold nanoantenna used
for four-wave mixing, with an SEM image of the fabricated sample array
shown in the inset. (d, e) Extinction cross-section (ECS) of single
gold nanoantenna for different incident polarizations, as indicated
by the inset. The measured spectra are shown by broken red lines with
the simulated spectra shown in solid blue. The pump and seed wavelengths
of interest are indicated by the colored vertical bars.

Previous experimental demonstrations of SET have been applied
to
characterize nonlinear crystals,−photonic waveguides,,or optical fibers. SPDC generation
rates have been predicted from sum frequency and second harmonic generation
in nanophotonic structures,,however, these are
not stimulated analogues of SPDC and their predictive power is based
on the reciprocity principle. Here, we expand on previous work to demonstrate the SET of a subwavelength parametric
light source. SET is especially relevant for the rapidly growing field
of nanoantennas and metasurfaces, as the reduced nonlinear conversion
efficiencies and greater precision required make coincidence measurements
prohibitively difficult. The validation of the SET for these materials
may facilitate the characterization and development of nanoscale sources
of correlated photon pairs in the future. Our investigation reveals
that, with an optimized geometry, the intrinsic SFWM generation rate
could reach the order of 103photon pairs per second per
mW squared per antenna. For the unoptimized system considered in this
paper, we observe that the extrinsic generation rate is approximately
1 photon pair per second per mW squared per antenna. When scaled up
into a metasurface array, photon pair production rates could be sufficient
for applications, such as quantum communication, quantum sensing,
and integrated photonic circuits.

The sample used in this experiment
is a square array of multiparticle gold nanoantennas, each composed
of a bar and two disks (Figurec). This antenna structure has proven to be extremely effective
in previous studies of second- and third-order frequency mixing, but here we focus on the FWM of individual antennas
to evaluate SFWM efficiency. The linear extinction spectra of the
antenna arrays were measured with a Fourier transform infrared microscope
and converted to extinction cross-section spectra (Figured,e). The antennas support
multiple resonances at wavelengths of 1500 and 750 nm and were designed
for optimal second-harmonic generation (SHG) emission into the far
field. For the purposes of the FWM measurements
in this experiment, however, we take advantage of the field enhancements
near 840 and 1500 nm. As can be seen inFigured,e, the chosen excitation wavelength is
close to the optimal coupling conditions to the plasmonic antenna.
The disk resonance near 750 nm also extends to our chosen pump wavelength
in this work, at 840 nm. Meanwhile, the bar resonance near 1500 nm
can be accessed either by a seed laser for FWM up-conversion or by
radiating the FWM down-conversion. Although the structure is not resonant
at 583 nm for either seeding FWM down-conversion or radiating FWM
up-conversion, the modest scattering available is sufficient.

A schematic of the experimental setup is shown inFigurea. The stimulated FWM measurements
involve two input beams: a strong pump beam and a weak seed beam.
The pump beam is provided by a 140 fs, 80 MHz Ti:sapphire laser (Coherent
Chameleon Ultra II) operating at 840 nm. The same laser further pumps
an optical parametric oscillator (APE Compact OPO), which provides
a tunable seed beam. In up-conversion measurements, the OPO is tuned
around a central wavelength of 1500 nm, which generates a FWM signal
near 583 nm when combined with the pump. In down-conversion measurements,
the output of the OPO further pumps an SHG frequency converter to
bring the seed wavelength into the visible range. The seed beam in
this case is tuned around a central wavelength of 583 nm and generates
an FWM signal near 1500 nm when combined with the same pump. The pump
and seed beams are collinear and focused through the same high numerical
aperture (NA = 0.85) objective lens to provide focused beam illumination
of the sample at normal incidence. The pump and seed beams are near-diffraction-limited
in order to excite a single nanoparticle. In reality, the surrounding
particles are partially excited. The 840 nm pump beam is always polarized
perpendicular to the bar particle, and the seed beam (1500 nm up-conversion,
583 nm down-conversion) is polarized parallel to the bar. The FWM
signal is collected in transmission by a second objective lens and
directed to a spectrometer for analysis.

Schematic of experimental
setup for four-wave mixing and spectrograms
of intensity vs wavelength/delay. (a) Pulsed laser provides the pump
beam while simultaneously pumping an optical parametric oscillator
(OPO) which outputs the seed beam. A delay line in the seed beam path
allows for temporal overlap of both pulses, while a half-wave plate
(HWP) controls the polarization in each beam. The two beams are overlapped
on a dichroic mirror (DM) and focused collinearly by a 60×/0.95NA
objective (Obj1) onto the sample. The generated FWM light is collected
by a 40×/0.6NA objective (Obj2) and directed to a spectrometer
for analysis. The focusing objective has a different transmissivity
for pump (T1,p) and seed (T1,s) wavelengths, and the total transmissivity of the
FWM signal between the sample and the spectrometer is calibrated separately
asT2, as is the detection efficiency
of the spectrometer at the FWM wavelength, ηd. Spectrograms
of intensity vs wavelength/delay for (b) up-conversion and (c) down-conversion
FWM. The wavelengths of the pump and seed beams are labeled in each
figure with the intensity normalized by the respective maximum value.

As we are working with
ultrafast pulsed sources for both the pump and seed beams, it is crucial
that the pulse trains of the two beams are temporally overlapped to
observe the frequency mixing. To this end, a piezo-controlled delay
stage in one of the beam paths allows observation of the FWM at the
correct time delay.Figureb,c shows FWM spectrograms of the nanoantenna sample as a
function of the time delay between the pump and seed pulses. The FWM
signal only appears for time delays consistent with the 140 fs pulse
duration of the pump, which shows that the signal is indeed the result
of the frequency mixing of the two beams. The signal beam of this
system is slightly chirped, which is attributed to the dispersive
optics in the beam paths. Reliable SET
measurements require careful calibration of the pump and seed pulse
delay offsets, which vary dramatically across the tuning range. This
is shown inFigure.

Pulse calibration and spectrograms of intensity vs wavelength/delay
for up-conversion FWM. (a–l) Representative spectrograms of
intensity vs wavelength/delay for up-conversion FWM. The pump and
seed wavelengths are labeled in each figure with the intensity normalized
by the respective maximum value. The color bar is identical with the
one used inFigure. (m) Optimum delay for different combinations of pump wavelengths
(810–840 nm) and seed wavelengths (1450–1550 nm).

The observation of down-conversion signals from
the gold antennas
is a key development in this work, where previously these antennas
were measured in FWM up-conversion,with a low-noise
2D-array silicon detector. The down-conversion measurements in this
work were considerably more challenging given the weak near-infrared
emission near 1500 nm, the low field enhancement of the seed fields
near 583 nm, and the much more noisy InGaAs detector technology. The
observation of both up- and down-conversion FWM signals also shows
the unusual situation where visible- and infrared-photon pairs are
generated in the same antennas. Typically, SFWM is observed over narrow
spectral ranges due to phase-matching restrictions.

Having observed the FWM signals
for both up- and down-conversion, we constructed JSD maps of SFWM
photon pairs by scanning the wavelength of the seed beam. The wavelength
was tuned via the OPO, and great care was taken to select the delay
corresponding to the optimum FWM signal at each tuning value. We found
that the temporal pulse overlap changed significantly with wavelength
tuning.Figureshows
the JSD for up- and down-conversion SFWM. The signal wavelength shifts
linearly with the seed wavelength, which corresponds to the energy
conservation of FWM and further validates the occurrence of frequency
mixing. Notably, the JSD is extremely broad, showing the lack of phase
matching of parametric fluorescence from a single optical antenna.

JSD characterization.
JSD maps for (a) up-conversion and (b) down-conversion
FWM. The wavelength of the pump beam is 840 nm in both figures, and
the data are normalized by the respective maximum value. Although
the resonance extends beyond the seed wavelength range, a resonance
peak near 1470 and 590 nm is visible in (a) and (b) respectively.

The FWM appears to be optimal near 1470 nm for
upconversion (Figurea) and 590 nm for
downconversion (Figureb), which can be attributed to the antenna resonance of the bar.
The antenna resonance is much broader than the tuning range of the
various beams of our laser system, hence the JSD changes relatively
little in these maps. It is not possible in this case to scan much
further the seed beam wavelengths due to the fixed pump wavelength
and an instability of the OPO near 1425 nm. It is possible that the
variations over the FWM JSD here are due to alignment drifts during
measurements. This should be considered as a possibility given the
greater width of the apparent resonances compared to the wavelength
scanning range of the seed beam. Regardless of the nature of the signal
variations in this experiment, we show that this method can be used
to identify narrow resonant features in frequency mixing signals.
The shape of the JSD trace inFiguredemonstrates that the broadband photon in an SFWM
experiment with suitable filtering would exhibit significant spectral
correlations. For applications where heralded pure photons are desired,
a far narrower resonance, such as a surface lattice resonance or a bound state in the continuum, would be
needed to reach the corresponding circular shape of the JSD. Note that the JSD is not only useful for photon-pair
production but also reveals key information about the classical frequency
mixing process itself, such as the relative efficiencies for various
wavelength combinations.

The ease with
which SET produces JSD maps of parametric processes is already a powerful
application, but SET also enables the estimation of the spontaneous
photon-pair generation rate from a measurement of the analogous stimulated
process. According toeq, in order to arrive at the SFWM pair generation rate, we first need
to evaluate from our stimulated FWM measurements: (1) the rate of
incoming stimulating photons and (2) the rate of generated FWM photons.

wherePsis the seed beam power at the input of the focusing objective,T1,sis the transmission of the objective at
the seed wavelength, σsis the antenna cross section
at the seed wavelength, ωsis the central frequency
of the seed beam, andAsis the area of
the seed beam at the focus. In this report, all beam areas correspond
to beam radii where the field drops to e–2.

where we have multiplied the
SET ratio by the number of pulses per second, Ω, to recognize
that FWM occurs during each pulse, with the pulse duration setting
the coherent interaction time.

Here, we have substitutedeqs– as well asP̅p=PpT1,pσp/Ap, which accounts for the pump
power at the input of the objective,Pp, the objective transmission at the pump wavelength,T1,p, the antenna’s cross section at the pump wavelength,
σp, and the pump beam areaAp. The rate is also normalized against the number of particles,N, contributing to the FWM. The intrinsic rate normalizes
away both the pump power scaling as well as the inefficiency of coupling
the pump to the antenna, ηp= σp/Ap≈ 2%, providing an upper estimate
for the photon generation rate under ideal experimental conditions.
As this is larger than the power-dependent count rate experimentally
achieved,ṅSFWM, we also define
a power-independent extrinsic generation rate,RSFWM= ηpRSFWM,
which accounts for the inefficient coupling of the pump to the antenna
in our experiment.

The transmissions (T1,p,T1,s,T2), beam areas (Ap,As), and detector
efficiency (ηd) were measured and calibrated in the
experimental setup for both up- and down-conversion wavelengths (Figurea), and the antenna
cross sections at pump and seed wavelengths (σp,
σs) were estimated from extinction spectra measured
by FTIR spectroscopy (Figured,e). All calibration data are listed inTable.

We must finally account for the number of particles,N, contributing to the FWM, as the pump beam partially overlaps
with
neighboring particles in the array. We thus compute the overlap of
the squared pump field distribution that produces FWM with the antenna
positions in our sample. The number of antennas contributing to FWM,N= ∑Re–4πR·R/Ap≈ 3.02, whereRis a square lattice vector with
a length of 750 nm.

We are now equipped to estimate the SFWM
generation rate of our
nanoantennas from the stimulated FWM data. We first consider the case
of up-conversion FWM with λp≈ 840 nm, λs≈ 1500 nm, and λFWM≈ 583
nm. Usingeqsand , we calculateṅs≈ 2.58 × 1014photons per second andṅFWM≈ 6.43 × 106photons per second, respectively. ApplyingeqyieldsRSFWM≈ 1198 photon pairs
per second per mW squared per antenna (p.a.). In the down-conversion
case, the seed and signal wavelengths are interchanged such that λp≈ 840 nm, λs≈ 583 nm, and
λFWM≈ 1500 nm. Applying the same methodology
as above yields a spontaneous pair generation rate ofRSFWM≈
1762 photon pairs per second per mW squared p.a·.Tablesummarizes the above results.

There are several observations to note here. First,
we expect the
up and down conversion rates to be of similar values due to the symmetry
of the process. The values differ by less than 50%, which is encouraging,
while we acknowledge sources of error, including the extensive calibration
of detection efficiency and system transmission at the various wavelengths.
The normalization procedure developed for antennas here has nonetheless
worked fairly well, compensating for the different seeding conditions:
in the case of up-conversion, the bar resonance aligns with the seed
wavelength, while in down-conversion, the seed tuning to a resonance
of the antenna is only partial. Second, for reasons discussed above,
the nanoantenna samples in this work were not optimized for FWM emission,
and the ranges of wavelengths we work with are constrained by our
laser and the OPO system. Using multiresonant antennas, potentially
at different wavelength combinations, may increase the pair generation
rate. Notably, the difference between the internal and external pair
generation efficiencies suggests a large scope for improvement if
pump light can be coupled to the structures more effectively. Finally,
we have operated with relatively low average pump powers (2 mW for
up-conversion and 3 mW for down-conversion) due to the damage threshold
of our gold nanoantennas at about 5 mW in a diffraction-limited spot.
The pair generation rate would be greatly increased using a metasurface
design with wide area illumination of nanoantennas with higher average
pump power. Indeed, pair generation rates are quoted in units of inverse
power squared and per antenna (p.a.). Expanding the pump beam to excite
a metasurface of uncoupled antennas, while maintaining the local intensity,
would increase the pair generation rates linearly with the number
of antennas excited. Metasurfaces of coupled antennas could also be
explored, where the coupling would establish energy-momentum dispersion,
affecting the joint spectral density and potentially further enhancing
pair generation rates through collective modes.

In conclusion, we have studied the FWM
from subwavelength plasmonic
nanoantennas that support a single resonance at either the seed or
signal wavelength in both up and down conversion. We have applied
SET to construct joint spectral density maps, which reveal the spectral
correlations of signal and idler photons that would be generated by
SFWM in the antenna. We have also used SET to infer the intrinsic
and extrinsic SFWM photon-pair generation rates of our nanoantennas
for a particular configuration of wavelengths. We estimate these two
values to be ∼103and ∼1 photon pairs per
second per mW squared and per antenna. As this is a fairly conservative
estimate, we expect that the spontaneous pair generation rate can
be much higher by optimizing the nanoantenna design and moving to
the wide-area illumination of a derivative metasurface.

We believe
SFWM to be a promising alternative to SPDC for generating
photon pairs in metasurfaces, as it is a third-order nonlinear process
open to all materials, scales quadratically with pump power, and produces
broader bandwidth signal/idler photons. To realize photon pair sources
by this route, low-loss dielectric metasurfaces will need to be explored
to avoid background fluorescence inherent in absorbing materials.
We also find SET to be a convenient method for characterizing the
spectral properties of photon pairs generated via spontaneous parametric
processes, as it avoids background noise. The evaluation of pair-generation
rates in plasmonic antennas would not have been possible otherwise.
These findings will support ongoing efforts to design more efficient
metasurfaces and nanoscale sources of correlated photon pairs.

The gold nanoantenna arrays were
fabricated on silica glass by using standard electron beam lithography
(Raith eLINE Plus). The substrate was baked at 180 °C for 5 min
after being coated with a positive-tone PMMA resist (950 K A4). The
sample was baked at 90 °C for 1 min after coating with a conductive
polymer (Espacer 300Z, Showa Denko). The nanostructures were then
defined by electron beam exposure, followed by a development procedure.
The gold layer was deposited at 2Å/s, followed by a final lift-off
process.

To investigate the
linear optical response of the nanoantennas, the optical spectra and
electric field distributions were calculated using the finite-difference
time-domain (FDTD) method (Lumerical FDTD). Simulations were conducted
on a nanoantenna modeled as a gold (Au) bar with a cross-sectional
geometry of 340 × 80 nm and Au disks with a diameter of 160 nm,
lying on a silicon dioxide (SiO2) substrate. The dielectric
functions of Au and SiO2were adopted from the data of
Johnson and Christy and Palik, respectively. Perfectly matched layers (PMLs)
were applied at all boundaries to absorb incident light with minimal
reflections, and a total-field scattered-field (TFSF) source was employed
to efficiently model the polarized plane-wave excitation. The polarized
incident wave was applied, normal to the antenna configurations. The
mesh quality was validated through a convergence test to ensure the
accuracy. The absorption and scattering cross sections were calculated
by using the cross-section analysis groups, which measure the net
power flowing in and out of defined regions around the structures.
The extinction cross-section was determined as the sum of the absorption
and scattering cross-sections.

This research
was supported by the UK National Quantum Technologies Program, through
UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council grants - EP/T00097X/1 (UK Quantum Technology Hub in Quantum Imaging), EP/Z533166/1
(UK Quantum Technology Hub in Sensing Imaging and Timing).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.