This manuscript provides a review of the potential role for newborn genetic testing for autism, and whether the state has an inherent responsibility to facilitate and subsidize this. This is situated within the broader construct of benefits and limitations of genetic testing currently. Potential benefits of such pre-symptomatic genetic testing include facilitating earlier diagnosis and access to appropriate intervention which can improve the treatment outcome for the child and indirectly benefit caregivers and society by reducing the care-needs of the child and adult in future. However, there are several limitations to newborn genetic testing including the variable penetrance of ‘autism-risk’ genes, marked phenotypic heterogeneity of autism, real-world limitations in access to treatment, potential psychological harm to caregivers and financial considerations. We hence argue for facilitation of diagnostic genetic testing instead, especially for parents who seek to have greater understanding of recurrence likelihoods, related to reproductive-decision making. Facilitation of such testing can be in the form of both financial subsidies and infrastructural elements including availability of testing facilities and trained healthcare personnel for individualized pre- and post-genetic test counselling.

J and P are a young married couple and parents of B, their toddler child. B has age-appropriate motor skills but is non-verbal and socially withdrawn with global developmental delay. B has just been diagnosed to be on the autism spectrum by his developmental paediatrician. J and P are asked to decide on whether they would like B to undergo whole exome sequencing in order to try to ascertain a potential genetic cause for his autism. The test will cost approximately USD$3,500 which is a significant financial burden for the couple. But they are keen to know if there is a specific genetic mutation in B, especially because they are contemplating having another child in the near future and worry about whether he/she will be on the autism spectrum as well. Eventually they decline the test, due to financial difficulties and the need to provide for behavioral therapy for B. The couple remain extremely concerned about the chance of their next child being on the autism spectrum.

Given this growing scientific knowledge, genetic testing with the aim of identifying a specific genetic cause has become a standard part of clinical care for children following an autism diagnosis in some countries.11Chromosomal microarray was previously considered the standard initial genetic test with a diagnostic yield of approximately 12.2%.12To date, there are at least 1,586 genes annotated to associate with autism,13thus the significant genetic heterogeneity for this necessitates broad approaches to genetic testing. Exome sequencing has been shown to have a diagnostic yield of up to 36%,14and genome sequencing up to 68%,15and thus has replaced the microarray as the recommended first tier test for children with neurodevelopmental disorders.10,14Panel analysis comprising a selection of autism-associated genes are also available, though the yield of these are variable and depend on the coverage of genes included in the analysis.

Given such advances, is there a role for including analysis for autism in newborn genetic screening? And if so, how much of a role does the state have to facilitate and/or subsidize such screening? Can this help with early identification of children who need autism-specific intervention? In this paper we examine the arguments for and against the inclusion of autism-specific genetic testing for all newborns, within a healthcare system that subsidizes such testing to some extent, and compare diagnostic vs. pre-symptomatic testing.Figure 1provides definitions of the specific terms used in this manuscript.

Another potential benefit is that of beneficence to parents and society – whereby, by pre-symptomatic intervention can result in improved development, and hence the responsibilities of care for parents/caregivers can be reduced.29Parents of children on the autism spectrum are known to have high levels of stress and anxiety.30,31The child’s degree of difficulties resulting from autism and its related behaviours have known to be factors associated with this stress.32Thus, improved child outcomes can translate to lesser care responsibilities for caregivers. In turn, at a societal level, this may lead to adults on the autism spectrum who are better able to independently function within society and contribute to it better.

Secondly, the current landscape of autism treatment is fraught with limited access to intervention due to several factors including a lack of effective sustainable/low-intensity intervention programs, trained therapists, financial limitations in accessing interventions and geographical factors precluding access.38,39Effective interventions for autism40–42do exist and lead to tangible gains in communication, cognitive and daily living skills in most children, but access to such interventions is a challenge in much of the world today. As such, providing timely, sustainable and effective interventions for children who are currently diagnosed with autism remains an immense challenge in most countries, both in the developed and developing world.43Typical waitlists for autism treatments range from 1 to 2 years in most countries. Given this stark challenge, it is hard to posit that a healthcare system should and will be able to provide treatment for an infant or toddler who is at higher likelihood for autism based on a genetic test, in preference to older children who have been diagnosed and need treatment.

Thirdly, current treatment options for autism entail behavioural intervention with positive but variable outcomes and do not cure or completely prevent the diagnosis.41,42In other words, even with early and intensive behavioural intervention, it is not a given that the child will necessarily be completely well or not have any autism-related impairments in future. When coupled with the unpredictability of the exact phenotypic expression based on the genetic variant identified, this could result in an extremely stressful postnatal period for the family and caregivers of the infant in their attempts to process the information. In the scenario of an individual carrying a genetic risk variant but does not eventually manifest with the autism phenotype, knowledge of the genetic risk variant could do more harm than good.33Identification of that specific genetic variant may violate the principle of non-maleficence by causing psychological harm to parents as explained above. Such information may also take resources and time away from the other siblings in the family and indirectly result in their detriment.

Fourth, the limitations of genetic testing to include autism-risk variants is important to highlight. This can lead to both false positive and false negative test results. False positives include the scenario where the presence of a genetic variant by itself may not necessarily result in the autistic phenotype. Given the current understanding of the etiology of autism, and the proposed role of environmental factors, newborn genetic screens cannot take into account the environmental risk to the specific child. A result can thus be a false positive test especially if the genetic variant by itself, without the environmental interaction, does not lead to the autism phenotype i.e., there is a much higher probability of developing autism based on the genetic result, but in reality, the likelihood is not elevated and is closer to the population baseline risk. On the other hand, a false negative test may arise where there is a missed detection of an at-risk genetic variant. This is because, our current scientific knowledge related to autism is still limited and is rapidly evolving, hence there is the risk of tests not identifying (or reporting) certain genetic variants in a child because these may be currently classified as variants of uncertain significance (due to the knowledge base regarding their phenotypic association being limited). Similarly, genes which are not yet associated with autism in the scientific literature, at the point of testing would not be reported at all, although these may have an unidentified association. The proportion of genetic test results which are false negative or false positive as illustrated above, will likely change over time and likely reduce, in tandem with our growing understanding of the biological basis of autism. Hence, in future, with increased scientific literature, there may be a point in time where the ethical arguments for newborn genetic testing to include autism predisposition may change (especially if a specific panel of genetic variants are tested for) but for now, a normal newborn genetic screen in terms of autism predisposition would entail a risk reduction but not a risk elimination for autism and other related neurodevelopmental disorders. It is important for families to understand and contextualize this and this discussion will need to done by a trained specialist.

Finally, the cost of genetic testing, especially at a population level and who should bear this is important to consider. When the likelihood for autism is not uniform across all individuals, with some groups being at higher likelihood compared to the general population (e.g.; siblings of individuals on the autism spectrum) is it fair to subject all newborns to genetic testing that includes autism-risk variants? Or should this be something that is offered on an opt-in basis with the cost to be borne by the parents of at-risk newborns? In such a scenario, where financial subsidies are not provided, respecting the principle of parental autonomy will mean facilitating such testing; but with appropriate pre and post-test counselling in place, especially to convey the nuances of phenotypic variance and limits of test result interpretation as discussed above. Conversely, it may be justifiable to offer such newborn genetic screening at a subsidised cost only to those families with newborns belonging to higher likelihood groups. Do the potential societal benefits from earlier detection of genetic risk for autism and subsequent pre-emptive treatment for the child justify the state or healthcare system bearing the costs – especially given the increasing prevalence of the condition? This argument related to cost of testing also needs to be considered in relation to the current situation whereby costs of genetic testing in general are reducing worldwide. The cost of genome sequencing has plummeted from the initial USD$300 million in 1999-2000 to less than USD$1000 today.44Newborn genetic screening using genome sequencing is being evaluated in multiple sites.45–47While the ethical arguments for such broad-based testing constitute another set of complex issues, in its implementation, there would be minimal added costs for inclusion of high penetrance autism genes and such a move could be justified. In such a scenario, it would also be important to then be prepared to disclose information regarding the presence of any high-penetrance genes associated with autism, with appropriate genetic counselling in place, so as to facilitate developmental surveillance and potentially timely intervention.

The neurodiversity movement that recognises autism as a difference rather than a disability is also an important stakeholder in this debate. Increasingly, autistic individuals and parent advocates have questioned the overwhelmingly medical perspective of autism as a disorder, with historically accepted language at its core, when autism is an important identity for many individuals on the spectrum and often results in distinct strengths.48Indeed, such advocates argue that using the neurotypical lens to view autism does gross injustice to autistic individuals and urge for greater participatory and inclusive research.49Thus, the act of actively deciding against the birth of an individual with higher than population risk to be diagnosed on the autism spectrum may be perceived to go against the concepts of inclusiveness and embracing neurodiversity.

Given the significant disadvantages and potential harm of newborn genetic screening, a middle ground may be instead to facilitate genetic testing for all children following a diagnosis of autism. This could be in the form of financially providing for families who are unable to afford such testing and especially where the results of such testing may influence parental reproductive decisions. This could also manifest in having the option available (in terms of service, logistics and personnel) within each healthcare setting for parents who may want to do such testing. This has the promise to be beneficial to the child, his/her parents as well as society in the following ways.

At the child level, identifying a specific genetic variant or cause for the child’s autism may help to refine treatment for related conditions. Some individuals have autism as a presentation of an inborn error of metabolism.54Treatment of such conditions such as phenylketonuria, biotinidase deficiency, carnitine biosynthesis deficiency and urea cycle defects are readily available and can improve symptoms and prevent other clinical risks associated with the disorder. This applies especially to children with complex presentations and other medical symptoms which may not be readily explained. Identification of a specific genetic variant can thus directly impact clinical management of such children.

At the parental level, knowing a specific cause for their child’s autism can inform reproductive risk for parents and this information can be crucial in their decision for further children. Understanding specific risks especially for high penetrance monogenic or chromosomal disorders facilitates prenatal testing of an ongoing pregnancy or preimplantation genetic testing of embryos. This can allow the parents to exercise choice about future offspring. Being able to make an informed decision can be empowering to parents and respect their reproductive autonomy. This will be within the realm of procreative beneficence55and important to consider as parents will bear the immediate and long-term burden of caring for a child on the autism spectrum. Some parents may opt to continue with a pregnancy where the fetus has been identified to carry an autism-risk variant. This still enables higher postnatal vigilance for the child’s developmental and behavioral needs to allow for intervention at the earliest possible juncture. For genetic variants with variable penetrance and phenotypic expression, it can be challenging for families to make reproductive decisions; support by an experienced genetic counsellor or geneticist will be invaluable.

Lastly, at the societal level, more widespread testing of children on the autism spectrum will enable more tailored treatment, better informed reproductive decision making and earlier treatment, reducing costs to society. Further it can potentially increase the scientific knowledge towards the biological basis of autism and in turn, contribute to future advances in treatment in the field.

Indeed, from a distributive justice perspective, one can argue that every healthcare system should be able to provide genetic testing for autism. This includes being able to offer the tests, either locally or through international laboratories, having the necessary operational processes in place to run the tests and having trained healthcare professionals to counsel parents before and after genetic tests. Further, making genetic testing financially affordable or subsidised will be in the public interest in view of its impact not only on people on the autism spectrum, but also to their family, especially parents, and wider society.

Let’s return to B’s case. The results of his genetic testing would have a significant chance of making a difference to J and P’s future reproductive decision-making. We believe that financial subsidies are justified. This would enable them to perform testing, thereby allowing their autonomy to be exercised. Their psychological well-being may potentially be improved by such information and this may have flow-on benefits for B. Such subsidies should be facilitated within the healthcare system, perhaps in conjunction with specific means of ascertaining financial capabilities so as to ensure that any couple who will benefit from such testing is able to access it.

The authors thank Ms Sheena Nishanti Ramasamy (Department of Paediatrics, National University of Singapore) for her assistance in editing, formatting, and submitting the manuscript for publication.

This research was funded in whole, or in part, by the Wellcome Trust [Grant number WT203132/Z/16/Z] and [Grant number: 226801] for Discovery Research Platform for Transformative Inclusivity in Ethics and Humanities Research (ANTITHESES). For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.

Ethical approval is not applicable for this article.

This article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects.

RA and JS conceptualized the article. RA and HC wrote the original draft and JS critically reviewed and edited subsequent manuscript versions. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. RA is the guarantor and is responsible for the overall content of the final article.

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed.