A noninvasive method to estimate oxygenation and oxygen (O2) consumption rates in mouse brain tissue based on T1‐weighted tissue oxygen level‐dependent (TOLD) MRI was developed.
The aim of the present study was to estimate the kinetics of O2in tissue in order to facilitate the planning of radiation therapy.
The relationship between the proton T1relaxation rate and O2concentrations was examined in water and corn oil samples, which are models of the aqueous and lipidic phases of cell components.
T1maps of the mouse brain were obtained under breathing high oxygen concentration gas, carbogen (95% O2+ 5% CO2), or 100% O2, and shifts in the concentration of O2from the physiological state in the brain were then estimated.
Pseudo‐TOLD signals in blood samples, hemoglobin, and myoglobin aqueous solutions under oxygenation were measured to examine the effects of heme iron on T1.
O2metabolism in mouse brains was evaluated by the enhancement/diminishment rates of the TOLD signal when the breathing gas was switched from air to carbogen or 100% O2and when it was switched back to air.
Carbogen or 100% O2inhalation increased cortical O2levels by 0.28 or 0.26 mmol/L, respectively.
By analyzing the time course profile of the TOLD signal, the oxygenation rate, oxygenation level, and O2consumption rate were successfully estimated.
TOLD MRI has potential as a useful tool to estimate the quantitative indices of oxygenation and O2consumption rates in brain tissue.
The oxygenation rate,kox, and the O2consumption rate,koc, in the mouse brain parenchyma were estimated based on the increasing and decreasing phases of the tissue oxygen level dependent (TOLD) signal, which is oxygen‐induced enhancement of the T1‐weighted signal in the tissue.
An insufficient oxygen (O2) supply due to an immature vascular structure in tumor tissue induces tissue hypoxia [1,2].
Hypoxia shifts energy production in the cell from the TCA cycle to glycolysis [3].
Glycolysis results in lactate accumulation and causes a low pH environment [4].
Hypoxia may lead to treatment resistance and modify the redox status of tumor tissue [5].
Therefore, the quantitative detection of the partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) and evaluations of hypoxia in tumor tissues are important for planning cancer radiotherapy [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14].
Accurate and high‐resolution mapping techniques for hypoxia, pO2, and/or O2kinetics in tumor tissues may facilitate the success of treatment.
Positron emission tomography (PET) with molecular probes has been developed to detect tumor hypoxia [6,8,14].
However, the ability of PET techniques to map hypoxic regions in tumors based on the specific chemical binding reaction of the probe under low O2conditions is limited, and background signal contamination is unavoidable due to the pharmacokinetics of the contrast agent.
Although quantitative O2‐mapping methods based on electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) have been developed [7,8,9,10] and used on small animals, difficulties are associated with their application to humans due to weak signal intensity as a result of a low radio frequency (RF) with a larger resonator [15].
In contrast, MRI has high spatial resolution and provides three‐dimensional images of deep regions in humans.
Blood O2level‐dependent (BOLD) MRI has been utilized to investigate tissue O2requirements, particularly in brain functions.
The BOLD signal is the response of a T2*‐weighted signal induced by a population shift from paramagnetic deoxyhemoglobin (deoxy‐Hb) to diamagnetic oxyhemoglobin (oxy‐Hb), which decreases magnetic susceptibility and extends T2* [16,17].
Although O2kinetic parameters have been analyzed using T2*‐based BOLD MRI [18,19], BOLD signal intensity is less quantitative for pO2because it depends not only on tissue pO2but also on blood volume.
On the other hand, O2is a stable free radical species with two unpaired electrons that enhance T1‐weighted MRI contrast [19,20,21,22,23] and is less dependent on blood volume.
Molecular O2may enhance the spin–lattice relaxation rate similar to other paramagnetic contrast agents, such as gadolinium compounds [24].
Therefore, T1‐based tissue O2level‐dependent (TOLD) MRI detects direct responses in tissue pO2and is an important quantitative parameter [20].
Tissue T1shortening and T1‐weighted signal enhancement induced by breathing hyperoxic gas have been demonstrated in both animals and human volunteers.
Beeman et al. [25] reported a linear relationship between R1values and pO2in the brains of mice breathing gas containing a specific concentration of O2.
Winters et al. [26] showed T1shortening in normal abdominal tissues, including the liver, kidney, and paraspinal muscle, of rabbits breathing 100% O2, whereas T1extension was observed under breathing 10% CO2in air as well as carbogen (10% CO2+ 90% O2).
O'Connor et al. [27] examined the abdominal organs of healthy human volunteers at 1.5 T and found a positive shift in the T1‐weighted signal in the spleen, liver, paraspinal muscle, and renal cortex under breathing 100% O2.
The switching of gas from 100% O2to carbogen resulted in an additional signal increase in the liver, but not in the paraspinal muscle or renal cortex, and a slight decrease in the spleen [27].
Tadamura et al. [28] also detected T1‐weighted signal enhancement in the spleen and myocardium under breathing 100% O2in healthy human volunteers.
Furthermore, Jones et al. [29] reported positive T1‐weighted signal enhancement in the renal cortex of human volunteers under breathing 100% O2.
The use of TOLD in the planning of radiation therapy and controlling tumor/cancer is already several years in development.
Salem et al. [30] proposed that the oxygen refractory volume of lung tumor tissue under a 100% O2challenge in animals and/or human patients measured by mapping R1changes from that under breathing air has potential as a marker of hypoxic volume.
McCabe et al. [31] similarly estimated hypoxic fractions in the oropharyngeal tumors of patients by mapping the insensitive tissue volume of T1shortening caused by an O2challenge.
Dubec et al. [32] also evaluated tumor hypoxia in patients with oropharyngeal tumors and found that radiation therapy modified hypoxic volume.
Arai et al. employed oxygen‐sensitive MRI to differentiate radiation‐responsive from nonresponsive tumor areas based on tumor hypoxia and to predict tumor control.
Squamous cell carcinoma tumor tissue planted in the mouse hind leg showed a positive TOLD signal under high concentration O2breathing [20].
The amplitude of the positive TOLD signal, that is, the enhancement of the T1‐weighted signal, is associated with an increase in the concentration of O2in the target tissue.
However, in normal healthy muscle tissue, a negative shift in the TOLD signal, that is, the attenuation of the T1‐weighted signal, under high concentration O2breathing has been observed.
A negative TOLD signal makes the evaluation of pO2variations in muscle tissue challenging.
The incidence of the negative TOLD signal may be dependent on the tissue/organ.
Although the T1value observed in normal muscle tissue was stable or slightly extended under high concentration O2breathing [20,34], it remains unclear whether the negative TOLD signal in normal muscle tissue reflects variations in the concentration of O2in the tissue.
A population shift from paramagnetic to diamagnetic heme iron may also extend the T1value in muscle under O2breathing because muscle is rich in myoglobin (Mb).
Therefore, an O2‐induced positive TOLD signal may be observed in tissue containing low heme iron, such as the brain.
Effective oxygenation procedures that cancel hypoxia and enhance the effects of radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy in tumor tissues have been investigated.
Breathing carbogen or 100% O2represents an effective approach to increase tissue oxygenation [20,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34].
The T1‐based oxygenation responses of some tissues/organs do not always depend on the O2concentration in the breathing gas [20,26,34].
To select better oxygenation treatments for the brain, the oxygenation ability of carbogen and 100% O2was compared.
In the present study, a method was developed to evaluate O2metabolism, that is, oxygenation and O2consumption, in brain tissue.
Linearity between dissolved O2concentrations and the O2‐induced positive TOLD signal in the sample was confirmed.
The mechanisms underlying the negative shift in the TOLD MRI signal in muscle under O2breathing were then elucidated.
To establish whether the TOLD signal observed in brain tissue was positive and dependent on O2, the relationship between the shift in the T1‐weighted signal and changes in the T1value in the mouse brain induced by switching the breathing gas from air to high concentration O2was investigated.
A kinetic analysis of the increasing/decreasing phase of the TOLD signal induced by switching the breathing gas of mice was performed.
To assess pO2shifts in the brain, the volume ratio of water and lipid components in tissue was estimated in vitro.
A shift in the T1relaxation rate (R1), that is,ΔR1, in a sample induced by increasing/decreasing pO2is converted to a shift in pO2based on the T1relaxivity (r1) of O2.
In in vivo experiments, the tissue T1relaxation time (T1EXP) in a pixel/voxel comprises several different relaxation components (Equation1).
In mammalian cells, 70%–80% of cell components are water, while 30%–50% of residual cell components other than water are lipids.
Therefore, the T1value in tissue (T1T) is assumed to mainly comprise aqueous (T1A) and lipidic (T1L) components.
By using T1values in water and corn oil as T1Aand T1L, respectively, the ratio of aqueous and lipidic components in the mouse brain is roughly predicted (Equations2and3).
where VAand VLare the ratios of aqueous and lipidic volumes, respectively.
When r1of O2in water (r1A) and corn oil (r1L) is used as the estimation of r1in the aqueous and lipidic phases in tissue, a shift in pO2(ΔO2) in tissue may be expected as Equation (4) based on experimentally observed tissueΔR1.
Brain tissue oxygenation and O2consumption rates may be estimated by the time course of the tissue T1‐weighted signal enhancement induced by O2, that is, the TOLD signal, with the assumption that the TOLD signal in brain tissue is linearly related to pO2.
In the present study, the oxygenation rate,kox, the maximum level of the TOLD signal, Smax, and the O2consumption rate,koc, were proposed as indices for O2metabolism.
An exponential function (Equation5) is fitted on the increasing phase of the TOLD signal, and the parameters Toxand Smaxare estimated.
where Smaxis the maximum level of the T1‐weighted signal, and Toxis the time required to increase the TOLD signal to 63.2% of Smax.
The reciprocal of Tox, that is,kox= 1/Tox, estimates the increment rate of the TOLD signal, that is, the oxygenation rate.kocmay be estimated from the slope of the semi‐logarithmic plot of the decreasing phase of the TOLD signal.
Carbogen gas (a mixture of 95% O2and 5% CO2) was purchased from Tomoe Shokai Co. Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan).
Hemoglobin (Hb) and Mb were purchased from Sigma‐Aldrich Co. (St.Louis, MO).
Lithium phthalocyanine (LiPc) crystals were synthesized according to a previously reported method [35].
Other chemicals were of analytical grade.
Seven‐week‐old female C3H/HeSlc mice were supplied by Japan SLC Inc. (Shizuoka, Japan).
Animals were housed five per aluminum cage with a woodchip bed in climate‐controlled (23 ± 1°C and 55 ± 5% humidity) circadian rhythm‐adjusted (12‐h light–dark cycle) rooms and were allowed food and waterad libitum.
Mice were used in experiments after habituation for 1 week.
The total number of mice used was 12, with a mean body weight of 19.9 ± 0.58 g. Experiments (No. 22‐1010) were performed in compliance with the Guidelines for Animal Care and Use at the National Institute of Radiological Sciences and the National Institutes for Quantum Science and Technology (NIRS/QST) and were approved by the Animal Use Committee of the NIRS/QST.
Detailed information on animal handling and experiments was provided according to the ARRIVE guidelines [36].
Eight‐week‐old mice were anesthetized by 1.5%–2.0% isoflurane using air as the carrier gas.
Blood was collected from the abdominal artery 1 day before the experiment.
A portion of blood was centrifuged at 1000×gfor 10 min to obtain plasma and red blood cell (RBC) fractions.
Whole blood and fractions were kept on ice until MRI experiments.
O2solubility in corn oil used in the present study was assessed by EPR oximetry.
LiPc is a crystalized solid paramagnetic species, the EPR linewidth of which is broadened by a spin–spin interaction with O2[35,37].
LiPc crystals were placed into a 24‐cm piece of gas‐permeable polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tubing (i.d.
: 0.81 ± 0.025 mm, wall thickness: 0.051 ± 0.013 mm).
PTFE tubing was purchased from ZEUS (Orangeburg, SC).
An ~80‐μL aliquot of milli‐Q water or corn oil was carefully drawn into PTFE tubing, and LiPc crystals were immersed in the liquid inside.
The PTFE tubing was placed in a special quartz sample holder (FigureS1).
The gas line was connected to the bottom of the sample holder, which had a hole for gas flow.
The sample holder was set in the X‐band (9.4 GHz) EPR TE‐mode cavity, and the position of LiPc crystals was adjusted to the center of the sensitive region of the cavity.
The EPR cavity including the sample was warmed to ~30°C using an IR lamp and hot air flow.
The EPR linewidth of LiPc was measured under N2, air, or 100% O2gas flow (1 L/min).
EPR data acquisition was performed using an X‐band EPR spectrometer (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan), which was controlled by the WIN‐RAD ESR Data Analyzer System (Radical Research Inc., Hino, Tokyo).
The singlet EPR spectrum of LiPc was scanned under the following conditions: microwave frequency, 9.45 GHz; microwave power, 1 mW; center magnetic field, 337.3 mT; field sweep width, ±0.25 mT; field sweep resolution, 4096 points; sweep time, 1 min; time constant, 0.01 s; field modulation frequency, 100 kHz; field modulation width, 0.0063 mT.
The EPR spectra acquired were analyzed using an in‐house line‐fitting program [38], and the mixed Gaussian/Lorentzian line shape was fit with the best suited mixing rate.
The linewidth of the line shape was measured.
As a simple model of T1components in the aqueous and lipidic phases of a cell, the T1relaxivity of O2was estimated in water and corn oil.
Linoleic acid‐rich corn oil was selected as a model environment of the lipidic phase.
The T1‐weighted signal enhancements induced were dependent on O2concentrations in these solvents (pseudo‐TOLD signal).
An ~80‐μL aliquot of milli‐Q water was drawn into a 24‐cm piece of PTFE tubing, which was folded at the center to hold the water inside.
PTFE tubing was placed in a quartz tube (i.d.
= 3.6 mm), which was connected to the gas line at one end.
The quartz tube was set in the 7 T MRI scanner.
The sample temperature during the scan was maintained at ~30°C using hot air flow.
Figure shows a schematic of the experimental setting.
A T1map of a cross‐section of the phantom was measured under nitrogen (N2), air, carbogen, or 100% O2gas flow (400 mL/min) conditions.
T1‐weighted images of the phantom were repeatedly scanned for 21 min, during which air was flowed for the initial 5 min, and the gas was then switched to carbogen, 100% O2, or N2for the remaining 16 min.
The same experiment was repeated using corn oil, 5 mM Hb aqueous solution, or 5 mM Mb aqueous solution instead of milli‐Q water.
Using mouse whole blood, blood plasma, and the RBC fraction, the pseudo‐TOLD signal induced by switching gas from N2to air was observed.
Instrument details and scanning parameters are described below.
To confirm the quantitative estimations of oxygenation and O2consumption in brain tissue, changes in T1relaxation rates (R1= 1/T1) and T1‐weighted signal enhancements in the brain tissue of mice breathing gas with a high O2concentration as the carrier of anesthesia were measured.
The settings of mice, instrument details, and scanning parameters are described below.
The left panel in FigureS3shows a flow diagram of this experiment.
A T1map was generated under air breathing.
T1‐weighted images of the corresponding mouse head region were repeatedly scanned, during which the mouse inhaled air for the initial 5 min and carbogen for the next 16 min.
A T1map was then generated under carbogen breathing.
The breathing gas was subsequently switched back to air, and after a 5‐min interval, a T1map was obtained under air breathing.
Repeated T1‐weighted scanning was started, during which mice breathed air for 5 min and then 100% O2for the next 16 min.
A T1map was obtained under 100% O2breathing.
The settings of mice, instrument details, and scanning parameters are described below.
To examine oxygenation and O2consumption in the mouse brain, carbogen‐induced TOLD scanning was performed on mice.
A mouse was set on the MRI scanner, and repeated T1‐weighted scanning was initiated under air breathing.
The mouse breathed air for the initial 5 min followed by carbogen for the next 5 min.
The carrier gas was then switched back to air for the last 5 min.
The settings of mice, instrument details, and scanning parameters are described below.
An experimental flow diagram is shown in the right panel of FigureS3.
A mouse was anesthetized by 1.5%–2.0% isoflurane using air as the carrier gas.
The mouse was placed in the prone position on a custom‐built body cradle and immobilized using adhesive tape.
The respiration rate was monitored using a respiration sensor (MP150, Biopac System Inc., Goleta, CA, USA) and regulated at 60–80 breaths per minute.
Body temperature was monitored with a rectal probe (FOT‐L‐SD‐CI‐FI‐MI‐R2‐ST, FISO Technologies Inc., Germany) and regulated at 36.0 ± 2.0°C using a water‐circulating pad and warm air circulation system.
This inflammatory environment damages neurons and increases their vulnerability to further degeneration.
The proposed mechanism outlines how EBV infection can initiate PPMS.
These activated lymphocytes move into the CNS and amplify immune responses.
EBV-infected cells also express antigens like EBNA1 that cross-react with CNS proteins, driving autoantibody production.
This autoimmune activity disrupts immune control of EBV, allowing infected B cells to persist in the CNS.
Within the CNS, this cascade promotes oligoclonal antibody formation and T-cell activation, causing direct injury to neurons and oligodendrocytes.
The model highlights two major pathways, beginning with EBV infection of B cells and dendritic cells in lymphoid tissues, which stimulates autoreactive T- and B-cell expansion.