Over the past century, modern agriculture, through the use of synthetic fertilisers, pesticides, and improved plant breeding, has greatly increased food production.
However, this progress has brought serious environmental consequences, including excessive water use and harmful pesticide exposure.
In addition, future farming must adapt to the growing challenges posed by climate change and natural disasters through more sustainable practices and resilient crop management.
In this context, emerging supramolecular strategies offer promising alternatives through responsive molecular assemblies capable of precise sensing and controlled delivery.
In this review, we thus discuss the application of supramolecular chemistry principles to plant science and agriculture, with a particular emphasis on the design and implementation of host–guest systems, chemosensors, and supramolecular (nano)delivery vehicles for use in living plants.
We report and analyse recent advances in sensing and monitoring of plant processes, the detection of pesticides, the preparation of safer and more effective supramolecular pesticides, and nucleic acid-based crop protection strategies, highlighting key design principles specific to the plant biological context.
Moreover, key challenges are discussed regarding the application of supramolecular systems to plants, and examples are highlighted to promote new interdisciplinary strategies for designing next-generation tools for real-time,in vivoplant studies and sustainable crop management.
This review highlights the advances in the use of supramolecular (nano)systems for optical detection and delivery applications in plant sciences.
Agricultural breeding practices remain a valuable option for obtaining more resistant crops.
However, they cannot solve all problems, as they sometimes result in plant varieties that are more susceptible to environmental stresses.
For instance, this vulnerability has resulted in the imminent extinction of widely cultivated fruit crops, like the Cavendish banana, which faces the threat ofFusarium oxysporum, the pathogen responsible for the Panama disease.30,31In light of these challenges and limitations of conventional pesticides, there is an urgent need for advanced tools in plant science and in innovative agricultural practices, such as sensors for monitoring plant growth and “smart” strategies for improving pesticide application.
We anticipated that these innovations possess the potential to enhance crop protection, promote safer practices, and foster greater sustainability in agriculture.
In this context, supramolecular chemists are well-positioned to tackle the emerging critical challenges in plant science and agriculture.
By utilising their expertise, supramolecular scientists can contribute to the development of cutting-edge sensors that monitor fundamental plant processes in real-time with unprecedented precision, enabling efficient pesticide detection.
In addition, substantial progress can be achieved in creating cutting-edge pesticide delivery systems that minimise the overall use of current state-of-the-art pesticides while facilitating the adoption of innovative mRNA-based pesticide technologies.
This know-how encompasses supramolecular systems and tools – molecular assemblies that interact through noncovalent interactions, particularly those responsive to environmental stimuli – which have already shown groundbreaking applications in biomedicine.32–34Thus, we anticipate similar breakthroughs in agriculture and plant science if supramolecular chemists succeed in applying chemosensors, probes, and (nano)-delivery systems to this field and bring them to the market.
Particularly, crystal engineering,35,36a technique rooted in the first principles of supramolecular chemistry, has already demonstrated its ability to improve plant resilience, increase overall pesticide efficiency and diminish their toxicity towards mammals.37,38More sophisticated synthetic supramolecular tools, such as self-assembling chemosensors and probes, despite significant advances in targeted imaging and drug delivery for biomedical applications,32are currently difficult to adapt for agricultural use.
This is mainly due to the unique physical and biochemical properties of plants, such as their cell walls, phloem, and organelles like chloroplasts, which are absent in mammals, as well as the currently limited understanding of how plants take up, distribute, and eliminate supramolecular systems and nanoparticles.
Furthermore, developing supramolecular systems to specifically target certain plant organelles for improved crop protection and plant growth will undoubtedly play an increasingly important role in future research.
Equally important will be demonstrating their environmental compatibility and non-toxicity to ensure the approval of new generations of supramolecular (nano)pesticides, chemosensors and probes by national and state environmental and agricultural agencies.
In the spirit of the emphasis of Lowry, Giraldo, and coworkers, who state in their recent review that “there is a tremendous need for disruptive technologies to overcome challenges to meeting future food demand and to meet many of the 17 sustainable development goals…developing solutions to these challenges will require the convergence of thought, approaches and technologies across disciplinary and societal boundaries”,39we believe that supramolecular sensors, producing an optical (i.e., luminescent) signal readout, and delivery systems, particularly those leveraging host–guest chemistry in living plants, represent such essential technologies.
This review aims to summarise and highlight key examples of these systems.
Other reviews have previously outlined some specific aspects of the role of supramolecular chemistry in plant science, and interested readers are encouraged to consult these examples as well.40,41Herein, we provide a comprehensive and critical overview of the application of supramolecular tools, with a special emphasis on host–guest chemistry-based examples in plant science and agrochemistry, focussing on their utilisation in living plants.
We provide examples related to pest control and highlight developments of new strategies, such as RNA delivery to plants, where supramolecular design principles play an important role.
Additionally, an overview of the most relevant patents published in this area is provided.
Finally, the overall impact of applying supramolecular principles to sustainable agriculture is discussed, particularly emphasising the key challenges that still need to be addressed in this field.
Our goal is to encourage additional research that develops innovative solutions to existing and emerging challenges while promoting interdisciplinary collaboration and networking across a wide range of fields, including biology, chemistry, materials science, and engineering.
These are experimentally derived values found in the literature and applied to organic solvents.
To introduce selectivity in host molecules for specific guests or classes of guests, one can explore empiric concepts that are related to the supramolecular interactions mentioned above.
These concepts include entropy,51,52multivalency,53,54the packing coefficient,55,56the molecular electrostatic potential surface,57the energetic cost of receptor organisation,58,59conformational freedom and effective molarities,60,61the solvent cohesiveness,62–64the surface site interaction points,65the Hofmeister and chaotropic effect,66,67the solvent accessible surface area,68differential cavitation energies,69and the high-energy water release concept, as previously mentioned.
While these concepts are helpful in the design of host–guest systems, they fall short of providing a direct thermodynamic interpretation of binding events and should not be regarded as either a complete picture of the interactions or as mutually exclusive.
In the next section, we introduce the most prominent and widely used macrocyclic hosts for sensing and delivery applications.
Special emphasis is given to examples of hosts that are characterised by ease of preparation (through low-cost or one-pot synthesis), water solubility, non-toxicity, ease of functionalisation, and high binding affinity for biologically relevant molecules in aqueous environment – factors that are of critical importance in plant sciences.
To begin with, it is important to highlight that, in this review, macrocyclic chemosensors are defined as supramolecular tools composed of macrocyclic hosts possessing a cavity that reversibly binds their guests (i.e., small organic molecules, cations or anions, among others) under experimental assay conditions.
These macrocyclic hosts rely on noncovalent (supramolecular) interactions to selectively bind the guest inside or around their cavity, a process known as molecular recognition (Fig. 2).70In this context, the use of macrocyclic hosts offers the opportunity to transport and protect plant-active molecules, such as pesticides or nutrients, for improved delivery applications (see Sections 3.2 and 3.3).
Moreover, macrocyclic hosts equipped with a suitable reporter molecule can produce a detectable signal change (e.g., optical, electrical,etc.)
in the presence of an analyte, thereby forming a chemosensor ensemble (see Section 2.2).
Importantly, they can dynamically adjust (i.e., equilibrate) to changes in the sample's composition, in contrast to molecular probes, which are small organic molecules (see Section 2.3), that typically provide a static representation, thus making macrocyclic systems particularly suited for real-time monitoring of (bio)chemical and (bio)physical processes.
From a historical viewpoint, the first synthetic macrocyclic supramolecular host compounds for detecting metal cations (e.g., K+, Li+) were crown and aza-crown ethers, and bicyclic compounds of the crown ether type, also known as cryptands.71–75Notably, these have been successfully commercialised into sensor cassettes for biomedical applications;76,77however, to our knowledge, they have not been used in plant science or agrochemical research due to their selectivity for alkali metal cations, which limits their applicability.
This review primarily discusses macrocyclic compounds that act as cavity-bearing hosts for small organic molecules, which they bind through a combination of various host–guest interactions.
Calix[n]arenes (CXn,Fig. 2a) were first synthesised by A. Zinkeviathe reaction ofp-alkyl phenols, such as cyclic oligomers ofp-hydroxyalkylphenols, with formaldehyde in strongly basic solutions.100Later, J. Niederl and H. J. Vogel produced similar cyclic tetramers through the acid-catalysed reaction of 1,3-dihydroxybenzene (resorcinol) with aldehydes, such as benzaldehyde, yielding to what was successively identified as resorcin[n]arenes.
The cyclic structure of calixarenes was confirmed by C. D. Gutsche101and by the group of Andreetti, Ungaro, and Pochini,102–104whereas that of resorcin[n]arenes was elucidated by H. Erdtman and coworkers.105CXnconsists predominantly of 4, 6, or 8 phenolic units linked by methylene bridges, forming a cup-shaped structure with a hydrophobic cavity and phenolic OH groups at the bottom.
The phenolic –OH groups can be further functionalised to improve water solubility, for example, by introducing sulfonate, phosphonate, or trimethylammonium groups.106–108From a physicochemical standpoint, CXnpossess cavity sizes determined by the number of phenolic units: CX4 has a cavity of 3–5 Å, CX6 of 6–8 Å, and CX8 of 9–11 Å (Table 2), whereas more recently also so-called giant calixarenes have been described with 90 phenolic subunits.109Their different sizes, conformational flexibility and ability to be functionalised with a variety of groups strongly influence binding with guests, making this macrocyclic host class extremely versatile.
Functionalisation of CBnis more cumbersome than that of CDs or CXn: current strategies include the direct functionalisation of CBnor the use of functionalised glycolurils for CBnsynthesis.132,149–155However, the efficient functionalization of CBnremains a largely underexplored area, and further research is essential to expand their applicability.
Nonetheless, mono-functionalized CBnderivatives bearing reporter dyes have been developed,155–158enabling the design of unimolecular indicator displacement assays.
Such systems are particularly promising for creating salt- and dilution-stable chemosensors, including those with multimodal readouts.
Toxicological studies have shown that CBnexhibits no acute toxicity to mammalian cells and mammals such as mice (the tolerated dose for injected CB7 was 250 mg kg−1, while it was 600 mg kg−1for an orally administrated mixture of CB7 and CB8).159,160Moreover, the Wang group demonstrated that administering CB7 to mice, whether orally at 5 g kg−1, intraperitoneally at 500 mg kg−1, or intravenously at 150 mg kg−1, did not lead to any significant differences in body weight across the treatment groups.137As for their water-solubility (Table 2), the concentration of CB5 and CB7 in neat water can reach as high as 5 mM, with values as high as 20 mM also reported, whereas CB6, CB8 and CB10 only dissolve on a micromolar scale.
Combined with their excellent physicochemical properties for binding biomolecules, drugs, and pesticides, this makes them promising candidates for plant sciences and agrochemical applications.
While these aforementioned host classes remain up to date the most prominent examples of macrocyclic hosts in research and applications, the search for new macrocyclic hosts continues to be an active and valuable field, with the potential to yield novel structures possessing enhanced binding properties, such as improved selectivity and the ability to host larger guests.
This is exemplified by the development of the so-called deep cavitands (or deep cavity cavitands), which are prepared from resorcinarene or calixarene scaffolds and possess extended aromatic “walls”.173–176Furthermore, while most of these macrocycles exhibit strong binding affinity for hydrophobic and cationic guests, bambus[n]urils have been reported to show strong binding properties for anions.177,178In addition to macrocyclic hosts, coordination compounds also exhibit interesting host–guest properties and multifunctionality that can be used for drug delivery and sensing applications.179–181However, these latter structures, which are nowadays gaining increasing attention in the biomedical field, have so far not been investigated in plant science.
In addition, some ligands (e.g., salen-based ligands) coordinate with divalent ions, like Zn2+, to form emissive metal complexes, thus being them considered reactive probes, too.
In contrast, supramolecular probes are non-cavity-containing molecular systems; however, they interact with analytes through the formation of reversible, non-covalent interactions, which are much weaker compared to the typically covalent nature of interactions observed with molecular probes.188In this context, the interaction of the supramolecular probe with the target analyte leads to the formation of supramolecular assemblies (often referred to as aggregates) with distinct optical properties, such as detectable changes in luminescence or characteristic color shifts, which enables their use as sensors.
For instance, cyanine dyes can form supramolecular assemblies,192such as J-aggregates or less ordered structures, in the presence of analytes, exhibiting distinct photophysical properties compared to the monomer forms, thus enabling the development of luminescence-based sensors.
One promising direction for future research is targeted delivery, such as methods that utilise triggered cargo release for extended pesticide effectiveness and the potential for nanocarriers to break down into non-toxic byproducts that are environmentally friendly.
Moreover, the use of nanoparticles has shown a positive impact on improving gene therapies in plants by stabilising fragile nucleic acid-based cargo against degradation while simultaneously enabling organelle-specific delivery in plants.242Therefore, considering the emerging and promising potential to revolutionize crop protection and efficacy, the use of nanomaterials will be pivotal in the development of CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing tools and RNA interference (RNAi)-based pesticides,28,243–245by providing the necessary protection and improving the mode of action.
For example, the company AgroSpheres has developed genetically modified bacteria that produce double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) encapsulated within a lipid-bilayer nanoparticle, leading to a promising RNA-based pesticide to combat diamondback moth pests.246Given the delicate nature of bilipid membranes, there is significant interest in developing new nanomaterials that can provide both a well-controlled, stimuli-responsive release profile and long-term stability.
In addition to delivery applications, it is important to note that the utilization of nanomaterials for the real-time detection of plant metabolites and pesticides remains in an early stage.
This limitation is primarily attributed to the restricted capacity of nanomaterials larger than 20 nanometres to effectively penetrate plant cellular structures, thereby hindering their application in agricultural monitoring processes.247,248In addition, questions remain regarding the fate and safety of these materials in the environment, which is essential for determining their bioavailability.216,249,250Specific applications in plant sciences will be discussed in more detail in later sections.
We first provide an overview of the main nanomaterials currently being researched for applications in this field.
The discovery of the green fluorescent protein (GFP)251,252and advances in protein engineering provided the starting point for the development of genetically encoded sensors based on fluorescent proteins (genFPs), which are among the best-studied examples of nanosensors in plant science (Fig. 4a).253For genFPs, signal transduction based on Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET)254represents the main signal readout.255–257FRET-based sensors operate by detecting the light emitted from a FRET donor–acceptor dye pair.
During the FRET process, photoexcitation of the donor dye results in energy transfer from its excited state to the energetically lower excited state of the acceptor dye, causing the latter's sensitised emission.
The FRET efficiency is highly dependent on the distance between the donor–acceptor pair, thus enabling the detection of plant analytes modulating the distance or conformation of the FRET donor–acceptor pair.258Therefore, in their most basic design principle, genetically encoded and FRET-based nanosensors consist of two FRET-active proteins linked by an analyte binding domain (i.e., recognition domain).
Following analyte binding, a conformational change occurs in the nanosensor, thus modifying the relative distance between the two FRET donor–acceptor dyes.
This process can be monitored by recording the relative emission intensities of the two genFPs after the excitation of the donor.
Semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs,Fig. 4b)259,260can be used for preparing fluorescent nanosensors because of their near-infrared (NIR) emission261– a favourable feature forin vivoanalyses, as plant constituents do not strongly absorb in the long-wavelength region.
Signal transduction with SWCNTs can be achieved by taking advantage of the fact that their emission properties,e.g., emission wavelengths or intensities, strongly depend on the chemistry of their surface (corona)composition (Fig. 4b).
Strano and co-workers introduced this concept by wrapping SWCNTs with (bio)polymers, such as DNA, which can bind specific analytes.
This binding altered the dielectric environment of the SWCNTs, a phenomenon known as corona phase molecular recognition (CoPhMoRe),260,262–264which ultimately leads to modulated fluorescent signals.
As drug delivery carriers (Fig. 5), SWCNTs have gained considerable attention due to their extremely high surface area (>1000 m2g−1)265and the possibilities with which their surface can be functionalised with hydrophilic polymers like nucleic acids to enhance water solubility, as well as with other performance enhancers such as dyes, targeting moieties, and drugs.266–268Additionally, SWCNTs also enable a relatively novel uptake mechanism in plants, known as the lipid exchange envelope penetration (LEEP) model,269which allows them to be transported into and trapped within intact chloroplasts.
Carbon dots (CDots,Fig. 4)270,271have emerged as promising nanomaterials for fluorescence-based sensing and bioimaging due to their excellent dispersibility in aqueous media, ease of synthesis, and attractive photoluminescent (PL) properties.
These properties include excitation wavelength-dependent emission, robust photostability, and high photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQY) of up to 99%.272Thus, CDots are interesting for a wide range of applications in the fields of biomedicine, catalysis, and optoelectronics.273–275In particular, the excitation-dependent luminescence of CDots, which enables multicolour bioimaging without altering their chemical structure or size, is attributed to multiple photoluminescent centres and a broad distribution of energy levels.271Functionalisation of CDots is possible to extend their applications,276through techniques such as heteroatom doping and surface modification, enhancing their performance and expanding their application.
These modifications can provide CDots with additional reaction sites, enhanced stability, and other tailored functionalities for specific tasks.
The ability to fine-tune these nanoscale carbon-based materials has expanded their use in targeted drug delivery and bioimaging,277,278amongst other uses, highlighting their versatility.
Plasmonic nanoparticles are a class of nanomaterials that include various metal nanoparticles, such as gold, silver, and copper.
Their distinctive optical properties arise from their interaction with light, where the oscillating electric field induces a collective oscillation of conduction electrons at the metal surface – a phenomenon known as localised surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs).279Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)280is a technique used to detect molecules (analytes) by exploiting the large amplification of the Raman signal (by up to 1014times) when molecules are positioned on or between plasmonic nanostructures.281This enhancement occurs in LSPR hotspots, where light-excited plasmonic nanoparticles create strong local electric fields.
Molecules in these hotspots experience a much stronger electromagnetic field, leading to a significantly amplified Raman response.
While exciting near the LSPR maximum is generally preferred, as it corresponds to the strongest collective oscillation of conduction electrons, a slightly red-shifted excitation may be preferable if either the analyte or the SERS substrate exhibits fluorescence at or near the plasmon resonance wavelength, improving the signal-to-noise ratio.
Gold and silver nanoparticles (AuNPs and AgNPs) represent prominent substrates for the design of SERS nanosensors (Fig. 4c),282–285because their morphology can be precisely tuned.286–288Moreover, the nanoparticles’ surface can be easily modified with additional functional groups, such as stability enhancers,289,290dyes,291and receptor molecules,292–295through various methods,296e.g., thiol-mediated ligand exchange reactions, which have been shown to increase performances of nanosensors.
Similarly to metal nanoparticles, QDs (Fig. 4c)297–299are semiconductor nanoparticles with unique photophysical properties related to their characteristic small size (i.e., 2–10 nm).
The emergence of discrete quantized energy levels in these systems determines their luminescent properties, which relates them more closely to atoms than to bulk materials.300,301The most popular materials for biological applications are CdSe,302CdTe,302but also III/V group semiconductors or ternary semiconductors, such as InP,303,304InGaP305or AgInS,306which do not contain cytotoxic cadmium ions, are noteworthy alternatives.
The colour of the resulting fluorescent emission can be tuned by changing the diameter and composition of the nanoparticle.
Functionalisation,i.e., organic capping ligands or passivation,e.g., by creating a ZnO shell around the QD core,307–310is possible and often crucial for achieving high fluorescence quantum yields, obtaining longer decay kinetics, and high stability.311As for their physical features, QDs display a broad excitation spectrum while the resulting emission remains narrow,i.e., full width at half maximum (FWHM) intensity ranges from 20 to 40 nm.
In addition, QDs are characterised by a relatively large Stokes shift, which facilitates the acquisition of their entire emission spectrum.
Therefore, these properties facilitate their application to multiplexed imaging.
For example, their broad absorption spectrum implies that a single excitation wavelength can be used to excite multiple quantum dots with different emission colours simultaneously.
In a biological context, QDs are also attractive as fluorophores because they have a relatively good multiphoton excitation cross section and can emit infrared and far-infrared light.
In addition, the surface of QDs can be functionalised with fluorescent molecules participating in energy transfer processes,312and receptor molecules313–315– all features that can be exploited for developing advanced QD-based nanosensors.
Shortly after the successful research into producing micrometre-sized mesoporous silica particles (MSPs,Fig. 5b),316–318sol–gel-based bottom-up synthesis techniques for producing nano-sized particles were proposed,319–321with the most recent ones comprising single-micelle templated synthesis methods.322–325The presence of ordered mesopores (pore size: 2–50 nm) in MSPs allows for the encapsulation of bioactive molecules, such as pesticides,326enzymes327–329and nucleic acids,330,331while the outer surface of the particles can be functionalisedviaalkoxysilane-based chemistry with performance enhancers, such as dyes, catalysts, targeting moieties (e.g., cell surface receptor ligands) and polymers, for enhanced colloidal stability.332–334Importantly, silica is environmentally friendly as it is a major constituent of soil and has received GRAS approval from the FDA.
Besides, several clinical trials using silica-based nanoparticles are currently underway.335An intriguing aspect of employing sol–gel-based synthesis methodologies to prepare MSPs is the ability to covalently integrate reactive organic functional groups into a silica framework.
This integration results in the formation of what is known as mesoporous organosilica particles.
In this context, various stimuli-responsive groups have been used to design on-demand breakable nanoparticles, including redox-reactive (e.g., disulfide and diselenide),324,336–338and hydrolysable (e.g., amide, oxamide, carbamates, imines and nucleic acids) groups.339–344This functional design helps reduce unwanted bioaccumulation, because particles can be engineered to degrade quickly after being exposed to a specific external or in-plant-occurring stimulus.
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs,Fig. 5c)345represent a class of crystalline microporous materials synthesised through the self-assembly of metal ions or clusters, such as Zr4+, Fe3+, and Zn2+, with organic ligands like carboxylic acids or amines.346An exceptionally attractive feature is the ability to impart a high degree of chemical modularity to them, as a wide variety of metal nodes and organic linkers are available for the preparation of functional MOFs.
Characterised by exceptionally high porosity, MOFs can achieve internal surface areas (sometimes exceeding 6000 m2g−1) and pore volumes approaching 90%, making them important candidates for various advanced applications such as in gas storage (e.g., hydrogen and methane storage) and selective adsorbents for separation processes.347–349Recently, their high porosity has prompted the exploration of drug-delivery applications,350,351given their capacity for high drug loading and potential for controlled release.
However, challenges remain, including concerns about their toxicity and stability in water, which limit the scope of their applications.
Yet, some MOFs have reached applications in environmental contexts, such as in water harvesting,352showcasing how intelligent design can address stability concerns and potentially reduce ecotoxicity.
Polymeric nanocarriers (Fig. 5d) consisting of natural or synthetic polymers generally exhibit greater stability in biological fluids than lipid-based nanoparticles that are prominently used in the biomedical and agrochemical fields.353Their physicochemical properties can be easily tuned as various synthetic methods are available to produce polymers and block copolymers with well-defined chain lengths, chemical compositions and morphologies.353An effective strategy for developing degradable polymer nanoparticles is to incorporate labile crosslinkers.
For instance, acid-labile crosslinkers allow for the degradation of nanoparticles in acidic environments, such as those present in certain tumors or lysosomes compartments.354Polymeric nanoparticles offer extensive chemical modularity as their building blocks can be easily modified to achieve tunable properties such as molecular weight, charge, chemical functionality and hydrophobicity.
A wide range of polymeric nanoparticles for biomedical applications is currently being investigated, typically categorized into synthetic polymers and biopolymers such as chitosan or hyaluronic acid.
DNA nanotechnology355,356has paved the way for the preparation of nanoparticles with a variety of shapes with unrivalled precision, driven by the programmable and predictable Watson–Crick–Franklin base pairing of nucleobases.357These DNA-based assemblies (Fig. 5e) provide fine-tuneable control over size, shape, and function, making them versatile tools for biological applications, such as imaging, sensing, and drug delivery.358–361The now relatively straightforward synthesis and functionalisation of DNA using various methods, such as solid-phase peptide synthesis, enables production on a laboratory scale, and some larger-scale synthesis methodologies exist.362–364However, new methods must be developed to enhance production and facilitate the economical use of these materials for commercial purposes.
Despite the many successful stories of DNA nanostructures for their biomedical applications, challenges remain in achieving effectivein vivostability, targeted distribution, and cellular uptake of DNA nanostructures.365–367These challenges need to be addressed to fully realize their potential in the medical field, and also for plant science in the context of this review.
Generally speaking, the delivery of substances to plants can be accomplished in various ways, including uptakeviathe foliar surface, through the roots, or by infiltration methods.
The foliar delivery route primarily exploits the stomatal pathway as the main route through which plants absorb substancesviatheir leaves (Fig. 6).378Stomata are pore-forming structures within the micrometre size range, located in the epidermis of leaves, and consist of two guard cells that are essential for gas exchange during photosynthesis.
In addition to the stomatal pathway, the cuticular pathway also contributes to leaf uptake.
The plant cuticle is an extracellular, hydrophobic layer that covers the aerial epidermis of all land plants and serves as a protective barrier against dehydration and various environmental stresses.379This layer is composed predominantly of cutin,380a complex polyester-based biopolymer, and includes C20–C34 wax compounds such as alkanes, aldehydes, primary and secondary alcohols, ketones, and esters.
Due to its waxy and hydrophobic nature, and with pore sizes typically smaller than 2.4 nm,381,382the cuticle presents a major barrier to the penetration of substances.
For efficient deliveryviathe foliar pathway, the adhesive properties of the applied substances are of crucial importance.
Particle size, whether in the form of molecular aggregates or nanoparticles, plays an important role, as larger particles are more easily washed off and exhibit reduced adhesion to leaf surfaces,383a phenomenon that is particularly pronounced for hydrophilic substances since plant leaves, especially those with thick wax layers, tend to repel aqueous formulations.
To enhance leaf uptake, surfactants such as Triton X-100, Silwet L-77, sodium dodecyl sulfate, and dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide are often employed, as these surfactants reduce surface tension and facilitate the release of active ingredients at the leaf surface.247After penetrating the epidermisviaeither the stomatal or the cuticular pathway, substances are primarily transported within the plantviathe phloem.384This vascular tissue transports plant metabolites from the leaves to the basal parts and consists of various cell types, including sieve elements, companion cells, and phloem parenchyma (in trees, the phloem represents the innermost part of the bark).
More in detail, it is generally believed that the mass flow of the phloem, which constitutes the principal sugar-transporting tissue in plants, is simply driven by an osmotically generated pressure gradient.385The accumulation of sugars and other substances in the phloem is the starting point for the long-distance sugar transport in plants, which can be either apoplastic (crossing of the cell wall and the plasma membrane) or symplastic (direct cytoplasm-to-cytoplasm crossing).386A critical factor that may limit the systemic transport of non-plant metabolitesviathe phloem is the size restriction imposed by the pores of the sieve plates, which is largely species-dependent and can typically range from several micrometers to a few hundred nanometers.387,388However, a comprehensive understanding of the factors that determine the efficiency of phloem translocation from the plant surface, particularly regarding physicochemical properties such as charge and surface coating of small molecules and nanoparticles, has still not been reached.
Concerning the uptakeviathe roots (Fig. 6), natural absorption processes of the plant can be exploited for introducing molecules by the hydroponic system, which allows systemic distribution in the vascular system.389,390The initial barrier for transport through plant roots is the root exudate layer, a layer of organic compounds released by plant roots into the soil consisting of low-molecular-weight compounds (such as amino acids, sugars, organic acids, phenols, and secondary metabolites) and high-molecular-weight substances (primarily mucilage and proteins).391The exact influence of exudate composition on the uptake of substances, particularly nanoparticles, is not well understood and further complicated by species-specific variations.
After traversing the exudate layer, substances encounter the root epidermis and cortex before reaching the endodermis.
At this stage, the Casparian strip,392a suberin- and lignin-rich structure encircling endodermal cells, forms a critical barrier, restricting the apoplastic transport.
Although the Casparian strip theoretically impedes nanoparticle passage, some studies have reported successful translocation across this barrier.
Even after substances have successfully entered the plantviafoliar or root uptake, they still face the subsequent challenge of internalization by the targeted plant cells (Fig. 6), representing the next critical hurdle in the delivery process.
Structurally, the plant cell wall is a dynamic fibrous composite material that is essential for the maintenance of cell shape, mechanical stability and regulated growth.393Particularly, primary cell walls, produced during cytokinesis, are thin (0.1–1 μm) and flexible, composed mainly of cellulose microfibrils embedded within a hydrated matrix of pectins and cross-linking glycans.394,395These components are primarily interconnected through hydrogen bonds, forming a coherent network that facilitates cell expansion driven by turgor pressure.
The resulting structure is porous, with pore sizes, although dependent on species, typically around 13 nm, and a common size exclusion limit for nanomaterials is in the range of 5 to 20 nm.396The cell wall carries a negative charge, and electrical gradients across it can range from −50 mV to −100 mV,397which is substantial enough to hinder the transport of charged substances.
Once growth is complete, many cells reinforce their primary walls by depositing a secondary wall that is enriched with cellulose and lignin, a phenolic polymer that provides additional stiffness and hydrophobicity, particularly in xylem and sclerenchyma tissues.398The passage of molecules and nanoparticles therefore initially encounters a passive selective barrier in terms of size and charge, before encountering the plasma membrane of the cell.
The plasma membrane, composed of a lipid bilayer embedded with proteins, constitutes a selective barrier that generally requires active transport mechanisms, such as endocytosis, for translocation.399,400Following internalization, particles may be directed to vacuoles or endosomes, where they can be subject to degradation or sequestration.401Consequently, efficient intracellular delivery may depend on the ability to escape endosomal compartments, a process that remains not fully understood in plant cells.
Additionally, intracellular enzymes can degrade small organic molecules or functional groups present on nanoparticle surfaces, posing another challenge for effective delivery.
Another method, particularly used for delivering nucleic acids, relies on biolistic particle delivery instead,408in which the cargo is loaded onto microscopic particles and physically ‘shot’ into plant tissue or cells using high-pressure gas or an electrical discharge.
The downsides of the latter two techniques are the need for specialised equipment and, in some instances, careful optimisation to avoid cell damage.
Additional methods, such as pressure-driven infiltration and (v) grafting techniques, are also used, each with unique advantages and limitations.
The choice of the delivery method depends on factors such as the properties of the molecule, the plant species, the tissue type and the specific research objectives.
More generally, for nanoparticles whose uptake is strongly influenced by their size and the porosity of various plant membranes, several strategies have been developed for their delivery and interfacing with plants: (i) protein-based nanosensors are introduced into plants by translocating their corresponding nucleic acid sequences, such as plasmid DNA, into the plant cells.411,412In other instances, nanoparticles are transferred to plant leaves by various infiltration methods (e.g., infiltration through leaf laminae)413(ii) by direct injection, or (iii)viasoil drenching techniques.414Nevertheless, it should be noted that the transport of nanomaterials remains an active area of research aimed at elucidating the mechanisms underlying their traversal across plant barriers and cellular uptake.247,383,415–417These processes are still largely unexplored, with many elusive mechanisms yet to be discovered.
Factors such as nanoparticle size, shape, zeta potential, surface chemistry, and the formation of protein coronas in plants must be further researched to advance this field.
It is important to note that plant cell walls, regarded as the most likely route for nanoparticles to penetrate plant cells, possess pores measuring between 5 and 30 nm.
Therefore, future nanoparticles should be synthesised to be smaller than this 30 nm threshold.421,422Interestingly, a recent study has shown that cellular internalisation of nanoparticles is not necessarily required for RNA transport into mature plant leaves.423Specifically, small interfering RNA (siRNA)-functionalised gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) of varying sizes and shapes were tested for uptake inNicotiana benthamianacells, and surprisingly, 10 nm spherical AuNPs already achieved 99% efficiency in cell penetration, suggesting that the particles associate with the cell wall and gradually release their siRNA cargo.
Secondary metabolites include alkaloids, nitrogen-containing plant compounds involved in defence against herbivores and pathogens (e.g., nicotine, caffeine, quinine, atropine),436anthocyanins437and terpenoids (e.g., α-pinene, limonene, menthol, caryophyllene or β-carotene),438which play a role in plant defence, growth regulation and communication.
It is clear that, in plant science, the development of sensor technologies, pesticides and nucleic-acid-based pesticides is key for improving the resilience of plants to external stress factors (e.g., pests, diseases, environmental conditions) and increasing crop yields.
Thus, monitoring stress-related metabolites, such as alkaloids, terpenoids, proline, abscisic acid, and reactive oxygen species (ROS), can provide real-time insights into plant responses.
This promotes sustainable agricultural practices by improving resource efficiency, reducing pesticide usage, and aiding in the development of new strategies to enhance plant resilience to ongoing climate change.
Hormone levels, such as auxins, cytokinins, and gibberellins, play a crucial role in regulating growth.
At the same time, monitoring nitrogen, including amino acids and nitrate, as well as phosphorus metabolism, such as phosphate esters, offers insights into the nutritional status of the organism plants.
Pesticides are chemical substances or biological agents used to control, repel, or destroy pests that damage crops, livestock, or other valuable resources.
Particularly, pests include insects, weeds, fungi, rodents, and microorganisms such as bacteria and viruses that can harm plants or transmit diseases.
For this reason, pesticides are classified into various categories, such as insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, rodenticides, and bactericides.
Globally, approximately three million tons of pesticides are used annually to control pests, according to estimates by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,439with usage following an increasing trend.
From a chemical perspective, pesticides can be classified into organophosphates, phosphonates organochlorines, (thio)carbamates, neonicotinoids, phenoxy acetic acids, triazines, sulfonylureas, and benzimidazoles, among the most prominent classes (seeFig.
The production, use, and disposal of pesticides have serious disruptive consequences for ecosystems, making it crucial to reduce their usage by developing more effective pesticides that require smaller quantities or by discovering new, more selective alternatives.440This effort must also ensure that pesticide production remains cost-effective while minimizing its ecological impact.
Efficient application of pesticides and nutrients is indeed crucial for effective plant protection.
Nowadays, conventional methods such as foliar spraying, soil application, and fertilization face several challenges, such as low efficiency, environmental pollution through run-off and accumulation in the soil, non-specific action on insects and mammals, and long retention times.
Endometriosis diagnosis, other chronic illnesses, employment, age and marital status were also included in the model as confounders.
For interpretation, in the current figure the covariations and errors are not included.
In the DataS1, the complete figure is included.
Pain, pain severity; PF, physical functioning; T1/T2/T3, Time 1, Time 2 & Time 3.
In Tables 1 and 2, the descriptive statistics and bivariate correlations for the study variables are reported.

Subsequently, the eleventh rib was anchored to the overlying rib using transfixing stitches with non-absorbable sutures (Figure3).
No pleural drainage placement was required.
The postoperative chest X-ray showed normal surgical outcomes.
Anchoring of the right 11th rib to the overlying rib using a transfixing suture in Tycron 1.
No postoperative complications occurred.
The patient was discharged on the first postoperative day.
She underwent follow-up through outpatient visits at one week, one month, and three months postoperatively.
At one week postoperatively, the patient reported using analgesic therapy, taking 1000 mg of paracetamol twice a day and oxycodone/naloxone 10/5 mg twice a day for six days, as stated in the discharge letter.
She reported a pain level of 6/10 on the NRS before taking the analgesic medication.
After one month, she had discontinued analgesic use, with a pain level reduced to 1/10 on the NRS, and the chest X-ray showed normal postoperative findings.