Gene‐culture coevolution (GCC)—an ambitious synthesis of biological and social sciences is often used to explain the evolution of key human traits.
Despite the framework's broad conceptual appeal however, empirical evidence is often perceived as limited to a few key examples like lactase persistence.
We argue this apparent gap between theoretical appeal and empirical evidence stems from conceptual ambiguities regarding the scope of relevant gene‐culture interactions.
Drawing on recent work in animal gene‐culture coevolution and human genomics, we propose a “broad” approach that formally incorporates drift and migration alongside natural selection.
This builds upon and subsumes the existing “narrow” framework focused on selection.
Through case studies of skin pigmentation evolution and gift‐exchange network influences on genetic variation in Melanesia, we demonstrate how cultural factors shape both adaptive and neutral genetic variation and population structure.
This integrative perspective accommodates diverse empirical findings while opening new avenues for research in human evolution.
A new perspective on human evolution has emerged over the past 50 years that attempts to integrate insights from the “natural” and “social” sciences into a comprehensive formal framework that can explain the distinctive evolutionary trajectory of the human species.
Variously labeled as “gene‐culture coevolution” ([1], used exclusively hereafter), “culture‐gene coevolution” [2] or “dual inheritance theory” [3], this approach posits that genes and culture represent two separate, yet deeply intertwined, inheritance systems that often result in (adaptive, but occasionally maladaptive) phenotypic change over time [4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11].
That “species‐defining” human phenotypes—for example our capacity for language, technology, cooperation, and complex problem‐solving—are not solely determined by genetic variation, but subject to a rich causal mosaic of interacting factors, including the cultural environment, is widely accepted [12,13,14].
The study of such interactions is not exclusive to gene‐culture coevolutionary theory; it is also important, for example, in the quantification of gene‐environment interactions and the analysis of correlations between relatives [15,16].
However, the evolutionary significance of this interplay can be elucidated through a theoretically rigorous and empirically grounded science of gene‐culture coevolution.
The central concepts of gene‐culture coevolution have changed relatively little since its inception through the pioneering work of Cavalli‐Sforza and Feldman [4,7,11], and later Boyd and Richerson [3].
At its core, it shares with broader cultural evolutionary theory a commitment to the idea that the population‐level transmission dynamics of cultural information mimic those of biological evolution sufficiently to allow for an evolutionary framework of cultural change [17].
But beyond that, it focuses on the possibleinteractionsbetween the two systems of inheritance, that is, co‐dependence of genotype and cultural phenotype.
For example, the term “gene‐culture coevolution” is often applied to instances where, by modifying ecological conditions, cultural traits shape the form of natural selection acting on the population's genome (a process known as cultural niche construction, see for example, [18,19,20]).
Our understanding of gene‐culture coevolution is typically closely aligned with the traditional use of the term “coevolution” in evolutionary ecology.
In a now‐classic paper, titularly asking “When is coevolution?” Janzen [21, p. 611] defines coevolution as “an evolutionary change in a trait of the individuals in one population in response to a trait of the individuals of a second population, followed by an evolutionary response by the second population to the change in the first.” Even though Janzen himself did not specifyadaptiveevolutionary change, he does credit an earlier paper by Ehrlich and Raven [22, p. 606] with establishing the field of coevolution, who in turn specifically highlight “reciprocal selective responses.” Indeed, natural selection is often invoked as the primary mechanism generating coevolutionary dynamics [23], and the terms of “coevolution” and “coadaptation” are usually used interchangeably within evolutionary ecology [24].
However, Janzen's focus on trait‐level coevolution, specifically, has been subject to revision [23,25].
In a recent review, Dixit [26, p. 212] characterizes coevolution somewhat more broadly as “reciprocal adaptive evolution at any level of biological organisation.” Three key elements of this definition are worth drawing out here: coevolution is (a)reciprocal, that is causally bidirectional (echoing [21]), (b)adaptive, i.e., primarily effected through mechanisms of selection and adaptation (and thus, effectively collapsing coevolution and coadaptation), and (c)multilevel, that is, not limited to inter‐specific evolutionary interactions.
This useful contemporary definition moves away from more traditional ones (e.g., [21,24]) by explicitly allowing for coevolutionary dynamics beyond genes as the primary substrate of coevolution and inter‐specific interactions as its primary arena.
This is to say that even evolutionary ecology is moving away from privileging “classic” dynamics between predators and prey, or hosts and pathogens, as the sole focus of coevolutionary thinking.
However, like those earlier definitions, it invokes a deep causal interdependence between the coevolving elements—or, more precisely,dynamic reciprocal evolutionary change, usually in the form of specificcoadaptationmarked by reciprocal influences on the relative fitness of interacting traits and specific phenotypes [23].
Accordingly, a key aspect of gene‐culturecoevolutiontheory is that biological and cultural evolutionary processes interact through mutual causal feedback.
For instance, biologically rooted predisposition toward certain relevant phenotypes (e.g., evolved perceptual, motivational or cognitive biases) may shape what and how cultural information is acquired, stored and transmitted.
At the same time, cultural practices can modify the ecological conditions that drive natural selection on the human genome, including genotypes underlying the traits that enable and amplify enculturation in the first place [27,28].
To account for this interplay between often disparate domains of inquiry, the science of gene‐culture coevolution must draw upon a wide range of relevant disciplines, from genetics to cognitive science and cross‐cultural anthropology.
Such an ambitious scientific endeavor requires conceptual clarity.
In the present paper, we set out to both clarify and expand what researchers traditionally mean by “gene‐culture coevolution.” We first query the central scientific motivations behind applying gene‐culture coevolutionary frameworks and definenarrow gene‐culture coevolution, namely the more traditional and commonly applied approach, before subsequently introducing an expansion of that framework, which we callbroad gene‐culture coevolution.
This expanded framework incorporates nonselective mechanisms, namely drift and migration, into gene‐culture coevolutionary theory, which produces a more comprehensive explanatory framework for analyzing recent human evolution.
We illustrate the utility of this wider viewpoint with two examples of the way culture interacts with these processes: the buffering role of cultural traits in the adaptive evolution of skin pigmentation, and the way that migration by way of a traditional trading network, the Kula ring, may have shaped genetic patterns in Oceania.
We conclude by considering the limitations and boundaries of this expanded approach and suggesting a way forward for the wider field.
Many common definitions of gene‐culture coevolution mirror, explicitly or implicitly, the coevolution through‐coadaptation conception that dominates evolutionary ecology.
Their originators, among them many of the field's key contributors, appear primarily concerned with gene‐culture interactions that lead to “new selective pressures” [10, p. 8985], to “selection […] generated or modified by [culture]” [1, p. 453], or that become the “basis for genetic selection” [29, p. 879].
In other words, the focus clearly appears to be onselectiveprocesses, namely on cases where cultural elements modify the natural selection of genetic variation (the “culture‐to‐genes” direction of gene‐culture coevolution), but where the requirement of reciprocal co‐adaptation—that is, cases where frequencies of associated cultural and genetic variants change together—appears to have been relaxed (see also [30]).
Narrowgene‐culture coevolution focuses on the reciprocal action of selective processes on both cultural and genetic variation (see Figure1).
Culturally evolved traits and the local ecology can interact to form the selective environment (including tangible and intangible features, e.g., physical geography and social norms).
In principle, this interaction is inherently reciprocal.
Some cultural traits are adaptive and shaped by the local ecology [31,32].
At the same time, culturally evolved traits can profoundly shape both the local ecology itself (e.g., choosing or modifying the landscape) and the impact of ecological variation (e.g., buffering against seasonality), a phenomenon known as “niche construction” [33,34,35].
While the dynamics of these interactions are important topics of research in themselves, the gene‐culture coevolutionary framework primarily concerns their outcome, namely, the eco‐cultural “landscape” that sets the stage for genetic selection, which affects adaptive genetic variation.
Take the flagship example of gene‐culture coevolution, lactase persistence (i.e., the ability of humans to digest lactose into adulthood; see Box1).
Here, the eco‐cultural dynamics of dairying practices and availability of grazing land lead to presence or absence (or varying extent) of dairy pastoralism, which in turn determines the fitness advantage of lactase persistence‐related alleles, whose spread, in turn, may affect the incidence and utility of dairying.
Causal diagram for narrow gene‐culture coevolution.
The arrows here represent the following causal interactions: (a) cultural selection on cultural variation (i.e., the differential transmission and copying of cultural variants, e.g., due to conformist bias), (b) genetically evolved (cognitive) biases in social learning, (c) population‐level cultural adaptation (through individual‐level learning), (d) cultural niche construction, (e) the eco‐cultural environment as a source of selection, (f) natural selection of (adaptive) genetic variation, (g) natural selection of cultural variation, (h) genetic and developmental biases in the natural selection of cultural variation (e.g., evolved anatomical morphology, lactase persistence genotypes, etc.).
The best known example of narrow sense gene‐culture coevolution is the evolution of human adult lactose tolerance and the associated ability to digest dairy products.
Most humans (and most mammals) lose the ability to digest lactose, a disaccharide sugar that forms the principal component of milk, as they mature [36].
However, some populations have retained this ability, termed lactase persistence, due to genetic variants in the lactase gene LCT and associated regulatory regions such as MCM6 [37,38,39,40].
These populations also tend to have a strong cultural history of cattle farming and milk consumption, giving rise to the now‐classic gene‐culture coevolutionary hypothesis that dairy farming, as a cultural practice that provides a novel abundant source of milk in the diet, may predate this adaptation and may have produced the selection pressure to favor lactase persistence [41,42,43,44,45,46].
This example also showcases the potentially transformative power of gene‐culture coevolution, as selection on LCT is estimated to have been some of the strongest selection in the human genome to date [47].
While this represents a textbook example of gene‐culture coevolution (e.g., [6]), not all details of the lactase persistence story are fully understood, and important aspects (e.g., the strength, timing, and mechanisms of selection) are continually revisited and updated as new ancient DNA is analyzed and archaeological evidence emerges [48,49].
For example, Evershed et al. [50] have noted that selection of lactase persistence alleles does not seem to correlate with the level of milk exploitation (arguably the cultural trait in question), highlighting the complexity of gene‐culture coevolutionary inference even in the narrow sense.
Furthermore, there is the distinct possibility that a two‐trait model of gene‐culture coevolution is insufficient for understanding even this example, as evidence suggests some populations may have adapted culturally by reducing the lactose content of milk through further processing (e.g., fermentation into yogurt [51];) or developmentally through changes to the microbiome [52], rather than genetically via lactase persistence.
Nevertheless, the evolution of lactase persistence is remarkable in the wide attention and general acceptance it has received in the scientific community as a cross‐disciplinary phenomenon [39,50], spanning genomics, medicine, anthropology, and archaeology.
This prominence has played a key role in reifying the belief that narrow gene‐culture coevolution is not just a hypothetical possibility, leading geneticists and interdisciplinary teams to propose other candidate cases of gene‐culture coevolution (albeit only rarely in the terms of that theory).
For example, among indigenous Inuit populations of Greenland, there is evidence for extensive genetic adaptation to diets with a high content of polyunsaturated fats (or PUFAs), which has been posited to be a direct function of the predominantly fishing‐based subsistence of these Arctic marine hunters [53,54].
Elsewhere, human dietary adaptations have been proposed for regulating the intake of a number of other macro‐ and micro‐nutrients, including starch Perry et al. [55], iron [56], calcium [57], zinc [58], and selenium [59]—the relative abundance of each of which in human diets is often directly dependent on the subsistence culture [60].
Local adaptation may also have shaped physiological responses to dietary by‐products and toxins.
Genes coding for alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), an enzyme involved in the detoxification and processing of alcohol, exhibit remarkable geographic variation and signatures of recent selection [61,62]; some variants may result in a protective genetic response to cultural practices such as rice cultivation in East Asia, which gave rise to increased alcohol consumption [63].
Recent studies of ancient DNA suggest that the number of copies of the amylase gene may also have increased as a consequence of human adoption of agriculture [64,65].
More generally, the genetic variation favored by culturally modified natural selection may feedback to shape the selection acting on cultural variation in at least two ways.
On the one hand, both cognitive biases towards certain cultural traits [66,67] and a psychological bias towards cultural learning [27,68,69] may evolve and shape the action of cultural selection, namely the biased transmission and spread of certain cultural variants [9].
On the other hand, genetic contributions may also influence the fitness, and hence natural selection of individuals with certain cultural traits, or certain variants of a particular cultural trait.
In the lactase persistence example, the presence or absence of lactase persistence may have modified the fitness advantage of practicing dairy pastoralism [44].
Taken together with the culturally shaped selection on genotypes, these two pathways produce the reciprocal feedback fundamental to the classic gene‐culture coevolutionary approach (see Figure1).
With its focus on selection, this narrow mode of gene‐culture coevolution is often invoked as a framework to explain the form and function of evolved cultural and biological traits, as well as their perceived distinctiveness.
In this context, such a selection‐focused approach can certainly be productive.
Gene‐culture coevolutionary approaches to explain such phenotypes as lactase persistence (see Box1) or even large‐scale cooperation and musicality, employ gene‐culture coevolutionary theory in this fashion [2,29,70].
Our key contention is that if, conversely, the aim of gene‐culture coevolutionary research is to elucidate the wider evolutionary dynamics of species with a rich cultural capability, humans chiefly among them, and specifically the causal role culture plays in influencing these dynamics, then abroaderarray of gene‐culture interactive processes needs to be considered to fully account for the emergence of and change in genetic and cultural variation.
In their initial formulation of the cultural evolutionary theory in which gene‐culture coevolution is rooted, Cavalli‐Sforza and Feldman [11] extensively model the role that neutral evolutionary processes like drift and migration, rather than selection alone, play in shaping not only genetic, but also cultural evolution.
However, subsequent works that can be seen as early approaches to gene‐culture coevolutionary theory de‐emphasize drift and migration as core mechanisms [3,6], and largely adopt the narrow approach outlined above.
Only recently has the importance of drift and migration in the explicit context of gene‐culture coevolution again been highlighted, notably in work on nonhuman animals, such as whales, where the influence of culture on both adaptive and neutral (i.e., nonselective) evolutionary processes is emphasized [30].
Why is it important to adopt a similar approach in regard to human gene‐culture coevolution?
As we describe below, there are strong empirical reasons to do so.
Genetic analyses suggest that human biological evolution since the emergence of our species is profoundly affected, perhaps dominated, by drift, founder effects, and gene flow, rather than (positive) natural selection [71,72,73].
This implies that a focus on selection alone is unlikely to reveal the full picture, and that other evolutionary processes, including (cultural impacts on) mutation, drift, and gene flow, should be included.
In fact, it seems highly plausible that narrow gene‐culture coevolution may inadvertently exclude some of the most important forms of evolutionary interaction between genes and culture in humans.
Additionally, without retreading the adaptationism debates of the 70 and 80s (but see [74], for a helpful review), it is important, if perhaps obvious, to consider that if gene‐culture coevolutionary approaches onlylookfor adaptation, they will onlyfindadaptation (or a lack thereof).
That is to say, any evidence generated in a “narrow” gene‐culture coevolution framework will frame the evolutionary dynamics of a given trait primarily in light of selection.
As other have argued, there are distinct (practical) limits to such an adaptation‐focused approach in explanations of human phenotypes [75].
Furthermore, such critiques are certainly not unique to the context of human gene‐culture coevolution, but embedded in a broader conceptual discourse in the natural sciences.
Indeed, neutralist‐selectionist debates [76] and disagreements about the role of “constructive neutral evolution” [77] in the evolution of traits and species pervade the field of evolutionary biology more broadly, and remain largely unresolved [78].
And yet, given such schisms, it is worth noting here that our approach does not reject what we have termed “narrow gene‐culture coevolution,” but rather subsumes it.
A broad approach to gene‐culture coevolution does not ignore selection, nor does it eschew adaptation—it merely places these phenomena in a wider evolutionary context.
In short, we believe that approaches to gene‐culture coevolution may differ inscope(emphasizing selection alone vs emphasizing selection, drift, and migration) because the application of the framework may differ inpurpose(explaining traits vs. characterizing wider evolutionary dynamics and the causal role of culture in this context).
As such, broad gene‐culture coevolution accepts all the core gene‐culture interactions of the narrow framework but also incorporates two additional evolutionary mechanisms that contribute to both cultural and genetic variation: drift and migration (see Figure2).
Eco‐cultural dynamics may interact with selection, but can also shape gene and cultural trait frequency changes that arise through drift and migration.
There is strong molecular evidence to suggest that such neutral evolutionary forces have played a major role in shaping extant patterns of human genetic variation [11,71,72,73, pp.
109–124, 157–179].
This is not to say that selection, both positive selective sweeps and background selection, is unimportant in explaining genetic variation and adaptation in humans [79,80,81,82,83].
Some studies even suggest that recent linked positive selection (i.e., selection on genomic regions that are physically adjacent to actual targets of selective sweeps) may affect as much as half of the human genome [81], though subsequent analyses have called this result into question [84,85], and other estimates are much more conservative, at 10% or less [73].
Similarly, background selection (i.e., purifying selection acting on deleterious variants) may lead to a substantial reduction in genetic variation of up to 20%, and is likely both fast‐acting and pervasive [80,86], though the relative importance of background selection and drift remains an open empirical question [87], and “narrow” gene‐culture coevolution is more typically interested in selective sweeps.
In any case, the broader implication is that a substantial fraction of human genetic variation is dominated by nonselective processes.
Causal diagram for broad gene‐culture coevolution.
In addition to the processes outlined in Figure1, this framework includes the following: (i) cultural drift, (j) eco‐cultural and demographic background conditions of genetic drift (e.g., environmental carrying capacity and population size), (k) genetic drift, (l) eco‐cultural and demographic background conditions of migration (e.g., geographical barriers and the cultural knowledge needed to overcome them), (m) gene flow, (n) demic diffusion (i.e., movement of cultural traits through movement of people).
Additionally, what many of these estimates have in common in that they rely on contemporary genomic data in making these complicated inferences.
Conversely, Simon and Coop [72] decompose the contribution of gene flow, drift and selection to allele frequency shifts between both ancient (5000 years bp) and contemporary European genetic samples.
They conclude that gene flow (especially from Yamnaya Steppe pastoralists) and drift account for virtually all changes, leaving only a marginal explanatory role for selection.
Akbari et al. [88, p. 2] working with a similar data set to Simon and Coop, find “an order of magnitude more genome‐wide significant signals than previous studies,” but even they note that only about 2.35% of their observed allele frequency changes appear to be caused by directional selection—certainly a substantial number, but a far cry from being the dominant evolutionary force on the genome‐wide scale.
In light of these results, a theory of gene‐culture coevolution that ignores neutral processes appears limited in its explanatory potential.
In fact, Simon and Coop [72] illustrate our point elegantly.
Both the time frame and geography of their example broadly mirror the evolutionary context of the European lactase persistence example (i.e., Central Europe over the last 5000 years).
Yet Simon and Coop find that this narrowly localized (at the genetic level) selective event, one of the strongest evidenced in the human genome, leaves virtually no detectable pattern on overall genetic variation.
This is to say—narrow gene‐culture coevolution here explains the emergence of a particular phenotype, lactase persistence, but not the wider patterns of change in genetic variation.
Those patterns appear instead to be largely shaped by an influx of Yamnaya steppe pastoralists into Europe, and the genetic legacy of those migrants [89,90].
But what allowed this influx to happen?
What cultural traits allowed the Yamnaya to spread across Europe in the first place (e.g., technological innovations such as wagons, or a pervasive culture of horse riding that enabled their nomadic pastoralism (see [91,92])?
And what interactions between sex, environment and culture may account for the remarkable divergence in sex‐specific genetic variation in Yamnaya lineages reported elsewhere [93,94]?
We do not claim that these questions go unanswered entirely, but they are typically not answered in the framework of gene‐culture coevolution.
Broad gene‐culture coevolution does explore such questions, and by doing so may attempt to link patterns of cultural change and heterogeneity, which may themselves be characterized by cultural selection and adaptation, to the broad genetic shifts documented by [72].
Ultimately, ignoring how culturally evolved practices and institutions influence nonselective processes like drift and gene flow may overlook many interesting phenomena.
Drift is a stochastic process of allele or trait frequency change that fundamentally depends on two factors: effective population sizes, and the strength of selection.
In finite populations, smaller population sizes magnify the effects of sampling errors that arise from gametic reproduction or stochastic between individual variation in reproductive success.
Additionally, since selection acts as a deterministic influence on allele frequency changes, its strength may limit the stochastic influence of drift (and vice versa).
Both population size and strength of selection are likely to be profoundly shaped by culture [95].
Culture may intensify selection, both because cultural activities are capable of bringing about unusually rapid, consistent and heritable changes in environmental conditions relative to noncultural sources of selection [96], and because (at least in humans) cultural practices have led to striking increases in population size (discussed below).
However, the opposite effect is also plausible, with culture leading to relaxed selection on genes.
In domains where cultural and genetic traits covary and jointly influence phenotypes, changes in cultural variation may mask genetic effects, effectively shielding the underlying genetic variation from selection and increasing the role of drift in determining the dynamics of genetic evolution [6,11,14,97,98].
Interestingly, as the relevant mechanism here still primarily concerns changes in direction or magnitude of selection, this particular aspect of drift‐based gene‐culture coevolution can be construed as covered by “narrow” gene‐culture coevolution (e.g., [6]).
In practice, however, investigating relaxed selection, while well‐documented within broader evolutionary anthropology (e.g., in the evolution of dental morphology [99,100]), is not the usual aim of (empirical) gene‐culture coevolutionary study.
Furthermore, the relative strength of random genetic drift (over selection) is also a function of the effective population size of reproducing individuals [101,102], which may also be subject to eco‐cultural influence.
Subsistence transitions, for example, have likely facilitated substantial and rapid increases in population size and density since the mid‐to‐late Pleistocene by modifying environmental carrying capacity [103].
The genetic signatures of such subsistence transitions is evident even in some populations that transitioned from hunting and gathering to agriculture within the last millennium [104].
Notably, drift may affect both genetic and cultural variation (Figure2), because stochastic variation in transmission is likely also to influence cultural evolution.
Population size and other demographic factors, for example, likely play a role in the preservation of cultural variation and in the efficacy of cultural evolution to generate successful phenotypes [11,105,106,107,108,109].
Additionally, in a reversal of the cultural masking mechanism described above, genetically evolved traits that functionally overlap previously learned ones may release some cultural variation from selective constraints [14,110,111].
Respondents were also asked about areas of support that the survey may have overlooked.
Several mentioned the need for services for amputees, such as obtaining prosthetic funding, accessing support groups, and receiving psychological care for body-image concerns.
Other missing areas included vocational retraining, assistance for undocumented patients, and support for families or caregivers.
The central finding of the survey was that 64.8% of respondents worked in clinics without personnel dedicated to helping patients with psychosocial aspects of recovery.
Despite this gap, 90.9% agreed or strongly agreed that having a dedicated social worker would be beneficial.
Surgeon discomfort in managing psychosocial issues is well established in prior literature [11,12].
Meanwhile, rising patient volumes and shrinking healthcare budgets have created conditions in which surgeons identify cost, time, and space as significant barriers to integrating needed patient support.