This study examines professional isolation in Finnish public primary healthcare and how general practitioners (GPs) craft their work in health centres and in the doctor's consulting room in particular.
Consulting rooms are often places of isolation and loneliness but simultaneously arenas of independence and autonomy.
The data consisted of 16 interviews of Finnish doctors, out of whom 13 worked in public health centres or were specialising in general practice at the time of the interview and three worked in hospitals.
This study shows how institutional material‐discursive practices that create the consulting room isolate the GP and how this generates feelings of loneliness, as well as how GPs aim to make the workplace more inhabitable through crafting themselves as independent and autonomous doctors or through crafting the environment to enable collaborative relationships.
Through this kind of crafting, the GPs create professionally sustainable jobs and roles for themselves in the public primary healthcare organisation.
General practitioners (GPs) in Finland and other countries with developed healthcare systems commonly report experiencing feelings that researchers have interpreted asprofessional isolation(Aira et al.2010; Larkins et al.2004).
Professional isolation concerns aspects of clinical work, such as physical separation from other professionals, making decisions alone or the lack of senior support, opportunities to consult on medically difficult cases or for debriefing (ibid.).
Finnish studies have found that professional isolation causes emotional distress and feelings of loneliness on top of the aforementioned problems, ultimately driving doctors away from primary healthcare (Lepäntalo et al.2008).
GPs' work is emotionally burdensome even without isolation.
The vulnerability and emotional burden of medical doctors is a well‐researched topic (e.g., Gothill and Armstrong1999; Litvina et al.2020; Nettleton et al.2008) and further builds the knowledge we have about this professional group with relatively great societal power and authority.
This article examines professional isolation in a Finnish public primary healthcare organisation, the health centre and in the GP's consulting room, in particular.
The research questions are as follows: How does professional isolation occur in Finnish health centres?
What do the GPs do in response?
The article's contribution is twofold.
First, it shows how institutionalmaterial‐discursive practices(Barad2007; Orlikowski and Scott2015) of the consulting room isolate the GP, and second, how GPscrafteither themselves as independent or their surroundings as collaborative by enacting different materially, discursively and socially embedded practices.
In approaching professional isolation, my starting point is in institutionalist and organisational theory, and I aim to analyse how the institutional role that doctors inhabit in the health centre is sociomaterially organised.
The sociomaterial perspective entails an interest in the concrete environment of primary healthcare work: the GP's consulting room.
The sociomaterial ormaterial‐discursive(originally conceptualised by Karen Barad) nature of these practices means that discourses and the material are seen as ontologically inseparable (Barad2007; Orlikowski and Scott2015,2023).
Through practices, the world and ‘reality’ are constantly remade, and ‘for anything to exist, it must be materialised in specific times and places through actions, texts, models, codes, and so on’ (Orlikowski and Scott2023, 6).
Thus, the material consulting room does not exist without its discursively given meanings and vice versa; the discourses framing GPs’ work do not exist without being materialised in spaces.
I will show how professional isolation in the consulting room is a result of different sociomaterial practices that isolate the doctor and shift the focus from a static and fixed concept of professional isolation found in previous studies (Aira et al.2010; Larkins et al.2004) to a constantly changing process involving multiple concurrent practices.
To emphasise doctors' roles as not only ‘inhabitants’ of the organisation they work in but also as crafters of their daily work and work trajectories, I analyse how professionals manage ambiguous demands and make sense of the problems faced at work.Craftingin the context of medical work and care has many meanings and has been the subject of many theoretical discussions.Job craftingis a concept developed by organisational psychologists Wrzesniewski and Dutton (2001) to describe actions such as changing the number, scope and type of job tasks; changing the quality and/or the amount of interaction with others or changing cognitive task boundaries in order to redefine and shape work.
By crafting their jobs, workers aim to create better work trajectories for themselves, improve job satisfaction and enhance work identity or meaning (Wrzesniewski and Dutton2001).
For example, Fuller and Unwin (2017) have shown how people doing ‘dirty work’ change the primary function of their work to retain high esteem and pride, and Yu and Jyawali (2021) have shown how women adapt to the masculine work environment by negotiating competence and reframing creativity.
In a recent study on nurses, Felder et al. (2024) show how job crafting can be a valuable retention strategy but is still restricted by the policies and conventions of medical organisations.
Carmel (2013) has used the concept of craft in analysing the application of different kinds of knowledge and the interaction with the materials in medical work, offering a broader understanding of medical work than the traditional science/art dichotomy.
Crafting relates also to the concept oftinkering(Mol et al.2010; Wallenburg et al.2013), which refers to incorporating different, sometimes conflicting, practices together in order to make things work out.
My perspective on crafting focuses on how GPs craft their workspaces, roles and relationships, that is, the organisation, to make sense of the ‘reality’ of their work that is produced through material‐discursive practices.
By looking at crafting in the sociomaterial context of the consulting room, I aim to understand how human actors—GPs—make sense of their work while being a part of the practices themselves.
Scholars have called for a ‘place‐sensitive’ sociology (Gieryn2000) and a thorough examination of material elements and physical infrastructures in the context of health, illness and care (Ivanova et al.2016; Martin et al.2015; Nettleton et al.2018).
Here, the interest lies in the material‐discursive practices creating the doctor's consulting room.
The room has many sociological interpretations that describe the relationship between the doctor and the patient: It is the stage (Goffman1956) at which the doctor and patient meet, an encounter in which the voice of the lifeworld comes across the voice of medicine (Mishler1984) or a spatial territory for control and power (Eräsaari1995).
Architecturally, consulting rooms adapt to a wider style of public office and bureaucracy space design which—before open‐office design—resembled the Foucauldian ‘prison cell system’ and the ‘strategy of individualism’, which Eräsaari (1995, 137–48) has recognised in the Finnish context as well in her classic research on bureaucratic spaces.
Although industrial offices with their ‘cubicles’ and visible hierarchies have been reformed into post‐industrial open offices in many sectors, in the health centre the cubicle prevails, presumably for patient privacy and information security reasons.
Eräsaari (1995, 148) describes how the dominance of the ‘cell office system’ links to Finnish culture in general: ‘It is an architecture of loneliness, silence, sensitivity, shyness and anxiety’ (author's translation).
Thus, the physical space serves as a site of cultural understandings (Gieryn2000).
The health centre is an organisation with formal ideals and rationales, informal work practices, social interactions and physical infrastructures.
Whereas old institutionalism sees doctors as constructing the health centre through their medical and organisational work, new institutionalism sees doctors as the result of the centre's organising logics and norms.
Inhabited institutionalism (II) is somewhere in between these and suggests examining the institutions locally, focusing on how interaction, organisation and institutional ideals are related to each other (Hallett and Hawbaker2021).
‘II is at its best in examining ‐ ‐ how the meanings and implications of institutional myths and rationales get worked out in social interactions, and how those meanings become the basis of ongoing organisational activities which have implications for the very institutions that shape organisations and the people who enliven them’ (Hallett and Hawbaker2021, 21).
VanHeuvelen (2019) complements II by zooming in on the built environment and how it shapes the way in which people work.
VanHeuvelen (2019) showed how the spatial change in the design of a children's intensive care unit facility affected the local work culture by limiting opportunities to meet and communicate with other workers, producing feelings of isolation and increasing individual responsibility in care assessment.
However, employees maintained the collaborative culture by inventing new ways of meeting and communicating (VanHeuvelen2019).
As stated above, many scholars see the discursive and the material reality being intertwined when examining the use of spaces.
However, as Orlikowski and Scott (2015,2023) argue, leaning on Barad’s (2007) agential realism, discourse and material are ontologically inseparable.
Thus, their focus is onpracticesthat are material‐discursive (or sociomaterial) and constantly constitute the world.
Orlikowski and Scott (2015, 703) encourage organisation and management scholars to move from studying interaction between entities to ‘concern ourselves with detailing how specific materialisations of discourse make a difference in practice, and with what performative consequences’.
Therefore, the organisational logics cannot be separated from the physical setting, nor can interactional habits be separated from the places where people work.
Building on these perspectives, I will show how both phenomena, professional isolation and GPs' ways of crafting their work, are entangled with the physical spaces, organisational logics and norms, professional discourses and interaction between different (human and nonhuman) actors.
GPs' work includes many tensions ranging from the individual level to the historical professional level.
GPs are considered one of the least prestigious groups among medical specialities, which has been explained by, for example, the close relationship with patients and the general medical knowledge base (Norredam and Album2007).
As general practice deals with older, multimorbid patients and involves less technology and more social problems, it is positioned lower, and thus, work in health centres can be considered ‘dirty work’ (Hughes1984) within the medical profession.
According to a recent study, GPs in Finland feel less appreciated by colleagues from other specialities than hospital doctors (Wrede et al.2022).
However, many international studies have described general practice as one of the ‘lifestyle friendly’ specialities (Creed et al.2010) and as ‘nice work’ (Jones and Green2006).
The institutional position of most Finnish GPs is that of an employee in a public health centre, which originates from the Public Health Care Act of 1972 and which created a locally anchored yet nationally steered primary health service for Finnish citizens.
Primary healthcare services collect client charges, but services are mostly free of charge.
Currently, the primary health service consists of 138 health centres and around 4000 GPs (The Finnish Medical Association2022).
Until the social and healthcare reform that shifted the organising role to the newly established welfare services counties in January 2023, primary care was organised by municipalities, and health centres' systems of organising medical care varied significantly.
In some health centres, doctors were assigned a pool of patients in accordance with the ‘population responsibility model’ or the ‘personal doctor’ model.
These population groups were often 2000–3000 people per doctor and usually composed based on residential areas.
This model was often critiqued for its uneven distribution of health problems, although it also enabled some kind of continuity of care.
The other prevalent model was a ‘working‐hour model’ in which doctors worked according to weekly schedules and patients saw the doctor that was available.
In this model, the doctors work overtime less often, but continuity of care is endangered.
In Finland, the working population has separate occupational healthcare, which is mainly organised by private service providers and paid by the employers.
Thus, primary care patients are mostly older people, unemployed, children or other nonworking people.
This dual healthcare model is one significant factor in increasing and maintaining health inequalities among Finnish people (Manderbacka et al.2017).
Currently, the financial situation of welfare counties is alarming, and the Finnish government has responded to the situation by, for example, introducing cuts in services, increasing compensations for private health services and bringing back the so‐called ‘personal doctor’ model to ensure the continuity of care.
Thus, the primary care sector is undergoing dramatic challenges and changes that affect the professionals working in these organisations.
The labour shortages and heavy workloads of health centre GPs are much debated.
Doctors' professional associations maintain that the primary health service suffers from long‐term resource problems, which are reflected in problems in recruiting medical personnel.
The Finnish Medical Association (2023) has reported a lack of 300 GP vacancies in public health centres (8% of all GP positions) and that as many as 200 new positions would be required to meet the need for primary medical care.
On an average day in the health centre, GPs meet two to four patients in an hour, give consultations and do reporting and documentation work, such as writing certificates for patients.
Although specialised GPs are (or should be) the primary group of doctors in health centres, there are actually six groups of doctors: medical students in temporary positions, recently graduated doctors carrying out their obligatory 9‐month primary care period (a political decision to ensure there are doctors in primary care), GPs specialising in general practice, already specialised GPs, nonspecialised GPs who have a long career in primary care and doctors with other specialist degrees than general practice.
This has various effects depending on the stability and continuity of the workforce.
Early‐career doctors need experienced mentors, but in rural areas where recruiting permanent staff is difficult, health centres might rely heavily on recently graduated doctors.
A survey carried out by the Finnish Junior Doctors' Association (2021), in turn, found that 44% of junior doctors lacked mentoring in their place of speciality training.
The data used in this study are a selection of 16 interviews from a larger set (N= 38) that were collected in 2016 for a research project on doctors' autonomy and professionalism.
The interviews include both junior and senior as well as male and female doctors who were recruited via the Finnish Medical Association.
Junior refers to doctors who graduated in 2010–2014, and senior refers to doctors over 60 years of age with 20 or more years of experience in medicine.
The doctors worked in the capital city area (Helsinki) or a smaller city area (Tampere), and the workplaces varied in the number of colleagues and in organisational practices.
Out of the 16 interviews (see Table1), 13 doctors worked in health centres, were specialised GPs or were specialising in general practice at the time of the interview, and three worked in hospitals.
I have included three hospital doctors in the analysis because they compared their work to GPs working in health centres and described differences in the amount of teamwork.
Professional isolation can occur in all kinds of medical consulting tasks where the work is conducted mostly alone, so also in the private sector, but together with other current challenges in public primary healthcare, the main research interest is in GPs' work in health centres.
The semi‐structured thematic interviews were conducted jointly by two research assistants in Finnish, and they lasted from 40 min to 2 hours.
Although the interviewers asked the participants the same questions in the same order, they had been instructed to also pose some clarifying questions.
The interview covered demands and threats at work, relationships with colleagues and patients, ideas about autonomy and the position of doctors in society.
The doctors were given vignettes and statements about clinical situations (see Supporting InformationS1: Appendix 1), on which they were asked to reflect and tell the interviewer whether they agreed or disagreed.
I was not involved in the data gathering nor in the original research project.
Thus, I am using the interviews as secondary data, with the permission of the primary investigator of the project.
In using secondary data, it is important to evaluate methodological rigour and ethical issues (Ruggiano and Perry2017).
Using secondary data is challenging because the interviews were not collected with the purpose of this study in mind.
Professional isolation was not explicitly investigated in the interviews, but when asked to describe their workday, work community, benefits or challenges in working with others or different attitudes towards work, for example, between hospital and health centre, men and women or junior and senior doctors, the GPs began talking about isolation and loneliness.
The interviewed doctors could have avoided bringing up the topic, but they chose to talk about their experiences, which highlights the importance of analysing the topic.
Risks in using secondary data include ethical and methodological concerns, such as informed consent, confidentiality and changes in the cultural, social or political context where the data were originally collected (Ruggiano and Perry2017).
I have tried to avoid these by conducting systematic coding and by comparing findings with the parent study.
Additionally, GPs are already burdened by their work, which makes using secondary data ethically more sustainable than collecting new data.
Furthermore, this study adheres to the ethical standards set out by the Finnish National Board on Research Integrity (TENK).
According to guidelines defined by TENK, an ethical review is only required in specific ethically challenging scenarios, none of which apply to this study.
The data that support the findings of this study are not available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.
I conducted the analysis by combining methods of grounded theory (Timonen et al.2018) and abductive content analysis (Earl Rinehart2021).
I noticed how GPs described their consulting rooms by using material metaphors to describe the problematic features of work, such as busy schedules and the lack of colleagues.
I decided to code the strenuous working conditions and difficulties that the GPs faced when trying to manage their work and found out how material structures emerged as impressions to describe the problems.
Rooms, doors and tables were used to describe the time pressure in the health centre.
For example, one interviewee says that‘lunch tables are not even for eating lunch’(24JM).
The movement of actors or ideas happened through connecting doors between the consulting rooms, but doctors were often the ones who stayed still, stuck and isolated, whereas patients and nurses moved in and out.
At the same time, the doctors described spatial dimensions that restricted them in practice, as well as professional, more abstract ideals that they found empowering: They described collegiality as a ‘support pillar’(15JF).
Thus, the chosen discursive elements were closely attached to the material environment.
According to Fairclough (2010, 351–55), stable and durable ‘order of discourse’ preserves and maintains certain ways of action and practice, and by using discourses, actors participate in maintaining the order.
However, it is often not a deliberate choice, and actors may even use different discourses in the same sentence, some of which can also contradict each other.
I perceive GPs' talk as a ‘bricolage’ (Fairclough2010, 353) of different discourses, which build upon the material setting of the work and describe the practices that create the ‘lonely consulting room’.
The dimensions of professional isolation (Aira et al.2010) and sociology of places and materiality complemented the analysis, in which I continued to search for the doctors' actions.
GPs mostly see patients alone in consulting rooms.
Their work schedules often follow a certain routine, which is described as ‘paperwork,calls and clinical work.Three sections every day’ (7SF).
Some GPs might work a few days a week in a different ward or unit, such as in schools or polyclinics, but most of the time, GPs work in designated consulting rooms in health centres.
We don’t have any coffee breaks.
And on breaks you could meet; we’re on two floors so some people are here on the second floor and others on the first floor.
So, we never meet colleagues.
Sometimes it comes up that someone is away, because their patients come or they’ve been transferred, that’s very bad.
Of course, I have very good relationships with the administration and nurses, so in the mornings I try to be, I come to work early so I can see the situation [talking about how she was a substitute chief physician when this routine started].
But if someone does not attend meetings, or does not come to the so‐called lunch break, then we may not meet colleagues for weeks.
It’s so lonely, this work.
The interviewed senior GP describes how physical separation, lacking information and not being able to meet colleagues create loneliness.
‘The so‐called lunch break’ implies dissatisfaction, which she tries to avoid by building relationships with the people she is able to meet: the administrative staff and nurses.
The previously reported professional isolation—the lack of senior help, making decisions alone, lack of collaboration and not being part of the community (Aira et al.2010)—emerged in the empirical data.
Many of the interviewed GPs use the word ‘lonely’ when describing their work, and the opportunities for collaboration and teamwork seem restricted due to the constant time pressure and spatial solutions that separated doctors from other workers.
Isolation in health centres is often presented as opposite to the work in hospitals.
A:‐ ‐ Well, working in a health centre might be a bit lonelier than in a hospital, somehow, it can be, that in hospital you get, you're constantly surrounded by colleagues and nurses and other occupations and you get to do a lot of teamwork with others, the work of a general practitioner is more a kind of lonely grind in your own room, people come in and go out and come in and go out so, I don't know how to answer that.
A:Yeah, the way of working is very different in the hospital and in the health centre.
If you work only in your consulting room in the health centre, it's quite different.
It's a bit more, like lonely work.
Well, of course you have a nurse partner and there are meetings, and stuff.
Here we start every morning with the X‐ray meeting, and everybody comes there, [‐‐] The work in the hospital is more like teamwork.
In hospitals, doctors are often surrounded by colleagues and other staff members, but in health centres, doctors are alone in their consulting rooms.
In the penultimate quote, the GP describes how other people, presumably nurses and patients, move in and out of the room, whereas he has to stay there.
The feeling of being stuck refers to isolation (also, VanHeuvelen2019, 701) and can reinforce the feeling of losing control over work.
Quite a few interviewees use the Finnish word ‘koppi’in describing their consulting room.
The word refers to a kennel or a shed and is used to describe office cubicles in a negative light.
Being trapped or stuck in the room is not only practically problematic, but it can also have a symbolic meaning: My work is not valued as I'm left alone to survive.
Research on Finnish GPs' career paths suggests that health centres are professional peripheries as opposed to the more prestigious hospitals (Wrede et al.2022).
But then if you think hospital versus health centre, so very few have enjoyed working in health centres.
However, the measure used in our study overlaps with other spirituality-related scales, including the Spirituality Assessment Scale, Spiritual Orientation Inventory, and Spiritual Well-Being Scale [41,51,52,53].
Thus, the SRS-A is not an outlier among spirituality measures, and our findings can be generalized to other spirituality research.
Second, the study participants represented a narrow demographic group.
They consisted only of individuals who joined a DARC and engaged in a 12-step program.
For instance, people who felt unsuited to a 12-step approach may have withdrawn from the DARC and thus would not have completed questionnaires over the five-year period.
Given the nature of the dataset, our findings cannot reveal the significance of spirituality for Japanese individuals who maintain abstinence without DARCs or 12-step programs.
Future studies should investigate spirituality among those who discontinue 12-step-based programs to better understand its broader role.
Third, unlike earlier research, the severity of substance use disorder was not significantly associated with methamphetamine abstinence, possibly due to differences in how baseline severity was initially measured compared with later follow-ups, despite using the same tool (the DAST-20).