To assess home disaster preparedness levels of individuals with sickle cell disease to determine education and resource needs and inform policy.
To evaluate the association between healthcare provider discussion of preparedness and level of preparedness.
Research demonstrates that extreme weather events and public health emergencies result in increased hospital visits for people with sickle cell disease, yet little is known about home disaster preparedness knowledge and actions of these individuals.
Cross‐sectional study of US adults diagnosed with sickle cell disease.
The independent variable was the healthcare provider discussion of household disaster preparedness.
The dependent variable was the Household Emergency Preparedness Instrument'sGeneral Preparednessscore.
Participants self‐reported their preparedness actions and disaster supplies through an online survey.
Descriptive statistics were analyzed, along with a Welchttest, to examine the associations between the study variables.
This study was reported according to the STROBE checklist.
The averageGeneral Preparednessscore of this sample (N= 32) indicated that the majority of participants were not considered well prepared for disasters.
Higher scores were found among participants who had discussions with their healthcare providers about how to prepare for disasters.
The sample's averageGeneral Preparednessscore was higher than other patient populations assessed with this instrument, possibly due to routine discussions about medical emergency preparedness that individuals with sickle cell disease receive from healthcare providers.
Home disaster preparedness levels should be improved to decrease disaster‐related morbidity and mortality.
Nurses should develop or advocate for home disaster preparedness lessons, community interventions, and public policies to meet the unique needs of community members with sickle cell disease before, during, and after disasters.
Prevention of disaster‐related morbidity and mortality for individuals with sickle cell disease (SCD) is of global interest because lack of preparedness, as a patient safety issue, puts millions of people at risk for exacerbations of their SCD symptoms when disasters strike.
SCD is a chronic health condition requiring lifelong specialized care.
It is the most common hereditary disorder (especially among those of African, Mediterranean, and Middle Eastern ancestry), affecting 7.74 million people (GBD 2021 Sickle Cell Disease Collaborators2023; Obeagu and Obeagu2024).
The disorder results in an alteration of the shape and function of red blood cells, causing disruption of blood flow with severe pain and organ damage.
In the United States (US), there are over 100,000 people living with SCD.
Tewari et al. (2015) found that extreme weather events result in an increase in hospital visits for people with SCD.
Extreme weather events, disasters, public health emergencies, and humanitarian crises are increasing in frequency and intensity and are projected to continue to do so if humans fail to reverse the course of a warming planet caused by human activities (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change2023).
People with SCD are considered to have access and functional needs before, during, and after extreme weather and disaster events.
The US Federal Emergency Management Agency (n.d.)
describes individuals with access and functional needs as requiring assistance in maintaining independence, communication, transportation, supervision, and medical care.
Temperature extremes can exacerbate symptoms of SCD, with exposure to extreme heat triggering vaso‐occlusive crises from dehydration and increased blood viscosity and exposure to extreme cold triggering vaso‐occlusion from the constriction of blood vessels (Mekontso Dessap et al.2014; Obeagu and Obeagu2024; Tewari et al.2015).
These vaso‐occlusive episodes, despite being the most common complication of SCD, are unpredictable, painful, and often require emergency medical care.
People with SCD require a well‐balanced diet to maintain their health.
If they lose access to nutritional food due to supply chain issues or drought and famine conditions, their overall health is negatively impacted (Obeagu and Obeagu2024).
Poor air quality also exacerbates symptoms of SCD because these individuals are at risk for pulmonary complications even when the air is considered satisfactory to breath (Mekontso Dessap et al.2014; Obeagu and Obeagu2024; Tewari et al.2015).
Stress and anxiety, commonly experienced before, during, and after disaster events, can also result in painful crises (Shah et al.2020).
Finally, people with SCD are at increased risk of falling ill during infectious disease outbreaks because they are immunocompromised.
This includes their exposure to vector‐borne illnesses, such as those spread by mosquitoes and ticks, as a warming climate increases their geographical range and active season (Obeagu and Obeagu2024).
During the COVID‐19 pandemic in the US, Black individuals with SCD experienced higher rates of hospitalization and pneumonia when compared with Black individuals without SCD (Singh et al.2021).
When a disaster occurs within a community, residents with SCD are at risk for acute exacerbations of their chronic illness because they can lose access to their healthcare providers and may be unable to refill their prescription medications in a timely manner.
Karras and Hemenway (2007) documented this risk in patients with SCD residing in New Orleans, Louisiana, eight months after Hurricane Katrina.
With a mixed‐methods cross‐sectional study, they found that a larger portion of adult patients, compared with pediatric patients, experienced difficulty securing an appointment with their hematologist, were dissatisfied with their care, and felt that their overall health was worse than before the hurricane.
The researchers attributed this difference to a lack of access to their specialized care providers.
The only local hospital that offered specialized SCD services to adults was a public hospital that was severely damaged by the hurricane.
The pediatric patients fared better, as they rarely received care within the public hospital and did not lose access to their hematologists.
Healthcare providers in the US do not routinely discuss home disaster preparedness (HDP) with patients (Meeker et al.2023; Killian et al.2017; Wyte‐Lake et al.2014).
HDP education is available to US residents with many free resources written in several languages available at the website Ready.gov.
All US residents are encouraged to stockpile enough water, food, supplies, and medication to maintain the needs of the household for at least three days post‐disaster (U.S.
Department of Homeland Security2025).
Outside of the US, stockpiles may need to be larger depending on the remoteness of the location, availability of local resources, and the speed at which disaster responders can send supplies to the affected communities.
Obeagu and Obeagu (2024) called for healthcare providers to work with individuals with SCD to develop tailored care plans to implement during disasters and extreme weather events to mitigate their risks.
To support this recommendation, an assessment of baseline HDP should be conducted to determine what resources these households have and what is needed to help them stay safe and comfortable during conditions that disasters create, such as living without electricity, experiencing limitations on safe drinking water, and being unable to access additional supplies for the home for a few days.
A review of the literature was conducted to determine the state of HDP in people with SCD.
The search was delimited to English‐language peer‐reviewed academic journal articles with abstracts available, published between January 2019 and May 2024.
Searches of theMEDLINE Complete,APA PsycINFO, andSocial Sciences Full Textdatabases were conducted in May 2024.
Eligibility criteria included original research studies measuring HDP of individuals with SCD or their household.
The following key word combinations were used: “household OR emergency OR disaster AND preparedness AND sickle cell”; “individual AND preparedness OR readiness OR preparation AND sickle cell”; “individual AND disaster OR emergency OR crisis AND preparedness OR readiness OR preparation AND sickle cell”; “disaster OR emergency OR crisis AND supplies OR kit AND sickle cell”; and “hazard AND preparedness OR readiness or preparation AND sickle cell.” Zero articles met the eligibility criteria from the 14 results, identifying a gap in the literature.
A librarian repeated the search and replicated the results, confirming the evidence gap.
The purpose of this study was to begin to assess the level of HDP of people with SCD to determine priority education and resource needs of these households to inform intervention and policy development.
This research was conducted with a cross‐sectional study design, which can provide a sound starting point when little research evidence exists on the topic, and when researchers are working with small sample sizes (Melnyk and Fineout‐Overholt2022).
A theoretical framework was not used in the design or analysis of this study due to the focus on data‐driven insights.
Eligible participants were those who reside in the US, are 18 years of age or older, are diagnosed with SCD or are an adult caregiver of someone with SCD, and live independently within the community.
One participant per household was eligible to participate.
Potential participants were recruited through ResearchMatch.org, an organization that matches willing volunteers with researchers at institutions across the US (ResearchMatch2025).
ResearchMatch emailed their registered volunteers the institutional review board (IRB) approved recruitment script on the study team's behalf.
Volunteers had the option to either consent for their contact information to be released to the team or decline interest.
ResearchMatch released the email addresses of the interested volunteers to the study team.
The potential participants were emailed a link to the survey, starting with the internet‐based consent form.
In addition, the snowball sampling technique, where participants suggest other potential participants, was utilized.
The recruitment script included an encouragement for the potential participant to forward the approved recruitment script to friends and family with SCD that they felt may be interested in participating in this study, so long as they did not reside in the same home as the original participant.
Before beginning the survey, the potential participant read the consent.
After the potential participant clicked yes to participation, they advanced to a screening form.
If they met the inclusion criteria based on the screening questions, they advanced to the study survey.
No identifying information was collected on the survey.
At the end of the survey, the participant was directed to a separate screen where their email address was requested if they desired $10 compensation for their participation.
This compensation level was determined to be ethically appropriate and noncoercive for health survey studies (Zheng et al.2018).
Recruitment, screening, and data collection began in September 2024 and concluded in October 2024.
Data were collected with Qualtrics Survey software.
The Household Emergency Preparedness Instrument (HEPI) (Heagele et al.2022,2020) was used to determine the self‐reported level of HDP of each participant, along with demographic data questions.
Demographic data included military status, functionally diverse (disability) status, preferred language, age, household composition (partner/children), ZIP code, race and gender identity, education, employment, income, disaster risk perception, preparedness self‐efficacy, prior disaster experience (property damage, injury/illness due to a disaster), dependence on prescription medications or medical equipment, and home ownership.
The independent variable was measured with one item: Has a healthcare provider ever talked to you about disaster preparedness (yes/no)?
The dependent variable was the HEPIGeneral Preparednessscore (30 items).
The HEPI is an all‐hazards, comprehensive instrument with sound reliability that has been found to validly measure disaster preparedness for diverse geographical locations and types of disasters (Heagele et al.2022,2020).
The items are objective and inquire about what the respondent presently owns and does in preparation for disasters.
Higher scores on the HEPI indicate higher levels of preparedness.
Two subscales comprise the HEPIGeneral Preparednessscale:Preparedness Actions and PlanningandDisaster Supplies and Resources.
These two subscales represent basic disaster preparedness knowledge, behaviors, and actions applicable to all households.
The minimum score a respondent could receive on theGeneral Preparednessscale is 0, and the maximum score is 40.
The HEPI also has anAccess and Functional Needssubscale, which is applicable only to respondents with a disability, who are 65 years or older, dependent on at least one prescription medication, or who are pregnant.
This subscale is not scored but is used to collect data for respondents who are considered to have an increased risk of disaster‐related morbidity and mortality.
The IRB of Hunter College of the City University of New York approved this study as Exempt with Limited Review on July 11, 2024 (protocol #2024‐0464‐Hunter).
This status is designated to studies that include only survey procedures where information obtained is recorded by the investigators in such a way that the identification of the participants cannot be readily ascertained.
It was also determined that there was no more than minimal risk for participation in this study, with little to no feelings of discomfort expected.
When completing the survey, participants may have experienced unpleasant memories, anxiety, or respondent burden.
To mitigate these risks, participants were able to skip questions or terminate participation at any time.
This study was funded by an Interdisciplinary Climate Crisis Research Grant (#80210‐08 25) by the Research Foundation of the City University of New York.
The funding organization had no role in the design, implementation, or interpretation of this study.
Descriptive statistics of the sample were analyzed.
To examine the association between the study variables, a Welchttest was used to account for unequal variances between the two groups (healthcare provider discussed/healthcare provider did not discuss), with α = 0.05.
ResearchMatch emailed the IRB‐approved recruitment script to 133 of their registered volunteers with SCD.
Five volunteers (response rate 3.76%) were recruited via ResearchMatch, and 27 were recruited via snowball sampling, for a total of 32 participants.
When analyzing the data set, no instances of missing values were found.
Participants were aged between 21 and 42 years (mean = 31.28,SD= 5.16), residing in 18 US states.
The majority of participants self‐identified as African American or Black (n= 31, 96.88%) males (n= 19, 59.38%), with baccalaureate‐level educations (n= 17, 53.12%) and household annual incomes of $75,000 to $99,999 (n= 18, 56.25%).
Approximately 81% (n= 26) had a partner, and 87.5% (n= 28) had at least one infant, child, or adolescent living in their home.
Most (n= 18, 56.25%) reported that either they or someone in their home took prescription medications daily, 40.63% (n= 13) either required or had someone in their home who required special equipment for their medical needs, and 53.13% (n= 17) required assistance from others due to a medical condition or disability.
Additional demographic data are displayed in Table1.
Regarding research question 1, the average level of HDP of this sample (N= 32), as measured by the HEPIGeneral Preparednessscale, was 26.43 (SD= 8.49, range = 7–38).
The average level of HDP of participants who had a discussion with a healthcare provider about HDP (n= 20) was 29.1 (SD= 5.67, range = 18‐38).
For those participants who had not engaged in a discussion (n= 12), the average level of preparedness was 22.0 (SD= 10.64, range = 7–37).
The majority of the participants had their medical history (n= 26, 81.25%), a list of their physicians (n= 22, 68.75%) and medications (n= 27, 84.38%), and a copy of their advanced directives (n= 26, 81.25%) written on paper or stored on a flash drive or cloud storage server.
Social support was strong among this sample, with 28 (87.50%) reporting that they had family or friends who would be able to help them during a disaster.
Most participants reported having at least a two‐week supply of their prescription medications (n= 22, 68.75%) and medical supplies (n= 23, 71.88%).
The frequencies and percentages of all HDP actions and supplies of the sample are displayed in Table2.
Disaster preparedness actions and supplies of the sample.
HEPI = Household Emergency Preparedness Instrument (Heagele et al.2022,2020).
Percentages have been rounded up.
Regarding research question 2, participants who discussed HDP with their healthcare providers tended to have higher HEPI scores than those who did not (t= −2.14,df= 14.82,p= .0499, 95%CI= −14.19 to −0.01).
A negative confidence interval that does not include zero suggests that readers can be 95% confident that the true effect size is not zero.
This confidence interval (−14.19 to −0.01) corresponds with a skepticism limit of ±153.8, according to Matthews (2018). Skepticism limit denotes a range of “credible” effect sizes that others conducting similar studies may expect to find 95% of the time (and until more information can further guide estimates).
The range of expected effect sizes for this study is quite large, primarily because the sample size is modest (N= 32).
Larger samples would multiplicatively reduce the Skepticism Limit.
The purpose of this study was to launch an assessment of HDP actions undertaken by people with SCD to determine priority education and resource needs of these households to inform intervention and policy development.
In this study, participating adults’ HEPIGeneral Preparednessscores were near the middle of the range of possible scores.
Although this mean was higher than that found by other recent studies utilizing the HEPI (Heagele et al.2022,2024,2025), it indicates that there are aspects of HDP that have not yet been adequately addressed by members of this population.
However, the data also demonstrated that those who discussed preparedness with a healthcare provider tended to have higher HEPIGeneral Preparednessscores than those who did not.
This finding is similar to that of McNeill et al. (2018) and Killian et al. (2017).
Areas for improvement, where less than 75% of the sample reported completing these preparedness actions, include developing a home emergency plan, understanding whether or not the home is in a pre‐designated evacuation zone, planning what route to take to a safe location if a mandatory evacuation order was issued, and making sure that all household members know the evacuation plan.
Regarding areas for improvement with disaster supplies, less than 75% of the sample reported having working smoke detectors in the home, a 1‐week supply of ready‐to‐eat food for each member of the household, and a 2‐week supply of medications.
Healthcare providers should emphasize these disaster preparedness actions and supplies when providing disaster preparedness education to individuals with SCD.
The sample's higher‐than‐average preparedness levels may be due to the routine discussions about medical emergency preparedness for vaso‐occlusive crises that individuals with SCD receive from their healthcare providers.
From childhood, patients and families are educated to have a “go‐bag” packed in the event that they need to go to the hospital emergently (Yates et al.2024).
It is recommended to review this plan with caregivers and patients at every visit.
Families are also instructed to obtain additional medication prior to travel and have their specialty care provider's contact information readily available.
These medical emergency preparedness recommendations mirror recommendations for HDP.
School nurses have an opportunity to provide HDP education in the school setting.
This education could occur when families meet with school nurses to develop emergency plans for vaso‐occlusive events.
Readers may consider using New York City'sReady Girleducational materials as examples for other communities to replicate (City of New York2025).Ready Girlis an award‐winning program that teaches children and families about emergency and disaster preparedness with checklists, videos, a comic book, and presentations.
The Sickle Cell Disease Association of America (SCDAA) is a prominent international organization dedicated to advocating for and improving the quality of healthcare for people living with SCD, sickle cell trait, and their caregivers (SCDAA2021a).
Currently, SCDAA does not provide education detailing preparedness actions for climate‐related hazards or disasters.
However, during the COVID‐19 pandemic, the Medical and Research Advisory Committee of SCDAA publishedRecommendations for Coronavirus (COVID‐19) Preparedness: Health Alert for People with Sickle Cell Disease and Their Caregivers(SCDAA2021b).
Included in this document is guidance on emergency preparedness in the setting of COVID‐19 exposure, guidance that again mirrors HDP recommendations.
SCDAA can be instrumental in the dissemination of HDP education to people living with SCD, their caregivers, and their healthcare providers locally, nationally, and globally.
This organization, along with SCD advocacy organizations in other countries (e.g., Global Sickle Cell Disease Network, Africa Sickle Cell Alliance, Sickle Cell Society, and oneSCDvoice), should provide free, accessible, and easy‐to‐understand HDP information to improve safety and quality of life for individuals with SCD before, during, and after disasters.
This was an underpowered, observational, nonrandomized, cross‐sectional study and retains the limitations of this design.
However, to the authors’ knowledge, this study is the first of its kind conducted with people with SCD and represents an initial step in exploring this area of inquiry.
The small sample recruited from a single country limits the generalizability of the findings.
The sample size may not have been adequate to find real effects.
Males and middle‐class respondents were overrepresented.
The low response rate and recruitment difficulties experienced are not unique to this study, as people with SCD are considered a challenging population to recruit from for research studies (Mases et al.2020).
Because the participants self‐enrolled, it is possible that they were more concerned about disasters and preparedness than those who decided not to enroll.
The data were self‐reported with no verification of the participants’ actual disaster plans and supplies.
The survey did not discern between who initiated the patient/healthcare provider discussion of HDP, so it is unknown if participants perceived themselves to be at risk and sought information, or if the healthcare provider perceived the participant to be at risk and thus provided the education.
Nonetheless, strict inclusion criteria were used, along with a screening script and a valid and reliable instrument to minimize threats to the internal validity of the study.
The survey was purposely kept short to minimize respondent burden.
Social desirability bias was minimized by having the participants self‐report anonymously to an internet survey, and the survey instructions stated that there were no right or wrong answers.
Replications of this study could improve upon the design and enrollment by investing greater resources in recruitment and providing a more representative sample that could further inform intervention and policy development; interested researchers may contact the corresponding author for a copy of the study protocol.
Overrepresentation of middle‐class males in future studies could be addressed with simple random, stratified, or cluster sampling.
Mases et al. (2020) recommend recruiting participants directly from SCD clinics and affiliated sites.
This study provided quantitative data on respondents’ preparedness level for disasters, but it did not provide data on their reasons for preparing or not preparing.
Future research should include qualitative data elements to determine the barriers and facilitators that influence HDP decisions of individuals with SCD.
This study's findings should inspire the development of nurse‐led family and community interventions to address barriers to HDP that individuals with SCD face.
As an innovation to practice, nurses are encouraged to participate in the primary prevention of disaster‐related morbidity and mortality by educating and empowering patients with the resources and knowledge on how to safely endure disaster conditions.
Identify and list any community resources that could provide help to the family during disasters, including agencies that provide evacuation assistance, emergency shelter locations, cooling and warming center locations, community emergency alert system registration, priority utility restoration registries, first aid classes, survival books or apps, and free distribution of air conditioners.
Download or create HDP educational resources tailored to the community or country in which the nurse is providing the education.
See the many free resources available at Ready.gov for examples or use the HEPI to assess baseline preparedness and then educate on areas identified as lacking.
Assist the family with creating their emergency evacuation and communication plans.
An area to write these plans is commonly included in the educational materials found for step 2.
Provide a disaster supply kit shopping list (see Table3), or, if funding is available, provide a kit (or at least some of the recommended supplies) as part of the educational intervention to help the family get started on building their kit.
Additional supplies should be added to meet the unique needs of the family, such as entertainment for children, bowls and leashes for pets, etc.
These resources could be disseminated as handouts during visits with healthcare providers, as part of discharge instructions from the hospital, or they could be sent virtually through the patient portal of electronic medical records.
If any of the aforementioned components do not exist within the community, nurses should either develop or advocate for them to be implemented.
Health insurance companies may present a barrier to obtaining additional medication prior to predicted disasters (Clement et al.2021).
Nurses can advocate for policies that would allow for early medication refills in the days prior to predicted disasters, as access to pharmacies may be limited in the days and weeks post‐disaster.
Healthcare facilities can engage in disaster readiness by making electronic medical records compatible/accessible so that if patients with SCD need to evacuate outside of their community, their medical history and medication list will be available to their new healthcare providers, which could prevent medication‐seeking accusations (Karras and Hemenway2007; Obeagu and Obeagu2024).
Healthcare facility readiness should also include providing telehealth to continue care with SCD specialty providers when patients are unable to come in person.
Healthcare facility climate adaptation initiatives should include dissemination of heat advisories and outreach to promote hydration and alert patients about signs and symptoms of heat‐related illnesses and appropriate treatment.
Classes could be offered about (a) the potential impacts of extreme temperatures on health and how to mitigate risk; (b) prevention against vector‐borne illnesses like the removal of standing water, use of mosquito nets, vaccinations if available, and use of insect repellents, and (c) how to avoid painful vaso‐occlusive episodes by wearing warm clothes outside during cold weather and in air‐conditioned rooms and not swimming in cold water (Mekontso Dessap et al.2014; Obeagu and Obeagu2024).
Community support groups should be assembled to provide psychosocial support to help individuals with SCD cope with the stress and anxiety related to a changing climate and disasters.
Finally, nurses, primary and specialty care providers, and individuals with SCD should collaborate with emergency response agencies to ensure that their needs are prioritized during disasters with plans to address access to medical care, transportation, and emergency medications (Obeagu and Obeagu2024).
Prevention of disaster‐related morbidity and mortality is of global interest, and a lack of preparedness is a patient safety issue.
Little is known about the HDP knowledge and actions of individuals with SCD.
This study, as the first of its kind, begins to reduce this knowledge gap.
The data can be used to inform the development of innovative, nurse‐led HDP educational interventions for patients with SCD.
The study provides baseline data about the HDP level of a vulnerable population and the association between healthcare provider discussion and the level of HDP of people with SCD.
It is plausible that with the routine implementation of educational interventions, disaster‐related morbidity and mortality of patients with SCD will be improved.
In this approach, the hypermobile cartilaginous segment is identified and resected up to the costochondral junction.
The osseous portion of the rib is preserved, the pleural cavity remains intact, and particular attention is given to preserving the neurovascular bundle.
Recurrence may occur due to continued motion of the remaining floating rib segment, which can reproduce symptoms through intermittent compression of the overlying intercostal nerve.
A single-institution descriptive study by MacGregoret al[6] analyzed 13 pediatric patients with SRS who underwent CRE between 2012 and 2020.
Among them, 91% reported postoperative pain improvement, with a median follow-up period of 3.5 months.