This mixed‐methods study used a participatory action approach to develop and test a culturally grounded measure of hope among adolescents.
Eighteen adult community leaders participated in interviews, and a youth advisory board provided their perspectives on hope in the southeastern U.S.
This information was used to develop the Adolescent Hope Scale.
Psychometric testing was conducted using data from an online panel of 311 youth participants (66.2% male;Mage= 12.62; 62.1% White American, 32.8% Black or African American) and their parents or legal guardians in the U.S.
The newly developed Adolescent Hope Scale functioned equally well across gender and ethnicity.
It was uniquely predictive of physical and relational aggression, conduct problems, anger management, peer relational problems, and prosocial behavior.
Promoting hope is a potential intervention target to reduce problem behaviors.
Hope typically has been described as a desire for an uncertain outcome or future state, combined with a motivation or resolution to pursue the desired outcome (Jeffrey & Mehari,2023; Bloser & Stahl,2022; Milona & Stockdale,2018).
Hope may be an important construct for understanding both positive youth development and the prevention of problem behaviors among adolescents, but there is currently no best‐practice approach to measure hope among Black youth.
Current measures were developed among White children and may reflect Eurocentric values (e.g., hope as individual agency in the present).
The purpose of this study was to develop a culturally grounded conceptualization and measure of hope among Black adolescents through participatory action and qualitative research and to test the measure's psychometric properties and nomological network.
Importantly, the phrase “culturally grounded” describes a process in which conceptualization (in this case) originates in the values, experiences, and worldviews of the participating community, rather than in existing philosophy, theory, or empirical work (Okamoto et al.,2014).
Therefore, existing empirical and theoretical work on hope is described to provide context, but they did not drive the conceptualization and measurement of this culturally grounded hope construct.
The classic psychological construct of hope was defined by Snyder (2002) as a cognitive‐motivational skill that includes two related cognitive processes: pathways and agency thinking.
Pathways thinking is a person's sense of their ability to generate or identify strategies to move toward their desired goal, and agency thinking is a person's motivation to initiate and persist in strategies to achieve their desired goal.
Trait hope in adolescence, as measured by the Snyder hope scales, is associated with fewer problems in psychological functioning, including lower negative affect (Ciarrochi et al.,2007), perceived stress, depressive symptoms, and anxiety (Berry et al.,2022; Bryce et al.,2020; Chai et al.,2018; Wong & Lim,2009).
Moreover, it is also associated with greater psychological health, such as more positive affect (Burrow et al.,2010; Edwards et al.,2007), increased life satisfaction (Bronk et al.,2009; Vacek et al.,2010; Valle et al.,2006), and increased well‐being in adolescents (Yarcheski et al.,2001).
Adolescents' hope may predict better physical health as well (Esteves et al.,2013).
Among these positive outcomes, the relationship between hope and life satisfaction among adolescents seems to be best documented, with longitudinal studies indicating that adolescents with higher hope are likely to have higher life satisfaction in the future (Marques et al.,2013; Valle et al.,2006).
Currently, little is known about the relation between hope and behavior beyond psychological functioning.
Most research linking hope to behavior among adolescents has focused on the cross‐sectional relation between hope and health behaviors, such as more balanced nutritional intake, more exercise, and lower substance use (Canty‐Mitchell,2001; Mahat et al.,2002; Mahon et al.,2004).
In addition to health behaviors, hope is associated with academic functioning among youth; it longitudinally predicts greater cognitive engagement at school as well as academic achievement (Bryce et al.,2024).
However, less research has examined the relation between hope and prosocial and externalizing behaviors.
In one cross‐sectional study of children, hope was associated with lower externalizing behaviors, using a composite measure of aggression and delinquent behaviors (Valle et al.,2004).
Constructs similar to hope, such as positive future orientation and optimism, are also associated with lower rates of aggression among adolescents (e.g., Stoddard et al.,2011).
However, less is known about the relation between hope and prosociality (e.g., Schornick et al.,2023), with existing research focused on emerging adults (e.g., Ferrari et al.,2014).
Therefore, there is a current gap in understanding the relation between hope and a range of behaviors among adolescents, including aggression and conduct problems, as well as prosocial behaviors.
Hope may be particularly relevant to behavior during the developmental stage of adolescence (Jeffrey & Mehari,2023).
Adolescence is a time of rapid physical, cognitive, social, and emotional change.
It also includes major structural changes, such as, in the U.S., moving from smaller, more homogeneous primary schools with one teacher and classroom for the majority of the day to larger, heterogeneous secondary schools, with a different teacher for every subject.
In the midst of these changes, identity development in relationships, occupation, and ideology comprises a key task of adolescence (e.g., Erikson,1968), including identity development around meaning and purpose (Damon et al.,2003).
Functionally, adolescents make decisions that have major repercussions for the rest of their lives, much more so than the decisions that they made in middle and late childhood.
For example, they choose how much to invest in school, how they want their lives to look after secondary school, and the extent to which they will engage in risky behaviors, such as aggression, delinquency, substance use, and risky sex.
Adolescents' degree of hope may be an important factor that impacts behavior, including risky behavior, with higher hope for a desired future potentially motivating wise decisions in the present.
More research is needed to explore the relation between hope and prosocial as well as problem behaviors.
The Children's Hope Scale (1997) is probably the most widely used measure of hope in youth and adolescents: one review identified over 200 studies that used the Children's Hope Scale (Hellman et al.,2018).
It was first developed based on Snyder's theory of hope, and the item pool was created by researchers in an investigator‐driven approach, with no documented input from youth or communities, such as through qualitative research.
The Children's Hope Scale was then validated among a predominantly White sample of youth in middle‐ and high‐income families (Snyder et al.,1997).
As then, it has been translated into a range of languages and used in many different countries (c.f., Hellman et al.,2018), but very little measurement equivalence testing has been conducted.
To our knowledge, no measurement invariance testing involving samples of Black youth has been conducted on the Children's Hope Scale.
The little cross‐ethnic research that has been conducted suggests that there are statistically significant differences in rates across ethnic groups within (e.g., McDermott et al.,1997) and across countries (e.g., Yang et al.,2021).
Furthermore, there are different patterns of hope across developmental stages and gender based on ethnicity1(Callahan,1999; Fraser et al.,2024; McDermott et al.,1997).
Ethnic differences in responding on the Children's Hope Scale are concerning because it suggests that one ethnic group has higher hope than others or that the scale does not measure the same construct across ethnic groups.
These findings suggest limitations on its cross‐cultural and cross‐contextual generalizability of the scale.
One fundamental but problematic assumption in existing work on hope in youth is that hope can be operationalized isometrically across cultures.
According to Snyder, hope comprises pathways and agency, which is consistent with a Western European emphasis on personal mastery and individual coping.
Further limiting generalizability, most research on hope has been conducted among predominantly White, middle‐class samples, and ignores the impact of context (c.f., Bryce & Fraser,2023).
In fact, Snyder (1995) postulated that Black individuals would havelesshope due to an assumed disparity in goal availability, although he acknowledged that lower hope among individuals of color was not supported empirically.
This deficit orientation—that Black individuals' hope is a product of oppression—reflects the linear, deterministic, overly narrow approach that often occurs when White researchers focus on youth of color (Spencer,2006).
In this case, it also reduces all potential cultural differences to experiences of racism.
To address this source of bias, participatory and qualitative research is needed to develop a culturally grounded conceptualization of hope that includes Black communities and Black youth.
There is evidence that hope is conceptualized differently across cultures.
In more communal or collectivistic cultures, hope derives not just from individual capacity and effort but from the social context as well (Thomas et al.,2023).
In those cultures, hope includes external pathways and agency (conjoint agency), not just the internal agency (or disjoint agency) as proposed by a Western tradition (Bernardo,2010).
For example, in a series of studies across several Asian cultures, Bernardo and colleagues demonstrated that adult and youth hope includes an external locus of hope, in which individuals believe that the efforts, agency, and influence of close others (e.g., family, friends) and the divine are important for goal attainment (e.g., Bernardo,2010).
Across both collectivistic cultures and cultures that have been marginalized, oppressed, and disempowered, hope may be conceptualized as envisioning a good but distant future for future generations, and not just beliefs about achieving an individual's goals in their lifetime (e.g., Gross,2014).
Other cultures or traditions treat hope as a disposition to persevere in doing what is good for the community independently of what the future may bring.
For example, Engaged Buddhism and activists in Chinese Buddhism characterize hope as an acceptance of uncertainty and expectation of a future that will not be escaped (May,2015; Ritzinger,2013).
Given how hope is conceptualized variably between countries and ethnic groups, it would follow that a measure developed in the context of one ethnic group may not be generalizable across contexts.
The purpose of the present study was to use participatory action research in the Southeastern U.S.
to (1) create a culturally grounded conceptualization of hope based on qualitative interviews among adults who worked with youth and a youth advisory board in a predominantly Black, highly burdened community; (2) use that conceptualization to inform the development of a measure of hope among adolescents; and (3) examine the structure and validity of the measure in a sample of Black and White adolescents in the U.S.
To our knowledge, only one other study developed a measure of hope for use among Black youth, the Urban Adolescent Hope Scale (Canfield et al.,2018).
It was developed based on qualitative research with Black youth (Harley,2015), and scales were identified based on what youth indicated they thought about when they thought about hope.
Although empirically guided, the scale is limited in the extent to which it was guided by a cohesive operational definition of hope.
The scale has five factors, and it measures hope through sources of hope (e.g., spirituality, caring connections), necessary conditions for hope (e.g., basic needs being met), personal agency, and education as a pathway to goal achievement (Canfield et al.,2018).
None of these scales are unique to a conceptual understanding of hope itself, and it may be problematic to measure a construct by its predictors rather than directly measuring its essential constituents.
Furthermore, this scale was validated in a predominantly White sample, with no measurement invariance testing by ethnicity (Canfield et al.,2018).
There continues to be a need for the development of a measure of hope that is based in a culturally grounded conceptualization of hope from qualitative research and that has been empirically validated among a sample of Black youth.
The current study moves toward addressing this gap.
Given the minimal existing research on hope in Black communities in the U.S., our aims were exploratory.
We did not have specific a priori hypotheses about what themes would emerge in the conceptualization of hope, and the subsequent quantitative phase was driven by the results of the qualitative research.
We took a participatory action research approach to this mixed methods study.
The team co‐leaders included the director of a community center that provided afterschool and summer programming, two psychologists, and a philosopher.
All project activities were guided by quarterly community leader advisory board meetings and monthly youth advisory board meetings.
Parent and caregiver input was obtained through two focus group meetings, but the parents and caregivers at the participating sites indicated that they had too many demands and stressors to participate more frequently than that.
This study occurred in three phases.
In the qualitative study (Phase 1), we conducted interviews with community leaders to develop a culturally grounded conceptualization of hope and how it appears in youth.
In Phase 2, Measure Development, we used that information, combined with community and researcher input, to develop the Adolescent Hope Scale.
In the quantitative study (Phase 3), we piloted the scale in a national sample of youth and tested its psychometric properties, including invariance testing.
One author is a Black woman, three are White women, and one is a White man.
Three authors grew up in the Southern U.S., which created some cultural similarities between the participants and the researchers.
All authors had food security, housing stability, and stable access to healthcare, electricity, running water, and the Internet.
This may have resulted in a devaluation or minimization of responses that identified the satisfaction of basic needs as a necessary precondition for hope.
Prior to the qualitative coding process, coders met with the project leader to discuss potential biases that could emerge.
For example, like the participants, the majority of the authors identified as Christian or had a Christian background, which may have resulted in an overemphasis on responses that were congruent with Christian conceptualizations of hope.
Participants were 18 community leaders who participated in individual interviews.
Participants were recruited based on their leadership roles and volunteer or formal work with youth in one localized community in a city in the Southeastern U.S.
The neighborhood was predominantly Black (greater than 95%) and low income, with the heavy majority of youth participating in afterschool programming living in Federally subsidized housing.
In participatory work in the neighborhood, members described the community as having a proud history of participation in the Civil Rights movement, a strong faith tradition, and a rich history of Black‐owned businesses.
The sense of community declined through a series of actions conducted by the city, including pulling all subsidized housing complexes from across the city into that one neighborhood and disinvesting in a stadium that was an important part of residents' incomes.
Residents reported being significantly concerned about poverty (e.g., trouble keeping the lights on and food on the table) and gun‐related violence.
Within this setting, interview participants included leaders of community centers, faith leaders working with youth (predominantly Christian, one Nation of Islam leader), business owners in the neighborhood (e.g., barbershop owner‐operator), active and retired teachers, and others (e.g., a police leader who grew up in the neighborhood).
The interviewees included seven Black women, one White woman, nine Black men, and one White man.
The youth advisory board also provided feedback on the questions.
Youth advisory board members were not participants but provided context and reactions that helped the researchers put the information received from the adult participants into context.
Youth advisory board members lived in the community of focus and either attended a local middle school, afterschool programming in a participating community center, or a youth group at a local church.
Youth advisory board participation included between 15 and 20 youth prior to the COVID‐19 pandemic shutdowns in the U.S.
in March 2020, and 5–7 youth after this time point.
The meeting that focused on hope took place before March 2020.
All youth advisory board members were Black.
Interviewers included the project lead, a clinical psychologist and Black woman, as well as graduate students (PhD and master's students) in psychology (two White women, one Latino man).
Students were trained in qualitative interviewing and submitted a minimum of three practice audiotapes, which were reviewed by one of the project leaders, who provided written and oral feedback after each tape review.
After students completed training, the first two tapes were reviewed by one of the project leaders, and oral and written feedback were provided.
Depending on performance, students may have been asked to complete another practice interview with a project leader, who provided in vivo feedback, before continuing interviews.
Functionally, this level of review meant that essentially every interview conducted by a student was reviewed for quality before they completed a subsequent interview.
A snowball recruitment strategy was used.
After the advisory board was established (based on leaders who were already active in the community or working with participating community centers), all advisory board members were invited to participate in interviews as well as to identify additional leaders who worked with youth in the neighborhood who could provide a useful perspective to inform intervention development.
In addition to the qualitative interviews, one youth advisory board meeting was devoted to a discussion of hope.
Their thoughts about hope were used as a fourth source of information (in addition to theory, existing empirical research, and community leaders' input) to provide a counterweight to the other sources of information, all of which were provided by adults.
A grounded theory approach was used to analyze the qualitative data.
First, open coding was conducted by five researchers, who individually reviewed a random 30% of the interviews and generated the themes they noticed.
Then the team had a series of meetings to complete secondary coding, in which they met to discuss, synthesize, and organize the themes in ways that seemed most accurate to the respondents' original intents.
The following categories were created: definitions of hope, the importance of hope, indicators of the presence of hope, and indicators of the absence of hope.
Following this, a preliminary thematic codebook was developed to include the themes within each category, their definitions, and examples.
Based on consensus coding of the first three interviews by three coders, revisions were made for any unclear or overlapping definitions in the codebook.
Following revisions to the codebook, two researchers independently coded the interviews, and all discrepancies were resolved by consensus, with a third coder making a final decision when the two coders could not come to consensus.
Coding was conducted using NVivo 12.
Frequencies of the themes representing definition components of hope, the importance of hope, indicators of the presence of hope in adolescents, and indicators of the absence of hope in adolescents are represented in Table1.
The interview questions relevant to hope are presented as supplemental material.
Themes related to hope derived from interviews with community leaders.
The youth advisory board described hope as a wish or a dream, something that may or may not come true, which aligned well with thefuture‐oriented vision or dreamtheme.
They also talked about hope as persistence or having the motivation to continue reaching for goals despite external barriers to success or failure.
The youth advisory board discussed the advantages of having hope, mostly around hope as inspiration.
For example, they described hope as something that helps you to work toward who you want to be, create dreams, encourage you to be a good person, guide you, and help you make plans.
On the other hand, they indicated that sometimes hope hurts you.
This may be due to what you want not coming true, hoping for unrealistic things, and then getting frustrated and giving up.
Of note, when asked about how they can tell when other youth have hope, some of our advisory board first focused onnecessary conditions for hope: they said that youth who have hope have food, money, and a place to live.
When asked more specifically about how they could tell the difference in how youth show up or act when they do or do not have hope, our youth advisory board suggested that youth who have hope are more successful, high‐achieving, and hardworking.
They are enthusiastic, excited, and feel good.
They smile, brag, and show joy.
Our youth advisory board did indicate that sometimes hopeful youth are “too much” and that their excitement could at times be aversive to other youth.
Our youth advisory board reported that youth who did not have hope were depressed, disruptive, disappointed, and frustrated.
They reported that youth without hope might engage in suicide, be the class clown, be “antisocial” (in the sense of being withdrawn), or be popular—generally suggested that there was no singular way that youth without hope might present.
Based on the interviews and advisory board meetings, the research team developed a pool of items to measure hope that was consistent with the conceptualization of hope as a future‐oriented vision, a belief or expectation in something better, a sense of agency to realize that future, and persistence despite problems.
Members of the research team with measure development expertise refined items for clarity and reduction in duplications.
The items were then cognitively tested in a youth advisory board meeting (youth read the items out loud and provided their reactions and responses to the items).
The cognitive testing resulted in changes in wording for simplicity and clarity but no major changes in content.
Following this process, the scale included seven items.
Two items were included from the Children's Hope Scale which cohered with the theoretical understanding of hope as involving persistence, similar to the pathways thinking proposed in Hope Theory by Snyder (“When I have a problem, I can come up with lots of ways to solve it;” “Even when others want to quit, I know I can find ways to solve the problem;” Snyder et al.,1997).
Five items were generated by the authors to reflect the present study's conceptualization of hope as including an expectation or belief in something better (“I know that things don't stay bad forever”); a future‐oriented vision (“I will have a good life when I get older”); and agency (“I have what it takes to reach my goals;” “I will keep trying to reach my goals even if I fail at first”).
Although not emerging as a theme related to thedefinitionof hope, most adults discussed community and adult support as an importantprerequisitefor youths' hope—also consistent with research and theory (c.f.Bryce & Fraser,2023).
To explore whether that idea was part of the domain of hope, one item was created to capture others as a source of hope (i.e., “Other people believe in me”).
Participants were 311 youth and their parents or legal guardians who were members of a Qualtrics Panel.
Youth were between 11 and 15 years old (M= 12.62; SD = 1.19).
The sample was 66.2% male, 33.1% female, and 0.6% other.
The youth sample was 62.1% White American, 32.8% Black or African American, 1% Asian, 2.3% Hispanic or Latinx, 0.6% American Indian or Alaska Native, and 1.2% Other.
The sample was relatively high income; 48.6% had a household income greater than 100,000 per year, whereas 8% had a family income below the Federal poverty level at the time (less than $25,750 for a family of four).
All procedures were approved by the university's Institutional Review Board.
The investigators contracted with Qualtrics to recruit a sample of 300 dyads of parents or guardians and adolescents between 11 and 15 years old.
A quota sampling approach was used, with a goal of at least 100 Black youth and 100 White youth to pilot the measure.
Important structural proteins include cellulose synthases, cytoskeletal components such as tubulins and actins, and extensins that strengthen cell walls.
PPMS represents a long-term neurodegenerative condition defined by steadily worsening neurological function.
Unlike RRMS, which fluctuates between attacks and recovery, progressive MS follows a continuous decline that frequently leads to substantial disability.
Defense-related proteins—including PR proteins, protease inhibitors, and antimicrobial peptides—help protect plants against pathogens, herbivores, and environmental stress.
Certain genes, including IFN‐β, influence how well patients—particularly those with progressive MS—respond to treatment.
The interplay between multiple genes, their polymorphisms, and their possible roles in primary progressive multiple sclerosis remains an active area of investigation.
Abbreviations: APO E, apolipoprotein E; CX3CR1, fractalkine receptor; IL‐10, interleukin‐10; IL‐2RA, interleukin‐2 receptor alpha; IL‐7R, interleukin‐7 receptor; NOD2, nucleotide‐binding oligomerization domain 2; OMG, oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein; PRKCB, protein kinase C beta; SLC22A4, solute carrier family 22; TNF‐α, tumor necrosis factor‐α; TREM2, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2; VDR, vitamin D receptor.