This study investigated developmental pathways between early language and later social skills in a large, prospective cohort consisting of 3387 mother‐child dyads.
Mediational pathways were examined between parent‐reported expressive language (at 2 years of age) and social skills (at 8 years of age), via core language and pragmatic language (at 5 years of age).
The analyses accounted for biological and environmental factors known to be associated with language development (i.e., child sex at birth, child birthweight, family income, mother's level of education, primary language spoken in the home, and perinatal health factors).
Results indicated that pragmatic language, but not core language, acted as a significant partial mediator in the pathway of interest.
These results support a developmental chain from early expressive language in toddlerhood to subsequent social skills in middle childhood via pragmatic language skills around school entry.
Implications for theory and practice, and limitations are reviewed.
Using a large prospective cohort study, we investigated developmental pathways between early language at 2 years and social skills at 8 years.
Pragmatic language at age 5, but not core language, acted a significant partial mediator in pathway of interest.
These results support a developmental chain from early expressive language in toddlerhood to social skills in middle childhood via pragmatic language skills around school entry.
The acquisition of language in early childhood sets the foundation for an unraveling cascade of other development achievements, including social skills.
Although research has documented the connection between early language and later social outcomes in childhood (e.g., Aro et al.2012; Brinton and Fujiki1999; Longobardi et al.2016; Longoria et al.2009; Mulvey and Jenkins2021), questions have arisen abouthowthese abilities unfold over time.
One approach for addressing these questions is to examine mediation pathways that can inform how early language skills may shape later social outcomes via intermediate variables.
The goal of the present study was to examine developmental pathways between language and social skills in early to middle childhood by examining theoretically driven mediators between early language skills and later social skills.
Specifically, we drew upon a large longitudinal cohort of children to assess pathways between expressive vocabulary at 2 years of age and social skills at 8 years of age via core language and pragmatic language (at 5 years of age) while controlling for relevant covariates known to be associated with language development.
Here, we use the term core language skills to refer to the fundamental elements of language that allow individuals to form basic sentences and express oneself age‐appropriately, with specific focus on semantics and syntax in this study.
We use pragmatic language to refer to the ability to use language (e.g., ask questions, make requests), change language (e.g., adjust your communication style based on the receiver), and follow communicative rules (e.g., take turns) appropriately (ASHA2024).
We use the term social skills to refer to those behaviors that enable individuals to interact effectively with others in various social contexts and which include behaviors such as responding appropriately, being polite and helpful, showing empathy toward others, and navigating conflicts effectively (e.g., Elliott and Gresham1987).
It has been argued that both core language and pragmatic language abilities are important for social skills as many of these skills involve the use of language (e.g., responding appropriately, e.g., Brinton and Fujiki1999; Gallagher1999; Naerland2011; St.Clair et al.2011).
Furthermore, as language develops within social contexts and relationships (Hoff2006; Tomasello1992), it is highly likely that various components of language and social skills are intricately related.
A growing body of research has documented significant connections between early language abilities and later social functioning.
For example, children with expressive language challenges, including “late talkers” (i.e., children who are delayed in expressing themselves verbally) and children with clinical language delays (e.g., Developmental Language Disorder [DLD]), often have poorer social skills compared to peers with typical language skills (e.g., Aro et al.2012; Irwin et al.2002; Longobardi et al.2016; Schachinger‐Lorentzon et al.2018; Wieczorek et al.2024).
For example, children with DLD are more likely to be socially withdrawn at school (Fujiki et al.2019).
Furthermore, studies have shown that expressive language skills during toddlerhood (Aro et al.2012; Girard et al.2017) are positively associated with social outcomes in early and middle childhood, including prosocial behavior (Girard et al.2017), and cooperative behavior (Rose et al.2018), and social competence (Hebert‐Myers et al.2006).
Expressive language skills are negatively associated with behavioral difficulties (i.e., prosocial, hyperactive, emotional, and conduct behaviors; Clegg et al.2015).
Finally, meta‐analyses have documented positive associations between language skills and social competence (Wieczorek et al.2025) and between language and social preference (how popular a child is; Troesch et al.2016), as well as negative associations between language and internalizing/externalizing problems (Hentges et al.2021), and between language and problem behaviors (Curtis et al.2018).
In the current study, we build on this literature and seek to disentangle developmental pathways from earlier expressive vocabulary to later social skills and assess if these skills develop “through” core language and/or pragmatic language skills around the time of school entry.
Why might core language and pragmatic language skills at age 5 act as a bridge between earlier expressive language and later social skills?
First, core language skills encompass a comprehensive view of language skills that capture receptive and expressive components via examining semantics and syntax.
This constellation of skills is integral for effective communication with others as they allow one to reciprocally engage with others by understanding the content of others’ messages while also responding back appropriately.
Second, many aspects of core language skills are well developed by the time of school entry (Conti‐Ramsden and Durkin2012; Hoff2015) and have been associated with later social outcomes (e.g., peer acceptance; Hart et al.2004; Menting et al.2011).
Finally, previous literature has found significant correlations between expressive language in toddlerhood and core language skills at the time of school entry (Clegg et al.2015; Lee2011; Morin‐Lessard et al.2021).
There has also been research that has shown significant associations between core language skills around school entry and subsequent social skills in middle childhood (i.e., Grades 2 and 3; Burchinal et al.2006).
In addition to core language skills, it is critical to consider the possible impact of pragmatic language, otherwise described as how language is used in context, on later social skills.
Children must not only understand others’ messages and respond appropriately based on context, but also recognize and adapt to social subtleties to be effective communicators (Naerland2011).
Most research to date has focused on identifying specific pragmatic skills and challenges in social communication in clinical populations (i.e., children with Autism Spectrum Disorder and Developmental Language Disorder; Andres‐Roqueta and Katso2020; Brinton and Fukiji2019; Ellis Weismer, Rubenstein et al.2021; Ellis Weismer, Tomblin et al.2021).
Other research has shown that pragmatic language skills at 4 and 5 years of age are associated with later prosocial skills (e.g., around the age of 6; Bouchard et al.2020).
While aspects of core language contribute to competent pragmatic skills, we adopt a novel approach to better understand specific contributions of core and pragmatic language between early expressive language and later social skills.
Isolating the relations between pragmatic language and social skills separately from core language skills is a relatively underexplored research question.
That is, little research to date has examined the relations between pragmatic language skills and subsequent social competencies, while controlling for concurrent core language skills, and vice versa.
Some research has examined the developmental pathways between language and later social skills, via various aspects of core language and pragmatic language.
However, these studies have notable limitations.
For instance, Rose et al. (2018) found support for the mediating impact of receptive language (age 5) between earlier core language (age 3) and later social functioning (i.e., at 8 years; cooperation, aggression, and emotional regulation); however, they examined core language skills around age 3 and only receptive language skills around age 5.
Hebert‐Myers et al. (2006) found support for the mediating impact of core language skills between earlier language (age 3) and later social functioning (e.g., social connectedness, compliance; age 8); however, they examined mediation impacts through concurrent language skills (at age 8) only and examined only core language skills.
Furthermore, Law et al. (2014) examined mediating impacts between earlier core language skills and later aspects of social functioning and found that pragmatic language mediated broad behavioral outcomes (e.g., peer problems, hyperactivity), but not social skills (i.e., prosocial abilities).
However, this study drew on a small sample of 5‐to‐12‐year‐olds who were combined together for all analyses, thus limiting the ability to make developmental specific conclusions about the findings.
In summary, although existing literature provides emerging support for important cascading effects from earlier language skills to later social skills, the results are limited by the narrow focus on specific aspects of language or social functioning, small or combined age samples, and the use of concurrent rather than developmental measures.
In turn, the current study seeks to build upon these studies and address key limitations.
In the current study, we explore connections between language and social functioning across three developmental timepoints (toddlerhood, early childhood around school entry, and middle childhood).
We expand on previous research by simultaneously examining core language and pragmatic language skills (at 5 years of age) as unique mediators in the link between early expressive vocabulary (at 2 years of age) and later social skills (at 8 years of age).
See Figure1for the proposed mediation model.
These developmental timepoints were selected in accordance with important advancements and contextual factors that occur specific to these periods.
Specifically, this will be the first study to examine expressive language at 2 years of age (i.e., a period marked by rapid growth in productive language skills), via core language and pragmatic language at 5 years of age (i.e., a period that coincides with novel social demands around the time of school entry), and social skills at 8 years of age (i.e., a period characterized by increasing social connections and friendships outside the family).
Drawing upon a large longitudinal cohort of children, our research questions were as follows: (1) Do core language skills at 5 years of age mediate the relation between expressive language at 2 years of age and social skills at 8 years of age and (2) Do pragmatic language skills at 5 years of age mediate the relation between expressive language at 2 years of age and social skills at 8 years of age?
We hypothesized that both pathways would be significant, however, the design used in the current study also allowed us to examine whether either core language or pragmatic language exerts a stronger influence in the pathway of interest.
Several variables known to be associated with language development, including child sex at birth, birthweight, socioeconomic status, maternal education level, English language exposure, and perinatal factors were controlled for in the analyses (e.g., Collisson et al.2016; Hentges et al.2019; Hoff2003; Gibson et al.2021; McKean et al.2017; Reilly et al.2018,2010).
Covariates were included in the analyses to control for factors that could impact associations in the suggested model, thus improving the precision of our model in estimating the effects of interest.
Participants included 3387 mother‐child dyads from [blinded for review], a community‐based, longitudinal prospective cohort originating in western Canada (Tough et al.2017).
The sample was recruited between 2008 and 2011 through targeted advertisements in the community and at local health facilities.
Women eligible for recruitment were at least 18 years of age, less than 25 weeks' gestation at recruitment, and able to complete assessments in English.
Mothers were between the ages of 19 and 47 during the recruitment period (see Tough et al. (2017) for more information).
Though the initial scope of the project was to examine maternal and infant outcomes and assess access to services surrounding the time before and shortly after birth, subsequent funding has been progressively allocated allowing for follow‐up assessments throughout childhood when the children were 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, and 12 years of age.
The sample size has decreased over time due to attrition and children aging out of the study prior to additional funding allocations, as well as later assessment periods falling during COVID‐19.
The current study focused on examining trajectories in language and social outcomes when children were assessed at 2 (N= 1594), 5 (N= 1943), and 8 (N= 1821) years of age while controlling for variables collected at baseline assessments.
See Table1for demographic information on the sample.
Data were retrieved from five time points in the study, including the baseline assessment period (i.e., <25 weeks gestation), at 4 months post‐partum, and when children were 2, 5, and 8 years of age.
The selected timepoints were chosen as they included the outcomes for the variables of interest.
The MacArthur‐Bates Communicative Development Inventories: Words and Sentences (MCDI‐WS; Fenson et al.2007) was completed by mothers when children were 2 years of age.
Scores from the Words Produced form were used, which asks respondents to select which words their child produces verbally (scores range from 0 to 680), providing an overall expressive vocabulary score.
The internal consistency was good (α= 0.95).
The Children's Communication Checklist‐2 (CCC‐2; Bishop2003) was completed by mothers when children were 5 years of age.
This measure includes 70 items and assesses core language skills (i.e., speech, syntax, semantics, and coherence) and pragmatic language (i.e., initiation, scripted language, context, and non‐verbal communication) in children.
The CCC‐2 comprises a General Communicative Composite (GCC), which combines core language and pragmatic language scores together.
As the goal was to examine the isolated impacts of core language and pragmatic language as possible mediators in the analysis, researcher derived composites were created mirroring the same approach used to create the GCC.
Namely, the scaled scores that correspond to core language skill scales (i.e., speech, syntax, semantics, and coherence) and pragmatic language scales (i.e., initiation, scripted language, context, and non‐verbal communication) were summed together to create two distinct composites.
The internal consistencies for the core language (α= 0.86) and pragmatic language (α= 0.87) composites were good.
The Parent Rating Scale (PRS) of the Behavior Assessment System for Children—Second Edition (BASC‐2; Reynolds and Kamphaus2004) was completed by mothers when children were 8 years of age.
This measure comprises 160 items and assesses various domains of behavior and functioning in youth.
Scores from the Social Skills scale were used, which comprises nine items that assesses social functioning with peers and adults across school, home, and community settings.
The internal consistency of this scale was good (α= 0.84).
Given their association with language development during childhood, several covariates were controlled for in the analyses, including family income, mother's level of education, primary language spoken in the home, child gender, child birthweight, and perinatal health factors indexed by the Antepartum Risk Score (APRS; Collisson et al.2016; Hentges et al.2021; McKean et al.2015; Morin‐Lessard et al.2021; Reilly et al.2018,2010).
Family income, mother's level of education, and primary language exposure were retrieved from demographic questionnaires completed by mothers at the baseline assessment period of the study (i.e., <25 weeks gestation).
Family income was coded as the total income earned prior to taxes and deductions over the last 12‐month period according to $10,000 incremental categories, resulting in an 11‐point scale ranging from less than $10,000 to $100,000 or more per year (e.g., “1” = less than $10,000; “2” = $10,000–$19,999, etc.).
Maternal education level was coded according to the highest level of education completed by the mother and included categories ranging from some elementary and high school (“1”) to completed graduate school (“6”).
Primary language exposure was coded according to whether the mother could complete written questionnaires in English (“1” = yes; “2” = no).
Child sex, birthweight, and APRS were retrieved from medical records collected at the time of birth.
Child sex was coded as boy (“1”) or girl (“2”).
Birthweight was recorded according to the total weight of the child at birth, in grams.
The APRS score, a proxy for perinatal health factors, identifies mothers with an elevated risk for an adverse pregnancy outcome based on several risk factors (e.g., substance use during pregnancy, gestational diabetes, and prior stillbirths) and scores ranged from 0 to 16 (low risk = 0–2; moderate risk = 3–6; higher risk = >6; Burstyn2010).
All statistics were conducted in IBM SPSS Statistics 29.0 and IBM SPSS AMOS 27.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA).
First, descriptive statistics and correlations among study variables were examined (see Table2).
Next, a path analysis model was created to examine the longitudinal pathways between language and social variables while controlling for the selected covariates.
Specifically, the model examined the effect of Expressive Vocabulary at 2 years to Social Skills at 8 years as mediated by Core Language and Pragmatic Language at 5 years (see Figure1).
Covariates, including gender, birth weight, maternal education, family income, primary language spoken at home, and APRS, were controlled for in the model.
The total sample size for the analyses was 3387 children.
An assessment of missing data was completed and indicated that missing data was missing completely at random (Little's MCAR Test; χ2= 6.38, df = 9,p= 0.70).
Full information maximum likelihood (FIML) was used to handle missing data and maximize the sample size for all analyses.
Descriptive data and bivariate correlations between covariates and variables of interest.
Maternal education level was coded according to the highest level of education completed by the mother, ranging from some elementary and high school (“1”) to completed graduate school (“6”).
11‐point scale with “1” = less than $10,000; “2” = $10,000–$19,999, and so forth.
English (“1” = yes; “2” = no).
Child sex, birthweight, and APRS were retrieved from medical records collected at the time of birth.
APRS scores ranged from 0 to 16 (low risk = 0–2; moderate risk = 3–6; higher risk = >6).
The model examined the pathway between Expressive Vocabulary (age 2) and Social Skills (age 8) through Core Language (age 5) and Pragmatic Language (age 5), controlling for the effects of gender, birthweight, maternal education, income, English language use, and APRS (See Figure1for the results).
The model indicated excellent fit (χ2(18) = 26.73,p= 0.08; comparative fit index = 0.99, Tucker‐Lewis fit index = 0.99, RMSEA = 0.01).
There were significant direct effects between Expressive Vocabulary (age 2) and Core Language (age 5;β= 0.38,p< 0.001), Expressive Vocabulary (age 2) and Pragmatic Language (age 5;β= 0.21,p< 0.001), and Pragmatic Language (age 5) and Social Skills (age 8;β= 0.29,p< 0.001).
The direct path between Core Language (age 5) and Social Skills (age 8;β= 0.06,p= 0.06) was not significant (see Figure2).
Results of path analysis between expressive vocabulary (2‐year‐old) to social skills (8‐year‐old) through core language and pragmatic language (5‐year‐old).
Standardized coefficients are reported with a bold line indicating a significant path (p> 0.001) and a dashed line indicating a non‐significant path.
Tests of indirect effects were conducted using the online package RMediation (Tofighi and MacKinnon2011).
A significant indirect effect was found for pragmatic language (IE = 0.06 (SE = 0.008), 95% confidence interval [0.04, 0.08]), suggesting that pragmatic language partially mediates the relation between expressive language at age 2 and social skills at age 8.
The indirect effect for core language was not significant (IE = 0.02 (SE = 0.02), 95% confidence interval [–0.007, 0.05]).
Although core language did not significantly mediate the relation between expressive language at age 2 and social skills are at age 8, we conducted a follow‐up test to determine if pragmatic language at age 5 exerted a significantly stronger effect in the link between early vocabulary and later social skills, compared to core language.
To assess if the indirect effects were significantly different, the free to vary model (χ2(18) = 26.73,p= 0.08) was compared to a model where indirect effects were constrained to be equal (χ2(20) = 125.95,p< 0.001).
The Chi‐square difference test indicated that the models varied significantly (χ2(2) = 99.22,p< 0.001), indicating that pragmatic language exerted a significantly stronger effect than core language on the link between age 2 expressive vocabulary than age 8 social skills.
Drawing upon data from a comprehensive prospective cohort study and accounting for significant environmental and genetic factors affecting language development, this study documents a developmental pathway from expressive language at age 2 to social skills at age 8.
Specifically, we found that pragmatic language at 5 years of age, but not core language, was a significant intermediary mechanism between expressive vocabulary at 2 years of age and later social skills at 8 years of age.
These findings add to the growing body of literature examining pathways between language and social development from toddlerhood to middle childhood and highlight the critical connections between early language skills and later social skills.
Our key finding that pragmatic language mediates the link between early language and later social functioning extends existing research by demonstrating that pragmatic language acts as an intermediary mechanism between expressive language and social skills when examining specific developmental timepoints between the ages of 2, 5, and 8 years of age.
As these timepoints coincide with important developmental changes, our findings highlight that toddlers with well‐developed expressive skills may develop more refined pragmatic language skills around school entry, which are then linked to well‐developed social skills during middle childhood.
These findings provide novel insights into the specific importance of pragmatic language skills in their association with language and social outcomes during childhood.
Why might pragmatic language, and not core language, serve as a mediator between early expressive language and later social skills?
One explanation for this finding is that pragmatic language is inherently more socially oriented than core language skills.
Pragmatic language competence influences a child's ability to “tune in” during social interactions (St.
Clair et al.2011), enabling more flexible communicative responses and facilitating the demonstration of social skills (Naerland2011).
Indeed, the current study allowed increased precision in examining the impact of pragmatic language, by controlling for concurrent core language skills in the model.
This finding, in turn, indicates the importance of considering pragmatic language, compared to core language skills, when considering socioemotional and behavioral impacts of language strengths or challenges.
This finding is consistent with previous research highlighting pragmatic language skills, as opposed to core language skills, as more strongly associated with social functioning at school entry (Naerland2011).
Additionally, pragmatic language in middle childhood and adolescence is linked to a wider range of socioemotional and behavioral difficulties, compared to other language skills (St.
Clair et al.2011).
Core language skills were not a significant mediator suggesting that when the impact of concurrent pragmatic language skills was accounted for, the path from expressive language (at age 2) to social skills (at age 8) was not significantly mediated by core language skills (at age 5).
While these findings were somewhat surprising given previous findings (e.g., Hebert‐Myers et al.2006; Rose et al.2018), they raise the question of whether the impact of core language or receptive language skills as a mediator in previous studies may have dissipated if pragmatic language was accounted for in prior models.
Alternatively, it is possible that receptive language (i.e., at age 4 as shown in Rose et al.2018) is particularly important as a mediator, however, such nuances could not be captured in the current study given that the CCC‐2 does not have separate receptive and expressive language composites.
It could also be argued that the core language composite in the CCC‐2 is more heavily skewed to expressive as opposed to receptive aspects of language in general (e.g., speech and syntax composites).
Finally, it is important to consider the possible disparity of findings across studies as possibly impacted by differences in measurement across studies.
For example, social competence is a broad and elusive construct that is defined differently across different studies, resulting in the possibility of different constructs being measured but captured under the same label.
Studies also varied in their use of different informants and assessment types (i.e., questionnaires/screeners vs. standardized measures) which could also influence the findings.
The finding that pragmatic language, rather than core language skills, mediates the relationship between early expressive language and later social skills contributes to the ongoing debate about the importance of considering pragmatic language as well as structural language in formalized language assessments (Law et al.2014; Whitehouse et al.2011).
Pragmatic language is at times not represented or minimally accounted for in standardized language measures (Adams2002; Russell and Grizzle2008), despite its impacts on a range of domains of functioning, and as highlighted in the current study, social skills.
Second, mediation studies are useful in that they can provide insight into possible treatment targets (Law et al.2014).
Although the current study focused on typical language development, there was heterogeneity in the sample regarding early language skills, and results could inform prevention efforts among children with language delays.
Namely, a possible extension of the findings could be that monitoring and intervening late talkers’ pragmatic language skills at school entry may confer positive impacts on their developing social skills several years later.
Given that social competence during middle childhood has critical impacts on mental health and well‐being (e.g., Bornstein et al.2010), such treatment targets may buffer against future psychological problems later in development.
Our findings support a developmental chain from early expressive language in toddlerhood to subsequent social skills in middle childhood via pragmatic language skills around school entry.
These findings offer insight into the temporal direction of these relations.
It is likely, however, that the relations between pragmatic language and social skills are bidirectional in nature.
That is, pragmatic language skills enable children to approach peers and form connections, while establishing social relationships provides opportunities for interactive language use, such as turn‐taking.
Specifically, the success of these interactions depends partly on a child's ability to understand and respond appropriately to their conversational partners, clearly convey intentions, and contribute meaningfully to ongoing discussions (Gallagher1993).
Additionally, children who exhibit strong social skills, like cooperating and sharing with peers, are often viewed more positively, which may result in increased opportunities to practice and develop their pragmatic language skills.
Another possibility is that pragmatic language and social competence develop through a cascading effect, or a “skills beget skills” dynamic (e.g., Tamis‐LeMonda et al.2019), where stronger pragmatic language abilities lead to more social interactions, which in turn further enhance language development.
Future research using longitudinal datasets designed to capture earlier measures of both social and language skills will offer further insight into the nature of this important relation.
The findings should be considered in light of the following limitations.
First, the sample includes children from Western middle to upper class families which may limit the generalizability of these findings to other sociodemographic groups (Tough et al.2017).
Second, the language and social assessments were completed by a single informant (i.e., the parent).
It would have been optimal to assess language and social skills using an array of measures that integrated the perspectives of different informants, such as clinicians and teachers.
Third, we note that our measures involved brief screening questionnaires (e.g., CCC‐2) and scales (e.g., social skills scale on the BASC‐2 PRS) that may not fully capture the complexity of the constructs of interest.
Future research should draw upon a wider range of assessment tools, beyond those typically used for screening (e.g., CCC‐2), and using those with a broader pool of items to more deeply measure language and social skills.
Finally, it is important to note that the measurement of early language skills assessed only children's expressive vocabulary.
Similarly, it was not possible to distinguish expressive and receptive aspects of language via the core language composite measure at age 5.
Given that receptive language challenges, compared to expressive language, can be more detrimental for social competence (Davis and Qi,2020; Rautakoski et al.2021), future research could examine whether receptive language skills mediate the relationship between early expressive vocabulary and later social skills while controlling for pragmatic language skills.
The current study drew on a large longitudinal cohort to examine developmental pathways between earlier language skills and later social skills during childhood.
Most surgeons reported seeing over 20 fracture patients during a typical day in their fracture clinics.
When asked about their clinic populations, 81.8% stated that they frequently treat financially constrained patients, and 54.5% reported routinely seeing individuals with substance use issues.
Although slightly lower, agreement remained high (> 65%) concerning the effectiveness of social workers in supporting these issues.
The strongest agreement related to IPV, with 93.2% stating that a clinic-based social worker would be both effective and appropriately positioned to address IPV (Tables 4a and 4b).
Respondents also supported social workers asking about housing needs: 95.5% considered this appropriate, and 79.5% believed social workers would be effective in doing so.
A small number (4.5%) felt that social work services were unnecessary or unsuitable for their specific patient population.