Genomic selection (GS) has potential to accelerate the genetic gain in crop plants.
This study was undertaken to assess the accuracy and potential of GS in faba bean [Vicia faba(L.)]
and to enhance its application in breeding programs.
A set of 118 diverse faba bean accessions were phenotyped for key agronomic traits under herbicide and heat stress across 16 environments in Morocco, Lebanon, Sudan, and the United States.
These accessions were genotyped, revealing 170 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) strongly associated with target traits.
kompetitive allele‐specific PCR (KASP) markers were subsequently designed and validated on 4512 diverse breeding lines.
Prediction accuracy (PA) was assessed using the reproducing kernel Hilbert space model, with and without genotype‐by‐environment interactions and taking into consideration two cross‐validation (CV) strategies: CV1 (predicting new lines) and CV2 (predicting complete records from unbalanced data).
Additionally, 75 KASP markers with known association with heat tolerance traits were prioritized to estimate the PA of the models.
The results showed a comparable PA between the two models, with CV1 outperforming CV2.
This highlighted the difficulty in predicting the performance of untested lines in tested environments compared to lines evaluated in some environments but not others.
Moreover, SNP subset size and composition significantly impacted PA, especially under heat stress.
The highest accuracies were observed for days to flowering and plant height under heat stress and for plant height and grain yield under herbicide environments, indicating that these traits are ideal for training population selection.
Optimizing the size and composition of the training population will enhance the effectiveness of GS in faba bean breeding.
Accurate prediction accuracy and genomic selection in faba bean require a high genome coverage and large training population.
Days to flowering and plant height are ideal traits for training population selection for heat tolerance.
Plant height and grain yield are ideal traits for training population selection for herbicide tolerance.
Faba bean [Vicia faba(L.)]
holds significant importance among food legumes due to its nutritional density and agronomic versatility.
Among the many constraints hindering faba bean production, heat stress and weeds tend to have the most detrimental effects especially in the Mediterranean and Nile Valley regions where faba bean is grown as a vital legume crop.
High temperatures surpassing the threshold of 30°C during the flowering stage impair pollen viability leading to reduced pod set and significant yield reduction (Devasirvatham et al.,2012; Lavania et al.,2015; Bishop et al.,2016; Badri,2023).
Therefore, in light of the anticipated effects of climate change (Wardhana & Prawira,2024) and the observed rising temperature trend, breeding for heat tolerance is becoming very crucial.
On the other hand, given the low competitive ability of faba bean, weeds can lead to considerable reduction in yield that can reach up to 60% if not managed properly (Frenda et al.,2013).
In conventional agriculture, preference is given to herbicide application as the most effective, timesaving, and economical method of weed management compared to alternative strategies (De Arevalo et al.,1992; Gressel,2000), and therefore, herbicide tolerance is becoming a highly desirable trait in faba bean.
Although screening under field conditions has led to the identification of sources for tolerance to heat and herbicide in faba bean (Abou Khater et al.,2021; Maalouf et al.,2022,2019), achieving a significant genetic advancement using these conventional methods remains very challenging as they are input intensive, and their replicability depends on the environmental conditions.
This is evidenced by the genetic gain obtained over the years, which, despite some increase, is still insufficient to meet the demand of the growing population (Tolessa et al.,2015).
To address the outlined challenges, prior studies used genome‐wide association study (GWAS) or linkage mapping to identify quantitative trait loci (QTLs) associated with major traits of interest in faba bean like seed size; resistance to Ascochyta blight, chocolate spot, and broomrapes; and tolerance to herbicides, frost, and heat, in addition to vicine–convicine content (Ali et al.,2016; Kaur et al.,2014; Ocaña‐Moral et al.,2017; Khazaei et al.,2017; Abou‐Khater et al.,2022; Maalouf et al.,2022; Gela et al.,2022; Skovbjerg et al.,2023).
Although marker‐assisted selection is known to increase the selection accuracy compared to conventional methods (Mohan et al.,1997), it also has its own limitations as its effectiveness is contingent upon the trait under consideration being controlled by genes with relatively major effects.
Nevertheless, majority traits of breeders’ interest exhibit significant genetic complexity as they are influenced by environmental effects and by multiple minor genes with limited effects that cannot be captured thereby posing challenges to marker‐assisted selection (Xu et al.,2020; Adhikari et al.,2021).
Luckily, genomic selection, often considered as an innovative form of marker‐assisted selection, deals with complex traits by utilizing genome‐wide marker data to capture the cumulative effects of both minor and major effect of markers contributing to the overall genetic variation underlying the quantitative traits (Xu et al.,2020).
The cumulative effect is used for calculation of the genomic‐estimated breeding values (GEBV) of each individual (Budhlakoti et al.,2022) from early generation without the need of extensive phenotyping and multiple breeding cycles.
However, to ensure the success of the genomic selection, factors that may impact the accuracy of genomic prediction should be taken into consideration like the genetic diversity and size of the breeding population, the heritability of the studied trait, the genotype by environment interaction (GE), the markers’ density, and the genetic relationship between training population and breeding population or selection candidates (Clark et al.,2011; Daetwyler et al.,2010; De Roos et al.,2009; Howard et al.,2014; Lorenzana & Bernardo,2009; Luan et al.,2009).
Genomic selection was implemented successfully in the breeding program of different crops.
Recently, Budhlakoti et al. (2022) reviewed the genomic selection studies conducted on major cereals, pulses, oilseeds, and horticultural crops for grain yield (GY), biotic and abiotic stresses tolerance, and seed quality.
In the pulses breeding, genomic selection was applied to improve the maturity time of lentil (Haile et al.,2020) and a range of other desired traits like GY, Ascochyta blight resistance, botrytis gray mould resistance, salinity and boron stress tolerance, 100‐grain weight, seed size index and protein content (Gebremedhin et al.,2024), the cooking time and root rot resistance of common bean (Diaz et al.,2021), and the drought tolerance of chickpea (Li et al.,2018).
Given the huge size of faba bean genome (13 Gbp) compared to other crops and the limited funding allocated for faba bean research, it was not until recently that this strategy became applicable in faba bean as a high single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) density have been ascertained by the release of assembled reference genome (Jayakodi et al.,2023).
A recent, yet unpublished work on genomic selection for yield‐related traits in faba bean has shown promising predictive ability and prediction accuracy (Lippolis et al.,2025).
To the best of our knowledge, this study, in addition to ours, represents the first applications of genomic selection for improving faba bean traits, filling a critical gap in the literature and providing a foundation for future research in this field.
The present study was conducted to evaluate the accuracy and potential of genomic selection for herbicide and heat tolerance in faba bean using a diversified faba bean reference population, and to identify areas for future improvement and better implementation of genomic prediction in practical breeding programs.
Accurate prediction accuracy and genomic selection in faba bean require a high genome coverage and large training population.
Days to flowering and plant height are ideal traits for training population selection for heat tolerance.
Plant height and grain yield are ideal traits for training population selection for herbicide tolerance.
A set of 118 faba bean landraces originating from 42 countries in addition to 16 breeding lines from International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) were included in this study (TableS1).
The set is genetically diverse as assessed earlier using simple sequence repeat markers, and was previously classified into 42 major, 17 minor, 66 equina, and nine paucijuga class types (Maalouf et al.,2019).
The major class (seed weight [SW] ≥ 100 mg) includes accessions with large seeds, typically exhibiting a plate‐like shape.
The equina class (50 < SW < 100 mg) consists of accessions with medium‐sized seeds, also plate‐shaped.
The minor class (30 < SW < 50 mg) is characterized by smaller, cylindrical to rounded seeds.
Finally, the paucijuga class (20 < SW < 30 mg) includes accessions with very small, rounded to elliptical seeds (Cubero,1974).
Note that the seeds used in these experiments are obtained from the reserve stock, which is multiplied annually under insect‐proof cages to maintain the purity of the evaluated accessions.
A total of three field experiments were conducted between 2014 and 2018 in two ICARDA stations in Terbol, Lebanon, and Marchouch, Morocco, to evaluate their tolerance to three different herbicide treatments (T1—metribuzin @250 g ai/ha, T2—imazethapyr @ 75 g ai/ha, and T3—no herbicide application).
Noting that the herbicides were applied at the pre‐flowering stage.
In Marchouch, the experiment was conducted using augmented design while in Terbol Alpha lattice design was used.
The following observations were recorded: days to 50% flowering (DFLR) and days to 90% maturity (DMAT) were recorded on plot basis.
Plant height (PLHT), GY, grain yield per plant (GYPLT), number of pods per plant (NPPLT), number of seeds per plant (NSPLT), number of branches per plant (NBrPLT), and green canopy cover (GCC) were recorded on three plants selected randomly.
GCC is the average percentage of green coverage of three plants quantified using the Canopeo application developed by Oklahoma State University using Matlab.
In addition, herbicide damage score at flowering stage (HDS1), herbicide damage score at pod development stage (HDS2) were recorded at a 1–5 scale.
A score of 1 corresponds toplots with no visible damage and normal growth; 2 indicatesvery light damage with excellent phytosanitary status; 3 reflectsmoderate damage with stunted growth and significant yellowing; 4 representshigh damage, with over 50% plant death, weak vegetative growth, and stunted plants; and 5 corresponds tosevere damage, with more than 50% of plants affected, significant biomass reduction, and extensive deformation.
A total of six field experiments were conducted in an incomplete block design with two replicates between 2015 and 2017 to evaluate their tolerance to heat.
The experiments were conducted in three research stations: during the summer season at Terbol‐Lebanon where temperatures exceeds 35°C during the flowering and pod set time; at the Central Ferry Research Farm, Pullman, characterized by warm weather during the reproductive and terminal crop cycle, and in the winter season at ARC Hudeiba Research Station in Sudan where the weather is hot with daytime temperatures exceeding 32°C.
The following observations were recorded as described previously: DFLR, DMAT, PLHT, NPPLT, NSPLT, GYPLT, and 100‐seed weight (HSW).
Chlorophyll content (CI) was measured on three random leaves per plot using a chlorophyll meter (SPAD‐502 Minolta; Spectrum Technologies Inc.) during morning hours at the end of the flowering period.
Canopy temperature (CT) was measured using a portable infrared thermometer (Mikron M90 Series, Mikron Infrared Instrument Co., Inc.) during vegetative and grain filling stages.
And finally, the pollen germination (PG) was measured using the method described by Brewbaker and Kwack (1963). In brief, fresh pollen was collected from 15 random open flowers per plot when daytime temperatures exceeded 32°C.
The pollen was stored in microfuge tubes in iceboxes for a few hours before the germination test.
The test was conducted in two replicates per plot, using a germination medium containing boric acid, calcium nitrate, sucrose, and agar, prepared and autoclaved before being poured into Petri dishes.
The medium's pH was adjusted to 6.3.
Pollen grains were spread on the surface using a needle and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. Germination was assessed by counting the grains with pollen tubes at least as long as the grain diameter, and the germination rate was determined by counting the germinated grains per hundred observed, using a stereozoom microscope with a digital camera.
whereYis the observed trait value;μis the overall mean,gis the genetic effect;τis the treatment effect; Row and Col represent row and column effects, Rep/Block represents replication/block effects, and Error is the residual error.
Genotypes and treatments were considered fixed factors, while all others were considered random factors.
Significance of variation among genotypes and treatments was assessed at ap‐value < 0.001.
Multi environment trials analyses (META) was conducted using the method of residual maximum likelihood (REML) to evaluate variation among genotypes, treatments, and the genotype × treatment interaction across trials for traits measured in more than one trial.
In the META analysis, the environmental effect (E) is incorporated into the model equation to account for the influence of environmental factors on the phenotypic data.
whereYis the observed trait value,μis the overall mean,gis the genetic effect, Rep represents the replication effect, Rep/Block represents block within replicate effect, and Error is the residual error.
Accessions were fitted as fixed factors, while all others were considered random.
Differences among accessions were considered highly significant at ap‐value < 0.001 and significant at ap‐value < 0.05.
META analysis where environmental effect (E) is incorporated into the model equation to account for the influence of environmental factors on the phenotypic data was conducted to examine the differences among accessions and environments.
Combined phenotypic heritability (h2) was estimated for the traits based on the combined analysis using REML model and best unbiased estimated values of Genstat V23,2021.
Correlation analysis was conducted to examine the relationship between genomic prediction accuracy and phenotypic estimated heritability and to assess whether genomic selection aligns with phenotypic selection.
A total of 192 kompetitive allele‐specific PCR (KASP) markers were developed (TableS2) based on the GWAS results obtained by Abou Khater et al. (2022), Maalouf et al. (2022), and Guiterrez et al. (2023). These markers were selected based on their significant associations with multiple agronomic traits in faba bean, particularly those related to heat, drought and herbicide tolerance (e.g., PG and herbicide damage score), and yield performance (e.g., GYPLT, HSW, NPPLT, and NSPLT).
KASP markers were used as the prioritized set of SNPs in the prediction analysis.
To provide additional information on the genomic locations of these markers, we performed a BLAST analysis using theV.fabagenome assembly (GCA∖_048183575.1), available on NCBI and published by the Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences.
Marker positions were determined based on alignment results and are included in TableS2.
The developed markers were used to test 4512 accessions that include 2441 multi‐parent advanced generation inter‐crosses (MAGIC) lines, 500 elite lines,182 parent reference set, 118 generation challenge program (GCP) reference set previously studied by Abou Khater et al. (2022) and Maalouf et al. (2022), and the remaining are F3 segregating lines.
These accessions were sampled during the vegetative stage of the cropping season 2021–2022 at Terbol, Lebanon.
Young leaves of these accessions were collected and placed in 96‐well collection plate (BioArk, LGC Biosearch Technologies) where two wells A1 and H6 were left empty as checks.
Afterward, the desiccant was applied and sealed in a plastic bag and conserved in the fridge at −12°C to avoid any leaf oxidative degradation.
These samples were sent to LCG laboratory in Hoddesdon, United Kingdom, along with the list of KASP markers for genotyping (TableS2).
The DNA was extracted in LCG laboratory using sbeadex chemistry developed by LGC.
Genotyping was performed using KASP genotyping technology developed at LGC.
The KASP technology is based on allele‐specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which enables the bi‐allelic scoring of SNPs, insertions and deletions.
The SNP‐specific KASP assay and the universal KASP‐TF assay mix were added to the DNA in 1536 well plates and a series of 35cycles of PCR performed.
On completion of the 35 cycles, the plates were read using a fluorescence plate reader and visually inspected to assess the progression of the PCR reaction, further cycling was performed in cases where PCR reaction could not reach its endpoint.
Once the reaction reached its endpoint, the data were examined, and genotypes were assigned.
where,yis the phenotypes,μis the intercept,Estands for the random environmental effect, 𝑬 ∼N(0,VEσE2).VEis defined by multiplying theZEincidence matrix with its transpose;gis the genotypic effects, following a normal distribution ofg∼N(0,Vgσg2)., is determined by the incidenceZgand the genomic relatedness matrix (GRM); and finallyε∼N(0,σε2) is the independent and identically distributed residuals.
where,y,μ,E,G, andεwere defined in Model 1; G × E is the genotype by environment interaction G × E ∼N(0,VgEσgE2), whereVgE=Vg⊙VE;⊙is the cell‐to‐cell or the Hadamard multiplication.
Model implementation and fitting.
Both models were fitted using a Bayesian approach via reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS) regression (de los Campos et al.,2010; Gianola & Van Kaam,2008), as implemented in the BGLR R package (Pérez & De Los Campos,2014).
It is noteworthy that when a linear kernel, such as the GRM (G), is used to define the covariance structure for genotypic effects (g) within the RKHS framework, the model effectively becomes a genomic best linear unbiased prediction (GBLUP) model (de los Campos et al.,2010; Morota & Gianola,2014).
For each analysis, the Markov chain Monte Carlo was run for a total of 20,000 iterations of which the first 10,000 were considered as burn‐in iterations and the other 10,000 iterations were used for parameter estimation.
The thinning hyper‐parameter was set to 5.
The number of burn‐in iterations was used to be long enough to ensure convergence through initial testing of different values in which we found that robust convergence can be achieved with burn‐in values from 1000 to 3000 iterations.
The 192 KASP markers were filtered for minor allele frequency <0.01 resulting in a total of 75 markers.
To evaluate the prediction ability of the prioritized 75 KASP markers for selection compared to the whole set of markers, we rerun all the previous genomic selection analyses for all traits in two different scenarios.
First, using the prioritized 75 SNPs only (TableS3), and second, with a random subset of 75 SNPs that were randomly selected from the genotyping by sequencing SNPs and has no previously detected association with any of our studied traits.
The aim of the second scenario was to ensure that the prediction accuracy using the prioritized 75 SNPs is significantly higher than the randomly selected 75 SNPs, therefore, they can be used for practical selection from the unphenotyped 4741 lines.
We used two different cross‐validation (CV) methods (CV1 and CV2) as described in Burgueño et al. (2012) by masking a subset of the phenotypic data (one‐third of the population) as missing to predict their performance as a validation set.
CV1 masks random phenotypic records from the whole dataset across environments, therefore, a single individual can have actual records in the reference set and some masked records.
We run 100 replicates for each evaluated scenario in both CV strategies.
Average Pearson correlation coefficient across replicates between the phenotypic values and the predicted values of the validation set in both methods was used to infer the prediction accuracy.
Prediction accuracy values across all replicates were used to declare the significant differences among models and between the full genotyping by sequencing SNP set and prioritized SNPs using the Studentt‐test.
A diagram visualizing all the steps described from the phenotyping to genotyping and genomic selection is presented in FigureS1.
Starting with the phenotyping for herbicide tolerance experiments, significant differences were observed among genotypes and among treatments for all evaluated quantitative traits at ap‐value < 0.001 indicating a wide range of variation in herbicide tolerance in faba bean across both genotypic and treatment factors.
The genotype × environment interactions were also significant for all traits except for NBrPLT and GCC as they were only recorded in one location.
Our findings indicated also that the first (HDS1) and second (HDS2) herbicide damage scores for each genotype ranged from 1 to 5 across all trials.
When comparing the results of both herbicide damage scores (HDS1 and HDS2), we observed that 1 month after herbicide application, 5% and 42% of the genotypes had recovered from the damage caused by metribuzin and imazethapyr treatments, while the damage worsened in 56% and 10% of the genotypes, respectively.
As for the phenotyping for heat tolerance experiments, significant differences were observed among genotypes and among environments for all evaluated traits at ap‐value < 0.001 indicating a wide range of genotypic variation in faba bean for heat tolerance.
The G × E interaction was also significant for all traits except for GY (p< 0.398), indicating that yield performance of the tested accessions remained the same across environments.
This could be attributed to the similar environmental conditions across the different locations as all trials were conducted under heat stress conditions, during the summer in Lebanon and the United States and during the winter in Sudan.
Spatial analysis of each season–location combination revealed considerable variability in genotypes for DFLR, DMAT, GY, NSPLT, NPPLT, HSW, PG, and Cl for all locations/seasons.
PLHT showed significant variation at all locations, except Hudeiba in 2017 while no significant difference was observed for CT for all locations/seasons.
The estimated prediction accuracies obtained in CV1 and CV2 for the studied traits under herbicide and heat stress environments considering all SNPs are presented in Table1.
Prediction accuracy values obtained in CV1 and CV2 (where CV is cross‐validation) for the studied traits under heat (HT) and herbicide (H) stress environments considering all single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using two different prediction models (g + E and g + E + G × E).
Abbreviations: CI, chlorophyll content; CT, canopy temperature; DFLR, days to 50% flowering; DMAT, days to maturity; GCC, green canopy cover; GY, grain yield; GYPLT, grain yield per plant; HSW, 100‐seed weight; NBrPLT, number of branches per plant; NPPLT, number of pods per plant; NSPLT, number of seeds per plant; PG, pollen germination; PLHT, plant height.
Under heat stress environment, the highest prediction accuracies for CV1 and CV2 using two different prediction models were obtained in the case of DFLR followed by PLHT.
On the other hand, the lowest values were obtained in the case of CT and DMAT.
Under herbicide stress environment, the highest prediction accuracies were obtained for PLHT followed by GY and DFLR.
However, the lowest values were obtained for the herbicide damage scores in CV2 and for NPPLT and NSPLT in CV1.
Overall, the results showed that predicting the performance of untested lines in tested environments was less challenging than predicting the performance of lines that were evaluated in some environments but not in others.
The prediction accuracy values were higher in CV2 than in CV1 across all traits, except Ht_HSW and H_PG.
In CV2, prediction accuracy varied between 0.05 and 0.54 under heat stress and between 0.15 and 0.69 in herbicide stress environments.
On the other hand, in CV1, the prediction accuracy varied between 0.02 and 0.39 and between 0.06 and 0.41 under heat and herbicide stress environments respectively.
As for the prediction accuracies of the two different prediction models, considering G × E interaction in the g + E + G × E model does not seem to have a significant effect on the prediction accuracy of all traits, which means that despite the presence of significant G × E interactions, both models provided comparable level of prediction accuracy even when accounting for these interactions.
Average gains in accuracy of 3.52% in CV2 and 5.29% in CV1 were attained for G + E + G × E over G + E in the case of heat stress environment.
On the contrary, in the case of herbicide stress environment, considering the g × E interaction did not benefit the prediction accuracies and has worsened them as an average gain of −5.39% in CV2 and −3.92% in CV1 was attained for g + E over g + E + G × E. However, these small differences were not significant for all previous comparisons.
Moreover, Figure1confirms that the effect of the prediction model used is almost negligible as an overlap or a slight difference was noticed between their trends (Figures1and2) across the majority of traits.
Prediction accuracy of traits recorded under heat (HT) environments obtained by two prediction models and using different single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) subsets.
CT, canopy temperature; DFLR, days to 50% flowering; DMAT, days to maturity; GYPLT, grain yield per plant; HSW, 100‐seed weight; NPPLT, number of pods per plant; NSPLT, number of seeds per plant; PG, pollen germination; PLHT, plant height.
Prediction accuracy of traits recorded under herbicide (H) environments obtained by two prediction models and using different single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) subsets.
DFLR, days to 50% flowering; DMAT, days to maturity; GCC, green canopy cover; GYPLT, grain yield per plant; NBrPLT, number of branches per plant; NPPLT, number of pods per plant; NSPLT, number of seeds per plant; PLHT, plant height.
The estimated prediction accuracies obtained in CV1 and CV2 for the traits studied under herbicide and heat stress environments considering the 75 prioritized SNPs and 75 random SNPs are presented in Table2.
Similarly to the results obtained in the case of all SNPs, the prediction accuracy differed also between traits in both CV1 and CV2.
Using the two different prediction models, prediction accuracies obtained in CV1 and CV2 were the highest in the case of DFLR followed by PLHT under heat stress environment and in the case of DFLR followed by GYPLT under herbicide stress environment.
Prediction accuracy values obtained in CV1 and CV2 for the studied traits under heat (HT) and herbicide (H) stress environments considering 75 prioritized and 75 random single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using two different prediction models (g + E and g + E + G × E).
Abbreviations: CI, chlorophyll content; CT, canopy temperature; DFLR, days to 50% flowering; DMAT, days to maturity; GY, grain yield; GYPLT, grain yield per plant; HSW, 100‐seed weight; NBrPLT, number of branches per plant; NPPLT, number of pods per plant; NSPLT, number of seeds per plant; PG, pollen germination; PLHT, plant height.
On the other hand, the lowest values were obtained in CV1 and CV2 for CT and DMAT under heat stress environment in both prioritized and random SNPs.
Under herbicide stress environment, the lowest values were obtained for the herbicide damage scores in the case of 75 prioritized SNPs and for NBrPLT and NSPPLT in the case of the 75 random SNPs.
Moreover, similarly to the results obtained in the case of all SNPs, prediction accuracies are greater in CV2 than in CV1 values across all traits except Ht_HSW in both the 75 prioritized and random SNPs and H_PG in the case of 75 prioritized SNPs.
On average, prediction accuracies of the 75 prioritized SNPs were slightly lower than the ones obtained in the case of all SNPs in CV1 and CV2 in the case of heat stress environment but not in herbicide stress environment (Figures1and2).
However, this was not true in the case of the 75 random SNPs as the prediction accuracies obtained using this SNPs subset were significantly lower than the ones obtained in all SNPs cases under both heat and herbicide stress environments.
As for the prediction accuracies of the two different prediction models, the gain resulting from taking into consideration G × E interaction in the g + E + G × E model was negative in CV1 and CV2 in the case of the two different 75 SNPs subsets.
Under heat stress environment, the average gains in CV2 were equal to −2.35% and −10% and in CV1 −29.41% and −28% in the 75 prioritized and 75 random SNPs, respectively.
As for the herbicide stress environment, the average gains in CV2 were equal to −29.41% and −28.43% and in CV1 −0.98% and −0.98 in the 75 prioritized and 75 random SNPs, respectively.
When comparing the effect of the number and composition of SNPs subsets on the prediction accuracy, the results visualized in Figures1and2show that regardless of the model used, the full set of SNPs gave higher prediction compared to the two other subsets as the accuracy tends to rapidly increase in almost all of the studied traits when the number of SNPs involved increase.
This increase is especially noticed in herbicide stress environments (Figure2), which means that using a smaller SNPs subset might be effective under heat stress environments more than under herbicide stress environments.
In addition, the results also showed that the size of SNPs subset had the maximum impact on prediction accuracies followed by its composition whether it consists of prioritized or random SNPs increases.
Predictions obtained using prioritized SNPs were better than using random SNPs in heat stress environments, contrary to herbicide stress environments where on average, predictions were comparable in both subsets.
Phenotypic heritabilityh2was estimated for all traits in the heat and herbicide stress environments and correlation was estimated betweenh2and the prediction accuracies obtained using the two different models and all SNPs set.
Under heat stress environments, DFLR and PLHT, the two traits with the highest genomic prediction accuracy also exhibited the highesth2.
This pattern was similarly observed in herbicide stress environments, where GYPLT, along with DFLR and PLHT, had the highesth2under the three different herbicide treatments.
Highly significant and strong correlations (0.79 and 0.8) were observed betweenh2and the prediction accuracy obtained for CV1 with g + E and g + E + G × E models, respectively.
Also, highly significant and moderate correlations (0.59 and 0.58) were obtained betweenh2and the prediction accuracy obtained for CV2 with g + E and g + E+ G × E models, respectively.
Before applying any genomic selection, it is essential to evaluate the accuracy of genomic prediction models and to compare different sets of statistical models.
In this study, the accuracy of genomic prediction was evaluated in faba bean for heat and herbicide tolerance related traits considering two CV schemes (CV1 and CV2) with two scenarios, the g + E + G × E and g + E models.
Several factors have been taken into consideration including the size and the composition of the SNPs set.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that deals with genomic selection in faba bean.
The limited global resources allocated to this crop have constrained genomic research progress, given the huge size of the faba bean genome.
Our results show that predicting the performance of untested lines under tested environments is less accurate than predicting the performance of lines tested in some but not all environments, as higher prediction accuracies were recorded in CV2 than in CV1.
However, the difference is small and not statistically significant for many heat stress traits (CI, CT, DMAT, and GYPLT).
For other traits (herbicide tolerance traits, as well as heat tolerance DFLR, NPPL, NSPL, and PLHT) showed significantly higher prediction accuracy in CV2, while the remaining traits (e.g., HSW and PG for heat stress) showed significantly higher prediction accuracy in CV1.
This finding stems from the size of the reference population used in the present study as the prediction assessment in the CV scheme CV1 is based on information borrowed from other lines within the same environment or across environments (Burgueño et al.,2012).
This means that the larger the reference population, the better the prediction, while such contradictory results could happen due to our small reference population.
Our results align with Jighly (2024) results, who also used such a small population size, of having contradictory results of superiority of CV1 and CV2 across different traits.
However, most of previous genomic selection studies (e.g., Roorkiwal et al.,2018) reported that the performance of prediction of untested genotypes (CV1) resulted in lower prediction accuracies compared to other validation schemes, which is the case for most of our traits.
It has been reported previously that the accuracy of genomic predictions tends to correlate positively with the increase in the reference population size (Hayes et al.,2009; Tan et al.,2017).
Nevertheless, expanding the size of the reference population is costly due to the high expenses associated with phenotyping and it is challenging as the quality of collected data may be affected by the large‐scale phenotyping trials (Alemu et al.,2024).
In addition, it has also been reported that in some cases prediction accuracy may stabilize once an optimal size of the reference population is reached (Grattapaglia et al.,2011; Arruda et al.,2015; Tan et al.,2017; Sverrisdóttir et al.,2018; Fernández‐González et al.,2023).
Therefore, optimizing the size of the training population in a way that increases accuracy with minimal cost is needed.
To do so, many factors should be considered like heritability of the traits and genetic relatedness of the reference set.
For instance, previous studies suggested that including genetically unrelated individuals in the training population affects negatively the accuracy of the genomic prediction (Clark et al.,2012; Habier et al.,2010; Lorenz & Smith,2015).
In the present study, the reference population consists of 120 genetically diverse lines originating from different countries, which may have affected negatively the accuracy of the models.
Therefore, the composition of the reference population is as important as its size, and developing a reference population where the selection candidates are well‐represented is of great importance in genomic prediction to ensure that their genetic diversity is well captured and to minimize the probability of losing rare favorable alleles (Akdemir & Isidro‐Sa´nchez,2019; Akdemir et al.,2015; Lorenz & Smith,2015).
Since genomic prediction accuracy relies on the relationship between genetic markers and phenotypic traits, adding these lines to the reference population will enrich the genotypic data and phenotypic information and will therefore enhance its ability to predict the phenotypic performance.
Tan et al. (2017) found that adding parental lines to the reference population increases the prediction accuracy.
Adding to that the low to moderate heritability of some traits, especially in the case of heat tolerance, explains the lower accuracy associated.
Several research studies have demonstrated that prediction accuracy increases with the increase in trait heritability (Lorenzana & Bernardo,2009; Zhong et al.,2009; Jannink et al.,2010; Combs & Bernardo,2013; Kaler et al.,2022), and this was the case in our study where highly significant and positive correlation was observed between the trait's heritability and the prediction accuracy.
Bernarndo (2016) suggested to increase the prediction accuracy, low heritable traits should be compensated by increasing the size of the reference population.
The results reported by Tan et al. (2017) confirmed that an increase in reference population size led to an increase in the accuracy of traits with low heritability.
To increase cost‐effectiveness, genomic selection analyses were rerun for all traits using a reduced number of SNPs that were previously shown to be associated with heat tolerance.
Our findings show that a slight reduction in the prediction accuracy was observed as the number of KASP markers declined in the case of heat tolerance.
Earlier studies have also found that a lower number of SNPs can provide equivalent prediction accuracies compared to using all SNPs (Zhang et al.,2011; Su et al.,2012; Tan et al.,2017).
Also, a number of studies found that increasing the number of markers in small reference populations provides little or no improvement in predictive accuracy.
These findings apply to our study since we are using a small reference population.
Interestingly, Kaler et al. (2022) concluded that additional markers might be associated with an increase in error or noise.
Nevertheless, future studies should investigate the effect of increasing SNP density on prediction accuracy.
In the case of herbicide tolerance, our results show a more pronounced reduction in prediction accuracy.
This might be due to the fact that the 75 KASP were selected from the 11,000 SNP based on their association with heat tolerance.
Fewer SNPs were sufficient to capture the genetic variability and predict traits associated with heat tolerance accurately, but additional genome exploration is needed to provide sufficient coverage for the herbicide tolerance traits prediction.
As for the subset of SNPs used, our results show a significant reduction in accuracy when a random 75 SNPs subset was used under both heat and herbicide stress environments.
For herbicide tolerance, the results of the randomly selected 75 SNPs were comparable to the 75 KASPs indicating the inefficiency of the KASP markers to predict herbicide tolerance.
One the other hand, the prediction accuracy of the randomly selected 75 SNPs was significantly lower than that obtained from the KASPs for heat tolerance, indicating the superiority of the later.
This also means that using the 75 random SNPs could lead to biased observations as it does not favor variants contributing to heat and herbicide tolerance related traits.
Our results are in line with previous studies that found utilizing QTL‐linked markers increased accuracy more than using a random set of markers (Thavamanikumar et al.,2015; Kaler et al.,2022).
Contrarily, Poland et al. (2012) and Spindel et al. (2015) observed no change in prediction accuracy after using random subsets of markers.
To summarize, this study is a proof‐of‐concept that genomic selection is applicable in faba bean, but higher genome coverage and larger training population are needed to achieve a better prediction accuracy and as a result a more accurate selection.
In this regard, ICARDA is collaborating with international partners to develop high coverage SNPs markers (ICARDA, unpublished data, 2024).
Also, a diverse training population that includes parental lines in addition to the lines having the highest GEBV for DFLR and PLHT in the case of heat tolerance and the highest GEBV for DFLR, GYPLT, and PLHT in the case of herbicide tolerance will be developed and used for further studies.
Nonetheless, recent studies have emphasized the efficacy of minimally invasive surgical techniques that preserve the rib structure.
At three months postoperatively, the patient reported being very satisfied with the surgical outcome and described fluctuating pain with a score of 2/10 on the NRS, occasionally requiring analgesics such as 1000 mg of paracetamol, but without interfering with daily activities.
The histological examination of the resected specimen showed no cartilaginous abnormalities.
During the outpatient follow-up visits, the patient was satisfied with the result and stated that she would undergo the surgical procedure again if needed
The patient provided written informed consent for the publication of this case report and the associated images.