Having bioactive components such as hypericin, hyperforin and quercetin has enabled Hypericum perforatum (HP) to show antioxidant, antiviral and hypocholesterolemic effects in different animal species.
This study aimed to investigate the effects of different levels of Hypericum perforatum extract (HPE) additions on performance, immune response, serum metabolites, and lipid peroxidation in broiler chickens.
A total of 250 one‐day‐old broiler chicks were randomly allocated to five treatments with five replicates and ten chicks each.
Experimental rations consisted of a basal diet with no supplement (control group) and a basal diet with 0.1%, 0.5%, 1%, and 1.5% HPE.
Results showed that the addition 1.5% HPE in the broiler diet increased high‐density lipoproteins (HDL) compared to the control diet.
While the total cholesterol (TC) was significantly reduced by HPE supplementation, only feeding 1% and 1.5% HPE significantly lowered the low‐density lipoproteins (LDL).
HPE addition to the diet significantly reduced abdominal and breast fat at 0.5%, 1%, and 1.5% levels.
However, thigh fat was significantly decreased by dietary all HPE levels supplementation.
Moreover, in the group fed with 1.5% HPE, the immunoglobulin G (IgG) and thymus weight significantly increased compared to the control group.
Compared with the control group, HPE‐fed groups showed significantly lower malondialdehyde (MDA) concentrations in breast muscle.
The total antioxidant capacity (T‐AOC) was improved significantly by HPE supplementation.
In general, while there was no significant difference among treatments in the case of growth performance parameters, dietary supplementation of HPE at 1.5% was the most effective dose to improve serum biochemical metabolites, fat metabolism, immune response, and oxidative stability in broiler chicks.
Hypericum perforatum could be used as an antibiotic alternative in poultry nutrition due to its antioxidant, antiviral, and hypocholesterolemic effects.
Results of this study showed that supplementation of HPE at 1.5% was the most effective dose to improve serum biochemical metabolites, fat metabolism, immune response, and oxidative stability in broilers.
The presence of free radicals, including superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radicals, has been connected to the outbreak of many disorders in farm animals, such as sheep, cows, pigs, and poultry (Corino and Rossi2021; Ahmadipour et al.2024).
Moreover, many studies have shown the adverse effects of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in poultry, such as DNA damage, protein oxidation, and lipid peroxidation in living tissues and cells resulting in poor immunity and retarded growth of birds (Righi et al.2021).
Essential oils and phytogenic compounds such as flavonoids have been introduced as important antibiotic alternatives due to their lower toxicity, biodegradability and environmental compatibility (Liu et al.2025).
It has been demonstrated that biologically active components could promote the growth of poultry along with their antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral and emulsifying properties (Barreto et al.2008; Mokhtari et al.2023).
These multi‐functional components are found in the whole parts of a plant, such as fruits, vegetables, nuts, grains, leaves, roots and barks; as reducing agents, they directly react with the quenching free oxygen radicals, or they can form chelating complexes with transition metals.
Potentially, phenolic compounds can induce antioxidant enzymes or suppress the generation of oxidative enzymes such as cyclooxygenase in biological systems (Su et al.2007).
The most common plant phenolic antioxidants are flavonoids, cinnamic acid derivatives, coumarin, tocopherols, and multi‐functional organic acids (Moazzen et al.2022).
Hypericum perforatum (HP) is also called St.
John's wort and is traditionally used as a herbal tea and food supplement because of its excellent bioactive properties (Jarzębski et al.2020).
HP belongs to the family hypericaceae which is a perennial plant native to Europe, Asia, and North Africa.
The flowers of this plant contain a red liquid composed of complex and biologically active compounds (Gupta et al.,2021; Jarzębski et al.2020).
It also appears that the translucent glands and surrounding tissues in leaves (from the upper to lower leaf epidermis) of HP contain the phytochemical hyperforin (Soelberg et al.2007).
HP contains at least ten classes of biologically detectable active compounds, mainly including a wide range of secondary metabolites such as naphthodianthrones (hypericin and pseudohypericin), phloroglucinols (hyperforin and adhyperforin), flavonoids (hyperoside, quercitrin, and isoquercitrin), tannins (tannic acid) and essential oils (terpenes and alcohols) (Jarzębski et al.2020).
As a powerful antioxidant, St.
John's wort can effectively inhibit the generation of free radicals and lipid peroxidation in different cells (Orčić et al.2011).
According to Zou et al. (2010), Hypericum perforatum extract (HPE) could decrease oxidative stress and prevent inflammation, neurotoxicity, and gastrointestinal problems.
Landy et al. (2012) reported dietary addition of HP powder reduced TC in broilers.
Moreover, HPE supplementation in broiler diets increased bird humoral immunity by increasing IgG (Aghili et al.2014).
Recently, Ilhan et al. (2024) have evaluated the effects of feeding powder and extract of HP on the growth and inflammatory responses of broiler chickens.
They found that in comparison with the powder, the extract of HP significantly improved the body weight and immunity of broiler chickens.
The positive effects of HPE on the immunity and health of humans and rats are well documented.
However, there are very few works regarding the application of this compound and its essential oil on the growth performance, immunity, and lipid peroxidation of broilers.
Thus, this experiment aimed to investigate the effects of different levels of HPE on performance, serum metabolites, humoral immune response, and lipid peroxidation of broiler chicks.
A total of 250 one‐day‐old male broiler chickens (Ross 308) were randomly distributed into five dietary treatments with five replicates and ten birds each.
Dietary treatments were a control diet containing maize‐soybean meal as basal diet and a basal diet supplemented with different levels of 0.1%, 0.5%, 1%, and 1.5% HPE.
The starter, grower, and finisher diets were fed from 1 to 10 days, 11 to 24 days, and 25 to 42 days according to Aviagen recommendations for Ross 308 broiler chickens, respectively (Table1).
Diets were prepared for each period in the form of mash.
Birds were reared in 25‐floor pens (1.0 × 1.0 m2) and had free access to feed and water throughout the trial.
Each pen was covered with wood shavings at a depth of 5–8 cm, and equipped with a single tray feeder from 1–10 days, and suspended feeder from 11–42 days and a nipple drinker.
The ambient temperature was maintained at 32°C for the first 3 days and then decreased by 2°C–3°C per week to reach 22°C, and after that was kept constant.
The relative humidity was maintained at 50%–60%.
The chicks were housed in an acclimatised room, with the provision of sufficient artificial light and ventilation.
The lighting program was 23L: 1D for the first 7 days, 20L: 4D from 8 to 21 days, and 23L: 1D from 22 to 42 days.
The ventilation rate was 0.12 m/s during the whole period.
Ingredient and calculated composition of basal diets during starter, grower, and finisher periods.
Note:†Premix provided per kilogram; Vitamin A: 5,500 IU; Vitamin D3: 1,500 IU; Vitamin E: 15 IU; Vitamin K: 8 mg; Thiamine: 1 mg; Riboflavin: 4 mg; Niacin: 25 mg; Biotin: 30 mg; Folic acid: 0.5 mg; Pantothenic acid: 5 mg; Pyridoxine: 1.5; Vitamin B12: 0.01 mg; Cu: 12 mg; Fe: 35 mg; Zn: 25 mg; Co: 0.15 mg; I: 0.5 mg; Se: 0.12 mg; Mn: 38 mg.
HP grows widely in the north, northwest, west and northeast regions of Iran, particularly in temperate and humid weather, with light sandy soil conditions and low humidity in plains and areas at low altitudes above sea level (Riazi et al.2011).
Following HP cultivation, its aerial parts were used for this study; these parts were collected during the flowering season (May to August), and 50 g of dried plant material was extracted using 1000 mL of water for 5 h (85°C, 800 rpm).
The herb particles were then separated from the solution using a Whattman 10 µm filter paper.
The extract was pre‐concentrated in a vacuum rotary evaporator at 60°C for 1 h. Then, the obtained extract was dried (24 h, 45°C) in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany).
The residue was dissolved in distilled water and filtered using a 0.2 µm nylon filter, after which the filtrate was evaporated to dryness (Jarzębski et al.2020).
The total content of phenols in plant extracts was determined by the Slinkard and Singleton method (Slinkard and Singleton1977).
Spectrophotometric methods were used to determine total phenolic and flavonoid contents, as already reported in earlier papers.
Standard equivalents (gallic acid equivalent: GAE, for phenolics; rutin equivalent: RE, for flavonoids) were used to explain the contents in the plant extracts.
Briefly, 0.5 mL of extract solution (0.01 g in 10 mL of methanol at 60°C) was mixed with 0.05 mL of 2% ammonium chloride.
Then, 3 mL of 5% potassium acetate was added to the above solution.
After 40 min, the absorbance of the samples was determined at 470 nm against distilled water.
The absorbance of the samples was compared, and the total flavonoid content was expressed as 165.56 ± 2.4 mg per 100 g dry extract.
The phenolic content in HPE was determined as 0.15%–0.30% hypericin, 1.4% hyperforin, and 0.40%–0.44% pseudohyperforin.
Also, the content of total flavonoids, including quercetin, isoquercetin, rutin, hyperoside and quercitrine, was up to 3.50% (Table2).
Active substances of polyphenols found in the extract of Hypericum perforatum.
The average daily weight gain (ADWG), average daily feed intake (ADFI), and feed conversion ratio (FCR) for each and the whole experimental period were recorded and used as measures of chick performance.
The dead birds were weighed, recorded and used to adjust the FCR.
At 42 days of age, two birds per replicate (10 birds/treatment) were randomly selected; blood samples were taken from a brachial vein, and were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 min to obtain the serum (SIGMA 4–15 Lab Centrifuge, Germany).
Each serum sample was decanted into Eppendorf tubes and stored at −20°C for later analysis.
Serum triglyceride, TC, LDL, and HDL concentrations were measured spectrophotometrically using the Pars Azmoon kits (Pars Azmoon Inc., Tehran, Iran) and the enzymatic method.
Fat deposition of internal organs (the liver, abdomen, and intramuscular tissue (thigh and breast)) was measured according to the methods described by Mirghelenj et al. (2016). For this, 2 g of breast, thigh, and liver were selected and dried in two 12 h stages (65°C, then 105°C) and cooled in a desiccator for at least 30 min.
The liver, breast, and thigh intramuscular fat contents were measured by the Soxhlet system (AOAC,1990) and expressed as percentages of dry tissue weight.
Plus, the abdominal fat pad was removed and weighed as a percentage of live weight.
At 28 days of age, two birds in each group were randomly injected intramuscularly with 0.5 mL of 10% suspension of sheep red blood cells (SRBC) prepared in phosphate‐buffered saline.
Blood samples were collected at 7 and 14 days after the first injection, and the total antibody titer against SRBC was evaluated using the Haemagglutination Inhibition Test.
In total, mercaptoethanol‐sensitive (MES, presumably immunoglobulin M (IgM)) and mercaptoethanol‐resistant (MER, presumably IgG) anti‐SRBC antibody titres in serum samples were quantitated by the Cheema et al. (2003) method.
All titres were expressed as log2of the reciprocal of the highest dilution, giving visible Haemagglutination.
At 42 days of age, two birds per replicate were selected randomly, slaughtered, plucked, eviscerated and then the thymus, spleen, and bursa of Fabricius were collected.
Lymphoid organ weights were determined immediately after collection.
Data were presented as a percentage of organ weight relative to total body weight.
Breast tissue was sampled to determine the total antioxidant capacity (T‐AOC) activity and MDA concentration and stored at ‐20°C.
The MDA concentration of serum and breast tissue, an index of lipid peroxidation and oxidative stress, was determined using the thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) method.
The absorbance was measured using the reaction of TBARS with MDA to create a stable pink colour with the spectrophotometer (UV‐2100, Unico Instruments Co., Shanghai, China) at 532 nm.
Increased levels of MDA as a ROS indicate an effective indicator of lipid peroxidation in the body (Cortinas et al.2005).
To determine T‐AOC, the frozen breast meat was homogenised, and the homogenate was centrifuged at 400 g for 10 min at 4°C.
Then, the supernatants were stored at −70°C until analysis (Behroozlak et al.2021).
Finally, T‐AOC activities were measured by spectrophotometric using colorimetric methods and determined by spectroscopy (UNICO 7200, Shanghai, China) at a wavelength of 520 nm.
These assays were performed using commercial assay kits produced by the Randox total antioxidant status kit (Randox Laboratories Ltd, Crumlin, UK) and their associated methods.
Data were analysed in a completely randomised design using the general linear models (GLM) method of SAS.
Significant differences among treatment means were separated using the Duncan multiple range test.
The values of statistical significance were based onP< 0.05.
Table3shows the effect of different levels of HPE on FI, BWG, and FCR.
During the starter, grower, finisher, and whole period, the addition of different dosages of HPE had no significant effect on FI, BWG, and FCR of broiler chickens (P> 0.05).
Effects of different HPE†levels on performance of broiler chickens.
Abbreviations:‡ADFI ‐ average daily feed intake; ADWG ‐ average daily weight gain; FCR ‐ feed conversion ratio.
As shown in Table4, all the HPE‐fed birds had lower TC and LDL than control birds (P< 0.05).
However, the lowest LDL level was observed in 1% and 1.5% HPE‐fed birds (P< 0.05).
Although the glucose and triglyceride concentrations of serum were not affected by dietary treatments (P> 0.05), consumption of 1.5% HPE resulted in higher HDL compared to the control diet (P< 0.05).
Effects of different HPE†levels on serum biochemical parameters of broiler chickens.
Note:a–cMeans within a column having different superscripts are significantly different (P< 0.05).
Abbreviations:†HPE ‐ Hypericum perforatum extract.
TC ‐ total cholesterol; HDL ‐ high density lipoprotein; LDL ‐ low density lipoprotein.
The effects of dietary addition of HPE on fat contents of the abdomen, liver, breast, and thigh muscles of chickens are presented in Table5.
No significant difference (P> 0.05) was observed in liver fat among treatments.
Compared with the control group, feeding higher than 0.1% HPE significantly reduced abdominal and breast fat of broilers (P< 0.05).
However, thigh fat was significantly decreased (P< 0.01) by dietary all HPE levels supplementation.
Effects of different HPE†levels on fat deposition of internal organs in broiler chickens.
Abbreviations:†HPE ‐ Hypericum perforatum extract.
Tables6and7show the relative weights of lymphoid organs and humoral immunity (SRBC test) of broilers, respectively.
There was no significant difference (P> 0.05) in the weights of the spleen and bursa of Fabricius among treatments.
However, the addition of 1.5% HPE to the diet significantly increased the thymus relative weight of birds (P< 0.05).
No significant difference (P> 0.05) was observed in immunoglobulin T (IgT) and IgM in birds challenged with SRBC antigen at primary and secondary antibody titres, while only the addition of 1.5% HPE significantly (P< 0.01) increased IgG compared to the control group.
Effects of different of HPE†levels on lymphoid organs (% live body weight) of broiler chickens.
Note:a–cMeans within a column having different superscripts are significantly different (P< 0.05).
Abbreviations:†HPE ‐ Hypericum perforatum extract.
Effects of different HPE†levels on antibody response to SRBC (log2).
Note:a–cMeans within a column having different superscripts are significantly different (P< 0.05).
Abbreviations:†HPE ‐ Hypericum perforatum extract.
Table8shows the effect of dietary treatments on MDA and T‐AOC values of serum and breast muscle of broilers at 42 days of age.
Supplementing the basal diet with 1.5% and 1% HPE significantly (P< 0.001) increased serum or breast muscle T‐AOC activity.
Serum MDA levels did not differ between experimental groups (P> 0.05).
Compared to the control diet, dietary supplementation of HPE at any level significantly reduced the concentration of MDA in the breast muscle (P= 0.001).
Effects of different HPE†levels on lipid peroxidation of serum and breast muscle in broiler chickens.
Note:a–cMeans within a column having different superscripts are significantly different (P< 0.05).
Abbreviations:†HPE ‐ Hypericum perforatum extract.
The experimental treatments had no effect on the growth performance parameters of broilers.
In agreement with our results, Chikoto (2006) reported no significant effect of different levels of Ginkgo biloba herb and HPE on the performance of broilers.
The effects of herbal supplementation on broilers depend on several factors, such as the derivatives, the part of the plant, the dose, the method, the number of additives (plant powder, essential oil, extract), and the rearing condition.
For example, Ilhan et al. (2024) reported that chickens consumed feed with 1% powdered HP, and the 1.5 or 3 mL/kg of HPE level had no significant effect on growth performance compared to the chickens fed the control diet.
The highest possible score is 75, and SRS-A scores were used as an explanatory variable in this research.
Drug-related problem severity was evaluated using the Japanese DAST-20, which categorizes dependence as nonsevere/low (0–5), intermediate (6–10), and severe (≥11) [42].
This measure was treated as a numerical variable ranging from 0 to 20.
Notably, intoxicated individuals may act in ways that contradict their own moral values, potentially fostering suicidal tendencies and self-criticism, and spirituality may help them develop self-forgiveness for such maladaptive behaviors [44].
This may partly explain why our findings suggest that 12-step-based programs influence methamphetamine use disorder similarly to alcohol use disorder.
Interestingly, spirituality showed an association with long-term abstinence from methamphetamine in our sample.
However, Japanese people are often considered to have limited understanding of religiosity.