To explore whether people ‘other’ when making judgements about ‘harmful’ drinking and the drinking contexts (e.g., pub with friends) and features of drinking contexts (e.g., location, company) perceived as being indicative of harmful drinking.
Risky drinkers (AUDIT‐C ≥ 5;n= 20) in four focus groups, drew and discussed contexts and features of contexts they thought indicated harmful drinking.
Reflexive thematic analysis was conducted alongside content analysis of drawings informed by themes and prior research.
There are three deductive themes.
The first theme semblance of control referred to people's tendency to differentiate their own drinking practices as controlled and safe in relation to the out‐of‐control behaviours of a harmful drinker.
This was seen in the content analysis of drawings where participants tended to draw drinking contexts which were different to those they drank in.
The drinking practices perceived as being indicative of harmful drinking were further explored in the second theme harmful drinking contexts.
This theme was made up of four subthemes: mental harms, physical harms, social harms and societal harms which were discussed as being differentially associated with different types of drinking contexts.
The final theme, features which make drinking ‘harmful’, focused on the features of drinking contexts which participants felt were more indicative of harm.
There were seven subthemes: alone, home, amount, drink type, having responsibilities, reason for drinking and timing/pattern.
Drinking contexts fed into the construction of othering narratives among risky drinkers.
This has implications for alcohol harm reduction campaigns.
Risky drinkers underestimate the risk of harm; only a minority are motivated to reduce drinking.
Low problem recognition linked to othering, using an extreme stereotype to construct positive identity.
Drinking is socially engrained, but no research has explored othering and drinking contexts.
This study suggests that othering narratives are constructed in relation to contextual information.
Participants discussed contexts and features of contexts they felt indicated that drinking was harmful.
This could inform interventions aiming to increase reduction attempts by risky drinkers.
Globally, alcohol is a leading risk factor for death and disability (Griswold et al.,2018).
In a survey of 21 countries, only around a third of adults reported wanting to reduce their alcohol consumption (Davies et al.,2017).
This is consistent with the UK, where only around a third of risky drinkers [defined as Alcohol‐Use Disorder Identification Test – Consumption (AUDIT‐C) ≥5 (Bradley et al.,2007) which covers a broad spectrum of drinking] attempted to reduce their drinking in the past year (Alcohol Toolkit Study,2023).
This means that many people who could benefit from reducing their alcohol consumption in the United Kingdom are not currently attempting to do so.
Low problem recognition may explain these low rates of motivation to reduce risky drinking.
Risky drinkers often underestimate how much they drink relative to other drinkers (Garnett et al.,2015) and their risks of experiencing alcohol‐related harms (Morris et al.,2020).
This low problem recognition is related to othering (Alcohol Toolkit Study,2023).
Othering is the process of using an extreme stereotype of a problematic other to construct a relatively positive self‐identity (Khadjesari et al.,2019; Morris et al.,2020).
Those who do not perceive their drinking as harmful may engage in othering when confronted with information or feedback on their drinking (Morris et al.,2021).
Othering, alongside avoidance or rejection of personally relevant information about health risks (Morris et al.,2024), could lead to the maintenance of low problem recognition (Morris et al.,2020; Morris et al.,2024).
Several theories highlight the importance of beliefs about vulnerability to harm in determining intentions and behaviour.
The Health Belief Model (Rosenstock et al.,1988) predicts that an individual's perception of personal susceptibility to risk predicts behaviour change.
The Extended Parallel Process Model (Witte,1994) stresses the role of susceptibility to threats alongside perceived self‐efficacy in determining behaviour change.
As such, low problem recognition may partly explain (Melia et al.,2021; Morris et al.,2022; Rosenstock et al.,1988) why the majority of risky drinkers in the United Kingdom (Alcohol Toolkit Study,2023) and drinkers in a number of countries (Davies et al.,2017) are not motivated to reduce their alcohol consumption.
Finding ways to increase reduction attempts among risky drinkers is a public health priority.
Social Practice Theories highlight the importance of understanding drinking as one constituent part of wider social practices (Warde,2005).
Social practices encompass multiple interlinked behaviours and individual and group motivations or ‘meanings’ (Meier et al.,2018; Mielewczyk & Willig,2007).
Through this lens what could be interpreted as one behaviour, such as drinking a beer, can take on very different ‘meanings’ in different contexts (e.g., bonding with friends in a pub or unwinding at home after a hard day).
Drinkers in the UK drink in a range of contexts (Ally et al.,2016; Holmes et al.,2024) including ‘at home alone’ and ‘big nights out with friends’.
A recent meta‐synthesis of othering explored the characteristics of the ‘problematic other’ constructed by risky drinkers and found that contextual features such as timing and drink type were among those used to differentiate own drinking as non‐harmful (Morris et al.,Under Review).
It is possible that heavier drinkers create othering narratives about the nature of harmful drinking contexts, including physical, mental or social harms for the drinker or others.
This othering could occur in different ways.
There may be drinking contexts that are widely perceived as indicating harmful drinking.
For example, lone home drinking (Cook et al.,2023) and drinking in public places such as park benches or in the street (Wallhed Finn et al.,2014) have been discussed as being indicative of harmful drinking.
It is likely there are also multiple conflicting narratives about what indicates harmful drinking, depending on the characteristics of the perceiver and the types of contexts they drink in.
For example, among a sample of middle‐aged, male drinkers, harmful drinking took the form of a young, inexperienced drinker, drinking to get drunk quickly and causing a public nuisance (Parke et al.,2018).
Whereas younger drinkers thought harmful drinking was characterized by older adults habitually consuming bottles of wine daily (Khadjesari et al.,2019).
Little research to date has set out to explicitly explore the link between othering and drinking contexts.
As such, we conducted focus groups to explore drinking contexts and features of drinking contexts perceived as being indicators of harmful drinking, and how othering shapes these perceptions.
Dual‐process models such as the Reflective‐Impulsive Model (Deutsch & Strack,2020) draw a distinction between conscious cognitive processing and less reflective heuristic processing.
Perceptions on what constitutes harmful drinking may not be something participants have reflected on consciously or critically (Morris et al.,2021).
To facilitate reflection, arts‐based methods, such as drawing, can help participants elicit perceptions and beliefs that may be less easily expressed through words (Fraser & al Sayah,2011; King & Horrocks,2019; Okpako et al.,2024).
Investigate the extent to which people other when making judgements about contexts and features of drinking contexts linked to harmful drinking.
Explore which drinking contexts (e.g., drinking at home with partner, in the pub with friends) and specific features of drinking contexts (e.g., location, company) are perceived as being linked to or indicative of harmful drinking.
The study was designed in line with guidance recommending holding 3–6 focus groups lasting 1.5 h, each with 6–8 participants and two facilitators (Onwuegbuzie et al.,2009; Plummer d‐Amato,2008).
The Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ) checklist (Tong et al.,2007) is included in AppendixS1.
We held four in‐person focus groups in London between May–July 2024 with 20 adult risky drinkers (AUDIT‐C score ≥5 (Bradley et al.,2007)).
Data and thematic saturation were met; no new themes or significant changes to the meanings of codes were identified in the final group.
To reach a broad range of participants, we recruited from multiple sources.
This included a database of participants, diverse in age, gender and socioeconomic position, who had previously taken part in studies at University College London (UCL), focused on alcohol and smoking.
We also recruited via formal social media advertising (Instagram), posts on the researchers own social media (e.g., Instagram, Weibo) and physical posters in the local area.
We purposively sampled participants, inviting participants to focus groups who had a range of demographic (age, gender, ethnicity and subjective financial situation) and drinking characteristics (full range of AUDIT‐C scores between 5 and 12).
To examine othering and to reduce the likelihood of conflict or participant distress (e.g., if one participant drew or described a context which echoed the drinking contexts of other people in the group), the four focus groups were organized around self‐reported drinking contexts.
The four groups were made up of people who reported: lone drinking, drinking with a partner, social drinking in a home and social drinking out of the home.
Each participant was reimbursed with £20 in Amazon vouchers.
After consenting online, participants were screened based on the AUDIT‐C (Bradley et al.,2007).
Eligible participants were then asked to provide their name, email, mobile phone number, age, gender, ethnicity and subjective financial situation.
Participants also reported the type of contexts they typically drank in.
Response options were informed by a recent typology of the most prevalent forms of drinking occasion in the United Kingdom and previous work by the authors (Holmes et al.,2022; Stevely et al.,2024).
See pre‐registered protocol for detail (https://osf.io/vs8yb).
First, MO established guidelines for conversation and confidentiality.
Participants introduced themselves and described the last time they had an alcoholic drink.
Next, participants were asked to draw what they thought a harmful drinking context looked like.
Participants were prompted to think about the location, other behaviours, timing and company.
See AppendixS2for reflexivity statements and reflections on implementing this task.
Participants were asked to explain their drawings, highlighting the features that indicated a context was harmful.
Then, the facilitator asked questions focused on eliciting participants' broader beliefs about what harmful drinking contexts looked like.
As a group, participants were then asked to sort different cards featuring contexts or features of drinking contexts from being more to less harmful.
Each context or feature was discussed by the group, allowing space for disagreements and was then placed where most participants felt it should go.
Finally, participants were debriefed.
The research team developed a topic guide with reference to prior research (Krueger,1998; Krueger & Casey,2014).
The topic guide was reviewed by a Patient and Public Involvement (PPI) group to ensure that the questions and tasks were clearly articulated in advance of the focus groups.
The PPI group suggested that ‘harmful or problematic drinking’ was the best terminology to use to help participants understand what we were interested in, we use the shorthand of harmful drinking throughout this manuscript.
The group also had some helpful suggestions to facilitate trust and richer discussions (e.g., facilitators talking about their own relationship with alcohol via the icebreaker to break down perceived boundaries and making it clear from the start that people did not have to answer questions with reference to their own drinking if they did not want to).
Sessions were audio‐recorded and transcribed verbatim.
Drawings were retained and scanned.
Recordings were automatically transcribed using Microsoft Office 365 and manually checked and corrected by MO and JY to increase familiarization with the data.
Names were replaced with pseudonyms on transcripts.
Identifiable information was removed.
Data were initially coded in NVivo.
Data were analysed using reflexive thematic analysis underpinned by critical realism.
The critical realist perspective is that although reality exists independent of human perception, it is understood through the lens of human experience and interpretation.
As such, themes derived through thematic analysis represent patterns based on participants accounts of their experiences.
We set out to identify views and experiences around the three areas outlined in the objectives (othering, harmful contexts and harmful features); we deductively coded around these aims.
Thematic analysis was conducted in six phases, as outlined by Braun and Clarke (Braun & Clarke,2006): data familiarization, generating codes, searching for themes, reviewing themes, defining and naming themes and write‐up.
Initially, one transcript was coded by two researchers (MO and JY), with reference to field notes made after each focus group.
Following a discussion of the codes, all transcripts were coded by MO and initial themes developed.
MO and TO, and then MO, JB and FN met to discuss the themes.
The aims of these discussions were twofold.
First, to ensure that the research team broadly agreed on the interpretation of data and to limit (but not eliminate) researcher bias.
Second, discussions prompted reflection on how themes were arrived at and interactions between themes.
Content analysis of the different types of contexts (e.g., big night out) included in the sketches was undertaken by MO and discussed with TO for verification.
Drawings were coded as to which of the nine types of drinking contexts used in the screening survey they most resembled.
Most of the drawings fit within this framework clearly; however, two participants drew examples of street drinking, so these were coded inductively.
When undertaking this content analysis of images, MO referred to participant descriptions of their drawings to ensure no important features of contexts described by participants were missed or misinterpreted (e.g., clarifying whether a scene was a party in a house or a social event in a bar).
As well as informing the content analysis, the discussions which took place around each of the drawings (e.g., participants explaining their pictures or participants commenting on or making comparisons with other drawings) were also coded as part of the thematic analysis.
Three hundred and thirty‐eight people started the screening survey; 164 people were screened into the study.
Of these, 69 were invited to attend a focus group.
Given purposive sampling on demographic and drinking characteristics, not all eligible participants were invited to a group.
Twenty participants attended four focus groups and were diverse in terms of gender, age, ethnicity and subjective financial status (Table1).
Three deductive themes were generated, reflecting the study aims of othering, harmful contexts and harmful features.
The first theme,semblance of control, refers to participants tendency to differentiate their own drinking practices as controlled and safe in relation to the out‐of‐control behaviours of a harmful drinker.
The drinking practices perceived as being indicative of harmful drinking are further explored in the second theme,harmful drinking contexts.
This theme is made up of four subthemes:mental harms, physical harms, social harmsandsocietal harms, which are differentially associated with different types of drinking contexts.
The final theme,features which make drinking ‘harmful’, focuses on the features of drinking contexts which participants felt were more indicative of harm.
There are seven subthemes:alone, home, amount, drink type, having responsibilities, reason for drinking and timing/pattern.
Themes, subthemes and codes are outlined in TableS1and discussed below.
When asked to draw a harmful drinking context, most participants drew someone drinking alone at home or as part of a big day or night out with friends.
Both were perceived as being heavy drinking occasions (See Table2).
Coded as covered in previous research on harmful drinking contexts (Wallhed Finn et al.,2014).
Participants drawings showed evidence of othering.
For example, in Focus Groups 2–4, most participants depicted somebody drinking alone at home, see Figure1.
Home alone was perceived as being associated with drinking to cope.
Participants drawings representing lone drinking at home.
In these focus groups, when asked how they would change images to be indicative of less harmful drinking, most said they would add people.
However, in the focus group made up of participants who reported lone drinking, no respondents drew someone drinking alone at home, though one participant did draw a lone street drinker.
Big days and nights out were seen as being associated with excessive drinking and harm to the drinker, as well as potential harms to others through violence or victimization (Figure2).
The first image represents somebody who has collapsed on a night out with friends.
The second image was described as a busy bar with a higher likelihood of sexual violence.
Whilst the third image depicts a University Sports Society emblem, representing excessive and harmful drinking cultures that characterize participation in university sport societies.
No participants in the focus group made up of social drinkers out of the home drew a big day or night out.
Participants drawings representing big days or nights out.
There was also evidence of othering in the thematic analysis.
This is encompassed by the themesemblance of control.
Participants spoke about harmful drinking as operating outside the bounds of ‘normal’ drinking.
Participants described ‘red flags’ which indicated harmful drinking, like a drink type which was ‘inappropriate’ to the setting, such as ordering shots or drinking spirits at lunchtime.
In line with this, many participants talked about having personal rules to guide their own drinking practices.
These often mapped on to the features of drinking contexts discussed below that determined whether drinking contexts were perceived as being harmful, particularly aroundreason for drinkingandtiming/patterns.
These personal rules seemed to serve the purpose of reassuring participants, and perhaps others, that they were in control of their drinking.
This was frequently contrasted with a stereotypical, out‐of‐control harmful drinking other, who has gone beyond ‘normal’ drinking.
In line with this separation, fewer participants depicted ‘street drinking’ than may have been expected, given previous literature where this is discussed as being commonly perceived as a harmful drinking stereotype.
Throughout discussions this seemed to be because participants constructed a hierarchy of harms, and street drinking was seen as being on a different level of harmful drinking which could not be compared to people who were ‘functioning’.
Below the contexts and features of contexts perceived as being indicative of more harmful drinking are explored in more detail.
The second theme,harmful drinking contexts, encompasses four subthemes:physical harms,mental harms, social harmsandsocietal harms.
Physical harmswere one of the most discussed themes.
Participants mostly focused on short‐term harms (e.g., vomit, hangovers) or victimization (e.g., violence, sexual violence).
These harms tended to be associated with social drinking out of the home.
Some participants, particularly those who were older, talked about more chronic health harms of alcohol such as fatty liver disease and cancers.
These harms were discussed mostly in relation to lone or home drinking.
This may reflect the themes expanded on below that participants tended to link lone home drinking with frequent and excessive drinking and drinking to cope.
Mental harmswere not discussed as much asphysical harmsand were discussed mostly in the context of lone home drinking; again, this was linked withtiming/patternandreasons for drinking, which are expanded on below.
Social harmswere applicable across a range of contexts.
Experiences can be exchanged in dialogue through language, yet the interviewer must cultivate sensitivity to perceive meanings that the informant signals beyond explicit speech.
Dialogue is a hermeneutic act of interpreting spoken language and situating experiences within a meaningful whole.
Additionally, a person’s experiences hold an inner relation to life, linking individual events to the broader life process.
All experiences are lived by the self and derive meaning from belonging to the unity of that self and its life course.
Experience binds to one’s entire life and introduces a sense of unfolding journey.
We created a qualitative research methodology, along with analytic and presentational methods, grounded in a hermeneutic view of language.
This methodology is paired with a situational lens that examines what informants address, talk about, and refer to in interviews.