The prevalence of patients with a mental health (MH) disorder in intensive care units (ICU) is roughly twice that of other secondary care areas. This patient group can struggle to access the health care system because of stigma. Nurses' perceptions of MH patients in the Emergency Department have been studied and were associated with avoidance, misconceptions and perceived lack of skills to manage this patient group; however, it was unclear if similar issues were present amongst ICU nurses.

This review aimed to explore how nurses perceive ICU patients with a co‐morbid MH disorder.

An integrative review was undertaken in March 2024 using CINAHL, Medline, Embase and PsychInfo to synthesize empirical and theoretical evidence from a range of different research approaches. A five‐step approach (problem identification, literature search, data evaluation using the Mixed Methods Appraisal tool, data analysis and presentation) was followed. Papers were included if they focused on nurses' perceptions of adult ICU patients with a co‐morbid MH disorder. Totally, 620 studies were identified following duplicate removal.

Eight studies were selected for inclusion. Four themes were identified: (1) ‘Those types of patient’, (2) Patients with MH disorders are all violent and aggressive, (3) ‘They’ don't belong in ICU and (4) ‘They’ need someone with special skills. The themes explored issues of preconceptions, stigma and ‘othering’.

There was a paucity of research on this topic, and it was limited in geographical area. The findings suggest that stigma, misconceptions, a lack of support and a perceived lack of skills might lead nurses to deliver suboptimal care to this vulnerable patient group.

Stigma against patients with MH disorders could lead ICU nurses to reduce their engagement with them, impacting negatively on the provision of holistic care. Education and ongoing support are required to reduce misconceptions and bias and increase nurses' confidence when managing patients with co‐morbid MH disorders.

Patients with mental health disorders can struggle to access health care.

The prevalence of mental health disorders in intensive care unit (ICU) patients is twice that of patients in other areas of secondary care.

Nurses are susceptible to socially generated biases and stigma. Unconsciously or consciously acting on these views can lead to a decrease in the quality of holistic care.

There is a paucity of high‐quality research in this area of practice. The studies included in this review suggest that nurses may deliver care influenced by socially generated biases and stigma.

Assumptions about mental health patients being violent and aggressive can lead to increased use of restrictive practices and staff being unwilling to engage.

ICU nurses appear to lack confidence in their skills when managing patients with mental health disorders. A need for greater support and education has been identified.

Approximately 25% of people will experience some kind of mental health (MH) disorder during their lifetime.1The presence of a mental illness is known to exacerbate the risk of physical illness, and people with a serious mental illness (SMI) diagnosis experience a mortality rate of up to four times that of the rest of the population.2,3Patients with a MH disorder, such as schizophrenia or major depression, are disproportionately overrepresented in the intensive care population,4with a prevalence of roughly twice that of other patient populations in secondary care.

Intensive care units (ICUs) are a specialized area of secondary care, where patients requiring single or multi‐organ support can be cared for with a high level of medical and nursing supervision.5Patients with MH disorders form a unique subset of the intensive care population, requiring additional psychological support from bedside nurses4and being at a greater risk of a prolonged stay4and the development of delirium.6It is therefore important that critical care nurses consider the unique needs of this subset of patients.

Stigma is a socially generated negative attitude about a person or group.7Stigma against patients with MH disorders has led to their devaluation and perceived exclusion from some health care services.7,8,9Nurses are bound by their professional code to deliver unbiased, high‐quality care10; however, they remain susceptible to personal and socially disseminated views about mental illness. The topic of stigma against MH disorders has been studied amongst nurses who work in the emergency department (ED).11,12Participants expressed concerns about the appropriateness of the ED environment for this patient group, about inadequacy regarding their own skills, and the impact of negative perceptions that they hold towards mental illness. The disempowerment and application of stigma to patients with MH disorders is also prevalent in secondary and intensive care2,3and can have a detrimental impact on the provision of holistic care.13The high prevalence of patients with a MH disorder in ICU4alongside the vulnerability of critically ill patients and the position of power occupied by the ICU nurse14makes these preconceptions and their possible impact on care provision an important topic to explore.

This review aimed to explore how nurses perceive ICU patients with a co‐morbid MH disorder through identifying and analysing appropriate literature and synthesizing evidence from a range of research designs.15This review will inform future empirical research in this area.

An integrative review was undertaken. This type of review facilitates the synthesis of empirical and theoretical evidence from a range of different research approaches16and was deemed an appropriate approach for a review that focused on an under‐researched topic and therefore needed to capture diverse methodological approaches.

Whittemore and Knafl16outlined a five‐step approach (problem identification, literature search, data evaluation, data analysis and presentation). The identified problem was the apparent paucity of knowledge regarding how ICU nurses perceive patients under their care who have a co‐morbid MH disorder.

A comprehensive search of electronic databases (CINAHL, Medline, Embase and PsychInfo) was undertaken in March 2024 using four facets (setting, nurses, attitudes and MH disorders) (Table1). Keywords within each facet were combined with the Boolean operator ‘OR’, and then facets were combined using ‘AND’. The search was limited to English language papers from 2005 onwards to capture contemporary views on MH.

Abbreviation: HDU, High dependency unit; ICU, intensive care unit; ITU, intensive therapy unit.

A convergent data‐based synthesis was then undertaken.18,19This required the transformation of extracted data to enable a qualitative synthesis of the mixed study types included in this review.20Whittemore and Knafl16suggest a process of data reduction. A matrix (Table2) was created to facilitate the comparison and synthesis of the included studies.

ICU nurses try to communicate effectively with patients, but this is made difficult if they have MH disorders.

MH disorders are someone else's responsibility to manage. It is not a nursing job.

ICU nurses need support to deliver effective care to patients with MH needs.

Agitation was associated by the nurse with MH and no delirium assessment was undertaken.

ICU recognizes MH diagnoses and then ‘boxes’ them away, prioritising physical health.

MH illnesses are considered a separate component rather than a continuum of the patient's health.

ICU nurses are uncomfortable with the management of MH illnesses. They can be considered not an ICU responsibility.

No formal data collection, but the chosen case study is appropriate.

To explore the ways in which power relationships and the persistent disenfranchisement of consumer/survivors contributed to the reproduction of difference.

Patients with MH diagnoses are seen as inherently dangerous and require greater supervision.

Patients who are repeatedly admitted are offered poorer care.

Patients with MH disorders are seen as dangerous, blame‐worthy and untrustworthy.

Immediate application of stigma, alternatives not considered.

Patients experiencing mental illness were interpreted as a disruption to the ‘business’ of intensive care.

The co‐production and reproduction of knowledge and meaning, and the effect of relational aspects of space being pre‐structured by ‘knowledge’ (the symbolic universe of medicine) over time by preceding generations of staff.

Those who own (or are the dominant occupants of) the material space have the power to manipulate and organize activities within that space.

Patients with MH disorders are ‘othered’ and homogenized.

Power imbalances prevent compassion and empathetic care.

Patients with mental illness may automatically use coping strategies which have been helpful in other settings but are less effective and potentially counterproductive in ICU, such as expressing discomfort or fear through anger and intimidation.

Disorganized behaviour (contrast sedated patients).

Staff may judge the ways patients live their lives and experience disgust or anger, leading to guilt and moral distress (burnout).

No data collection – draws on the authors' experience.

Staff had concerns about their personal safety when caring for mental health patients.

A majority of the nurses felt confident engaging mental health patients in general conversation.

Environment can be a barrier to therapeutic conversation.

37% unsympathetic to patients with multiple admissions.

Patients with a MH diagnosis were seen as especially dangerous and likely to ‘act out’.

‘the self‐harmers’, ‘the suicide attempts’—labelling.

Negative impact on the recovery of ‘normal’ patients.

Not personally or professionally rewarding to care for.

Aware of stigmatization but find it hard not to ‘roll your eyes’ at MH patients.

MH patients were deemed culpable for any violence and aggression – considered normal for them.

Some behaviour attributable to poor management by nursing staff.

Most participants shared the interlinked views that mental health and intensive care were ‘at opposite ends of the spectrum’ and required different attitudes to care and required different knowledge and skill sets.

Intensive care was chosen by ‘those who don't want to talk deeper, focus on physical cares.’ (Interview 4).

Only 17.5% felt adequately trained to care for patients with mental illness (n= 7/40). Some misconceptions were also evident, with a majority of respondents believing that patients with mental illness in ICU were most commonly admitted because of self‐harm (55.0%,n= 22/40); and that patients with mental illness were more prone to violence or aggression (67.5%,n= 27/40).

51.3% (n= 19/37) did not believe that patients in ICU received adequate psychological support, and 29.7% (n= 11/37) felt that patients with mental illness were not treated with empathy in this unit.

Difficulty in understanding self‐harm: such patients are ‘a waste of their time’ (8.1%,n= 3/37) or that individuals who have self‐harmed ‘do not deserve to come to ICU’ (5.4%,n= 2/37).

Abbreviations: ICU, intensive care unit; MH, mental health; MMAT, Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool.

Deep iterative reading followed, with the aim of identifying patterns and themes.21Integrative reviews commonly use a thematic approach to data analysis.15,16Thematic analysis is flexible, and facilitates the creation of a rich and complex account of the analysed data.21The included texts were initially coded (AT). For example, labels were identified as a code and extracts were recorded, such as ‘the self‐harmers’. The codes were then reviewed and collated into themes (AT), which were agreed by both authors (AT and JB). The text coded as ‘labels’ contributed to the theme ‘Those types of patients’. Finally, themes and extracted data were checked back against the original text to ensure that decontextualization did not occur.

Papers were appraised using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT).22The tool includes two general screening questions for all types of studies, then separate sets of prompts for qualitative studies and different quantitative methods (Hong et al., 2018). All included studies were found to meet the tool's first basic screening question as they had a clear aim. All studies except the two discursive papers23,24met the second question because the collected data allowed the authors to address their research question. The two discursive papers combined expert opinion regarding case studies with published research and, as such, collected no empirical data.

The MMAT produces a descriptive summary of appraisal. Summary scores can be calculated, but are not recommended by the authors of the tool because of the risk of masking flaws within different aspects of a paper.22No studies were excluded from the review on grounds of quality; however, appraisal facilitated the identification of several limitations in the included studies. A summary of the MMAT results is included in Table2.

Of the 620 papers identified, eight studies were selected for inclusion. There was a paucity of high‐quality empirical evidence relating to the focus of the review. This necessitated the inclusion of lower‐quality studies. The included studies comprised four qualitative, two quantitative and two discursive papers based on case studies (Figure1,17). Most studies originated from Australia (n= 5), followed by New Zealand (n= 1), United States (n= 1) and Turkey (n= 1). Two discursive papers focused on case studies and relevant discussion by the authors. One24focused on a single case, whilst the other23offered two fictitious cases for discussion. As such, neither involved formal data collection, limiting their quality and the transferability of their findings. Both papers were included in the review despite this because they offered insight into how patients with an MH disorder should be ideally managed in ICU, and how critical physical illness and mental illness can be interrelated.23,24The remaining papers all took place in single centres, potentially limiting generalizability and transferability of the results.8,25,26,27,28,29Sample sizes were generally small across all the included studies (n= 15–40), and five of the eight included studies were undertaken in Australia, with none being based in the United Kingdom or Europe, further limiting transferability. In addition, the two papers by Corfee et al. (2019 and 2020) represented different analyses of the same dataset. The perception of MH health disorders is a potentially emotive topic. There is a risk that, in interviews, participants may underreport their prejudices to meet perceived social and professional standards (Table3).

We're all guilty of stigmatizing mental health patients. It is hard after so much compassion fatigue, to not see schizophrenia and roll your eyes (Patterson et al., 2023).

MH patients need ‘double safety’ compared with other patients. This is achieved through the removal of devices which could be potentially used as weapons and having chemical and physical restraints within easy reach (Corfee et al., 2020).

I don't even know why we keep trying to bring her back. People should just let her go. She should just do a good job; it's really not that hard to kill yourself. She's taking up bed space (Corfee et al., 2019).

Abbreviations: ICU, intensive care unit; MH, mental health.

Four themes were identified: (1) ‘Those types of patient’, (2) Patients with MH disorders are all violent and aggressive, (3) ‘They’ don't belong in ICU and (4) ‘They’ need someone with special skills.

We're all guilty of stigmatising mental health patients. It's hard after so much compassion fatigue, to not see schizophrenia and roll your eyes.

Here, behaviour which is seen as outside the norm carries the penalty of chemical restraint. This action is justified as necessary for the maintenance of the safety of other patients. A further participant described constructing a physical ‘barricade’ to prevent patients from leaving their bed area.26The subjective ‘we don't like that’8suggests a lack of willingness to adapt care.

This theme explored views held by ICU nurses about whether it was appropriate to admit a patient with a MH disorder to ICU. Some papers explored how nurses saw patients who self‐harm as undeserving of ICU care,8,23,29whilst others commented on how the ICU environment was inappropriate for patients with a MH disorder.27,28Five papers contributed to this theme.

It is important to note that such views were expressed by a small minority. However, Flaws, Patterson23noted that such opinions can cause guilt to the nurse themselves, as well as impacting negatively on the care given to the patient. The judgement regarding the way this patient has chosen to live her life is incongruent with the professional identity of a nurse23and may lead to feelings of guilt or inadequacy.

Nurses felt inadequately prepared and skilled to deal with patents with a MH disorder24and wanted further educational support.27100% of the respondents to the Weare et al.29survey felt that they could be better prepared to manage MH disorders. They expressed a fear of saying ‘the wrong thing’ (48.7%,n= 19)29and a reluctance to approach the patient in case they caused them to become upset.26This was described as leading to a culture of surveillance and distance.26This is in direct contrast to the trauma‐informed compassionate care advocated for by Flaws, Patterson.23One participant commented that often ICU nurses ‘don't want to talk deeper’,28suggesting a culture of unwillingness to engage.

There appeared to be a consensus that patients with MH disorders needed someone with specialized training to be allocated to care for them. A participant in the Patterson, Flaws28study commented that MH and ICU nurses have very different skillsets and that ‘no‐one feels equipped to manage a patient who sits in both spaces’. Bone and Smith24noted that MH is often ‘lost’ in ICU and that the physical illness is prioritized. However, despite this, the MH illness becomes a way of labelling the patient, in a way that is not seen with a physical illness.2486.5% (n= 32) of the ICU nurses surveyed by Weare et al.29believed they could provide better care if they were supported by a trained MH nurse. Participants in the interviews held by Aktaş and Arabacı25stated variously the need for a psychiatrist on ICU, someone with training whose job it was to care of patients with MH disorders, or a special unit in the hospital. They felt that the hospital management did not see how they were struggling to manage MH patients on ICU.

This integrative review provides an overview of how ICU nurses perceive patients with a co‐morbid MH disorder who are admitted to ICU. This topic appears to be under‐researched and, as a result, includes evidence which is limited in terms of quality and transferability. This review brings together a synthesis of eight published studies. Four themes were identified: (1) ‘Those types of patient’, (2) Patients with MH disorders are violent and aggressive, (3) ‘They’ don't belong in ICU and (4) ‘They’ need someone with special skills. The themes highlighted the stigma experienced by patients with MH disorders. They also explored some common misconceptions about this patient group, and how these might impact on the quality of the care provided. Finally, a need for support and education and support for ICU nurses caring for MH patients was highlighted.

The reasoning behind this is complex. Patients with MH disorders experience barriers to accessing health care2,8,23,31and are also more likely to engage in behaviour that risks their health, such as smoking.33In ICU, there appears to be a belief that patients with MH disorders, especially those who engage in deliberate self‐harm or risky behaviour, do not deserve intensive care.26However, there is a need to generate further research evidence to fully explore how this belief impacts patient care.

Exclusion of patients can be a result of ‘othering’. This can be an intentional or unintentional act. Unintentional exclusion can indicate limited self‐knowledge on the part of the nurse.30Exclusion creates distance between the nurse and patient and limits their therapeutic engagement.30Flaws and Patterson23discuss how a compassionate trauma‐informed approach is necessary to deliver holistic care to patients with a MH disorder in ICU. However, the results of this review suggested a lack of knowledge and perceived lack of skills amongst ICU nurses when managing MH. Nurses who feel that they lack the skills to manage a certain patient may choose to avoid interactions with that patient.35Respondents surveyed by Weare et al.29and Murch27expressed a need for further education. Educational programmes in both A&E and perinatal health39,40have demonstrated some positive impact in terms of reduced urgent admissions to inpatient care and self‐reported improved attitudes towards patients with MH disorders. However, as noted by Patterson and Flaws,28increased knowledge alone is not enough. The stigma against patients with MH is well established, as demonstrated by this review. Misconceptions are rife, and the language used to describe the patient group reinforces their place as the ‘other’. To deliver holistic, patient‐centred and trauma‐informed care, nurses must be supported. Sharda, Baker and Cahill41interviewed patients with a personality disorder who were admitted to general hospital wards. They found that the separation of mental and physical health care caused patient distress and disruption to their treatment and called for better integration between the services. Thornicroft and Sunkel42identified the value of persons with lived experience of MH disorders in the co‐production of anti‐stigma programmes. ICU practice might be similarly improved, and bias reduced, through the use of patient voices in staff education.

There has been a global drive towards the equal treatment of mental and physical health conditions.43,44However, professional bodies have called for improvements in the management of patients with a MH disorder in general hospital settings.45However, this review suggests that MH care is still seen as separate from the care delivered in ICU. Participants in one study called for greater support from MH trained nurses25; however, this would place a further burden on the already stretched MH services.41In the United Kingdom, liaison MH services exist within some general hospitals. This multi‐disciplinary service offers assessment and care planning support for patients with MH disorders admitted to general hospitals. However, these services require a referral from health care staff, and participants in the Sharda, Baker and Cahill41study note that they were insufficiently integrated into care and challenging to access and lacked the resources to provide holistic support. The results of this review suggest that ICU nurses would welcome support from specialized practitioners and that mental and physical health services need to be better integrated.

This review has drawn upon a range of evidence to explore and understand how ICU nurses perceive patients with a co‐morbid MH disorder. The search and synthesis were undertaken using established methods,16and appraisal was guided by a validated tool.22The review has identified several areas of practice that require further research.

This review was limited by the paucity of evidence on this topic. The search returned only eight studies, all of which were included in the review. The majority of the studies (n= 6) were based in single centres with small sample sizes (n= 15–40), and two were discursive papers that considered case studies rather than empirical evidence. No studies originated from Europe. This is a further limitation to this review, as it potentially inflates the impact of cultural MH biases. For example, five papers originate from Australia. There is increasing evidence linking racism against the indigenous population with poor physical and MH care.46As such, this review may not present a balanced perspective on how ICU nurses perceive patients with MH disorders.

This review forms the initial step of a research project which aims to explore how UK‐based ICU nurses perceive patients with a co‐morbid MH disorder. This review found no empirical data from the United Kingdom, and the authors consider that it is important to study this topic in the context of the United Kingdom to facilitate targeted recommendations for practice, education and support in clinical areas. Focus groups are planned with the aim of exploring how nurses share information about MH disorders and construct identities for their patients. This review suggests that this practice leads to the perpetuation of stigma and negatively affects care delivery.

To conclude, this integrative review has identified a paucity of high‐quality evidence regarding how patients with a MH disorder are perceived by ICU nurses. However, the findings do suggest that stigma, misconceptions and the continued separation of physical and mental health care could have a detrimental impact on the care of ICU patients with a co‐morbid MH disorder. Further research is indicated to explore this topic in a UK setting and to identify how educational support and multi‐disciplinary collaboration could reduce bias against MH patients and optimize the care they receive in ICU.