We report a case of a 21‐year‐old female manifesting narrow QRS complex tachycardia and alternating R‐R intervals. The fixed RP interval suggested ventriculoatrial conduction via an accessory pathway (AP). The alternating PR intervals indicated anterograde conduction through the fast and slow nodal pathways, respectively. The coexistence of AP and dual atrioventricular nodal pathways is not rare, with most of them exhibiting as atrioventricular reentry tachycardia (AVRT) using the fast or slow nodal pathway exclusively as the anterograde limb. We propose that alternating dual nodal pathway AVRT may occur when the fast pathway's effective refractory period is between the cycle lengths of fast‐nodal‐pathway AVRT and slow‐nodal‐pathway AVRT.

Lead II with a ladder diagram showing AVRT with alternating AV conduction via a fast and a slow nodal pathway.

A 21‐year‐old woman presented to the emergency department with intermittent palpitations over the past 5 years. Physical examination was unremarkable and echocardiography revealed a structurally normal heart. The ECG on admission showed a regularly irregular narrow QRS tachycardia with electrical alternans (Figure1). The tachycardia terminated spontaneously within 1 h, and the patient refused to undergo electrophysiological study.

Figure1shows a narrow QRS tachycardia with alternating RR intervals (340 and 420 ms). Differential diagnosis includes: atrial arrhythmia with second degree atrioventricular (AV) block, sinus rhythm with premature supraventricular complexes, dual AV nodal non‐re‐entrant tachycardia (1:2 AV conduction via the fast and slow AV nodal pathways), and AV reentry tachycardia (AVRT) with alternating anterograde conduction via fast and slow AV nodal pathways. Positive P waves were observed in inferior leads, and negative P waves were presented in lead V1. Despite alternating RR, PP, and PR intervals, the RP interval was fixed, suggesting ventriculoatrial (VA) conduction via an accessory pathway (AP). The alternating PR, PP, and RR intervals might have resulted from alternating AV conduction through the fast nodal pathway (FNP) and slow nodal pathway (SNP), respectively.

As illustrated in Figure2, the patient was supposed to have AVRT using an AP as a retrograde limb and alternating dual nodal pathways as anterograde limbs.

Lead II with a ladder diagram showing AVRT with alternating AV conduction via a fast and a slow nodal pathway.

In patients with AP, concomitant dual AV nodal pathways were reported up to 32.5% (Chen et al.1996). A few patients only had inducible AV nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) or had both inducible AVRT and AVNRT (Csanadi et al.1995). Most patients had AVRT as the only tachycardia mechanism, with the majority requiring either the slow anterograde AV node pathway (56%) or the fast anterograde AV node pathway (30%) exclusively as the anterograde limb (Csanadi et al.1995). AVRT with anterograde FNP exclusively can occur when the effective refractory period (ERP) of FNP is shorter than the AVRT cycle length using anterograde FNP (Figure3a). AVRT with SNP conduction exclusively could occur if the ERP of FNP is longer than the AVRT cycle length using anterograde SNP (Figure3b). Only if the ERP of FNP is between the AVRT cycle length using FNP and the AVRT cycle length using SNP, could the AVRT with alternating anterograde FNP and SNP occur (Figure3c).

Ladder diagram showing AVRT with anterograde conduction via fast (a), slow (b) and dual nodal pathways (c).

The coexistence of AP and dual AV nodal pathways is not rare. The anterograde pathway of AVRT via FNP, SNP, or alternating dual AV nodal pathways depends on the ERP of FNP. After the ablation of an AP, a repeat electrophysiologic study should be conducted to find dual AV nodal pathways and the potential for AVNRT (Wellens2018).