Nature, especially plants, can inspire scientists and engineers in the development of bioinspired machines able to adapt and interact with complex unstructured environments. Advances in manufacturing techniques, such as 3D printing, have expanded the range of materials and structures that can be fabricated, enabling better adaptation to specific applications and closer mimicking of natural systems. Furthermore, biohybrid systems—integrating plant-based or living materials—are getting attention for their ability to introduce functionalities not possible with purely synthetic materials. This joint feature article reviews and highlights recent works of two groups in microfabrication and plant-inspired robotics as well as plant-hybrid systems for energy conversion with applications in soft robotics to environmental sensing, reforestation, and autonomous drug-delivery in plant tissue.

Nature, especially plants, can inspire scientists and engineers in the development of bioinspired machines able to adapt and interact with complex unstructured environments.

Differently from other articles, this joint feature article highlights the developments of two research groups focussing on approaches based on plant-bioinspiration and plant-hybrid systems ranging from soft robotics, to sensing and energy harvesting directly in the plant tissue. The work will be featured in the context of works from other groups without being a comprehensive review.

1. Showcasing the latest developments in bioinspired soft robotics for the phytosphere, with a focus on plant-like machines and related manufacturing processes and materials by Fiorelloet al.

2. Exploring advancements in energy harvesting within the phytosphere, including spontaneous charging on leaves and materials for harnessing wind and rain energy, along with associated challenges by Mederet al.

3. Examining the progress and challenges of biohybrid approaches and discussing prospects for these innovative small-scale machines.

In the last decades, various soft robots have been developed by mimicking the biological features of animals and plants17,18including artificial structures and materials and directly organism-derived materials (dead or living) in biohybrid systems.

Examples of animal models in robotics include the caterpillar,19,20octopus,21,22crabs,23worms,24,25snakes,26geckos,27fish,28–30and insects.31,32However, in the recent years, plants have emerged as a crucial model especially for designing self-adaptive and/or miniaturized robots.8,12The most studied plant models in robotics include climbing plants,33–36carnivorous plants,37and a series of self-drilling seeds38,39and/or fruits,40and flying41–43seeds.11,38,39,44,45One promising direction in advancing these bioinspired systems is the development of multimodal designs that can significantly enhance robotic versatility and adaptability to complex environments.46There is no general design approach, and the robots have been prototyped using various manufacturing techniques and materials processing at different length scales, with various materials. Over the last years, we have developed microfabrication techniques that enable precise fabrication, and we highlight here our examples of plant-inspired robots and related manufacturing and material process inTable 1. The different prototypes are described in detail below.

Three-dimensional (3D) printing technology plays a key role in the fabrication of miniature bioinspired machines, as it allows to produce complex 3D structures at different scales. In order to mimic plant-structures, often microscale precision is required as functional components in plant tissue range from sub-cell-scale to macroscales. We use additive manufacturing techniques with capability to fabricate miniaturized materials and composites. Among the different powders, inks, or resins based 3D printing techniques,54–57two-photon polymerization (2PP) is particularly powerful and versatile technology,58to fabricate micro/nanotructures from photosensitive materials, including both rigid and soft types.59Recently, Fiorelloet al.integrated 3D reconstruction through X-ray microcomputed tomography (Micro-CT) to obtain morphological data of the biological structures with micromanufacturing techniques such as two-photon lithography, molding, and casting using biodegradable materials to create biohybrid machines inspired by wild oat fruits (HybriBots).44HybriBot combines actuation of oat fruits using plant-derived materials with engineered 2PP-printed seed capsules that can adapt to environmental changes by navigating soil irregularities and digging into the soil, mimicking the dispersal movements and biomechanical performance of natural fruits. It achieves comparable capsule drag forces of up to ≈0.38 N and awn torque of up to ≈100 mN mm−1(Fig. 1(f)–(i)). Moreover, the authors could functionalize the capsule of HybriBots with fertilizers and/or other seeds, opening potential applications for reforestation and precision agriculture (Fig. 1(f)–(i)).

Another work of the authors introduces the micromanufacturingviatwo-photon lithography of climbing plant-like miniaturized micropatterned machines with microhooks for reversible attachment. Again, inspiration of the leaf microstructures was taken by extracting morphology of microhooks exposed on the organs ofG. aperine. The resulting micropatterned surface can be used in machines to attach strongly and reversibly over various micro-rough natural and artificial surfaces (including fabrics,35skin tissues,35and leaf tissues33,47), by reaching shear locking forces up to 14 N cm−2(Fig. 1(c)). This plant-inspired material systems have been successfully applied to climbing robots, controllable manipulators,34leaf sensors forin situmonitoring,33and even leaf patches for drug delivery into leaf vascular tissues33(Fig. 1(e)) as described later in detail. This demonstrates potential for achieving new tools in soft robotics and for precision agriculture, that may fulfil tasks in the preservation of our environments and the phytosphere.

Although 2PP printing enables highest precision, also other techniques like digital light processing (DLP), polyjet, direct ink writing, fused deposition modelling, or moulding techniques can be sued to mimic plant functions in robotic systems. The resulting materials need to be compatible with the environment and interact with it specifically,e.g., interactions with ambient humidity or sunlight for actuation.

The selection of materials is a central factor in the development of plant-like machines. To achieve flexible movement and adaptive properties that mimic nature, these materials often have unique physicochemical properties such as environmental and stimuli responsiveness, programmability, durability, and high elasticity.41,44,60Carefully selecting precursors and integrating them with 3D printing technology is the key to obtain plant-inspired and plant-like behaviours.

Photosensitive resins are essential for 2PP 3D printing, for example, we recently mimicked the ratchet-like attachment mechanism ofGalium aparineby utilizing 2PP (see Section 2.1). One method involves directly printing micropatterned hook-like rigid structures using IP-S photoresists on a flexible Mylar® sheet as a substrate. The resulting flexible micropatterned materials could be precisely cut (e.g.,vialaser cutting) and subsequently integrated into climbing miniaturized robots, leaf-walking robots, or sensors (Fig. 1(a)–(d)). Another method involves directly printing micropatterned wheels and/or robotic mechanical components with plant-like organs such as microhooks using photoresists like IP-Q on a rigid silicon wafer substrate.

Furthermore, by combining 2PP with PDMS micromolding and casting favorable materials, we demonstrated the feasibility of prototyping soluble, biodegradable, and/or flexible plant-like machines with microhooks or spines. For instance, we cast a composite of polycaprolactone and embedded gold nanorods in a PDMS mold obtained from replicating 2PP-printed plant-like microhooks to create micropatterned materials achieving tuneable stiffnessviauntethered and controllable plasmonic heating-induced phase changes in the polymer. Additionally, we used isomalt with embedded fluorescein molecules to cast 2PP-printed and PDMS replicated molds and fabricate micropatterned hooks that first interlock with biological tissue and subsequently dissolve as a proof-of-concept forin situdrug delivery applications into plant vascular tissues.

As anticipated above, we have exploited 2PP also to prototype our HybriBots. Using Micro-CT, we created a detailed 3D reconstruction of theAvena sterilis L.capsule, which guided the design of two complementary miniaturized molds fabricatedvia2PP using the IP-Q photoresist. After casting and coating, we developed biohybrid machines consisting of a biodegradable, edible capsule made from flour-based material, coated with natural hairs ofAvena sterilis L., and equipped with two humidity-driven natural sister awns connected to the capsule.

Charging decreased by a factor of 10 when melting the wax structure although it did not reach the lower values of the hydrophilic leaves ofA. macrorrhiza. Due to melting and flattening the wax layer, also a change in the contact angle was expectedly caused from 150° to 80° which could again lead to a more significant remaining water layer affecting the charging.86While this needs to be further clarified in detail in ongoing work, the experiment showed that both, chemistry and but especially also the wax structure affect charging significantly.

Yet, improvements in the materials ranging from surface micro-nanostructuring, surface chemistry, to the mechanical behavior as also forecasted by our models117describing the elastic deformation under a wind load, show that further improvements can be achieved addressing this multidisciplinary aspects in addition to selecting the best plant species. Another approach that we did already to improve the output is implementing multisource energy harvesting by adding the capability to convert other energy sources in addition to wind by the plant hybrid systems.

In addition, to the wind energy harvesting described in detail in the previous section, other energy sources can be harvested as well. As seen mentioned before, charges can be generated by droplets and this has been particularly shown on artificial materials based on fluorinated polymers like FEP and PTFE.120,121The currents that we observed in the superhydrophobic leaves after droplet impact were too small to be used for energy harvesting but artificial materials can enhance charge formation when water droplets interact with surfaces. This has been extensively presented with different fluorinated polymers122which enabled significant energy harvesting from surface charging during interactions with single droplets and exploiting surface electrodes that contact the droplets.120,121Based on these results, we could implement a surface structure on our artificial leaf to establish and equip it with the function of rain drop energy harvesting in addition to wind energy harvesting.52It was required to add a FEP layer on top of the PET layer and ITO surface electrodes on top of the FEP layer as depicted inFig. 2(g). Together with the central electrode also used during wind energy harvesting, the droplet spreading on the FEP surface creates charges but also connects to the surface electrode changing its area and the device was capable to create charges leading to 40 V and 100 μW peaks from single water drops landing on the upper artificial leaf surface whereas the lower silicone surface generated charges from the impact with the plant leaf.52This does not only allow to use two energy sources but the possibility to harvest energy from rain drops compensates the typical decrease of energy output of solid–solid triboelectrification in high humidity leading to charge dissipation. Although this is reversible when the surfaces dry,48,49the additional droplet energy harvesting in one device helps to increase and maintain the power output with little additional materials.

We also observed that a third energy source can be harvested by the plant tissue without significant modification, that is radio frequency (RF) radiation when the plant is connected as a receiving Marconi antenna to the energy harvesting circuits and a ground connection provides the potential difference.51Here, the fact that the plant tissue is an ionic conductor acting as a “water or ionic antenna” is used and the ion current oscillates in the tissue when exposed to RF radiation.123–125Combining these intrinsic properties with further tissue modification by 100 μm thin silicone coatings on the leaf surface, allowed to connect two ivy or Ficus plants in a way that uncoated leaves touch silicone-coated leaves when moving in the wind and this allows harvesting wind energy without installing artificial leaves.51The RF and wind energy harvesting mode can be used simultaneously increasing the overall power output and enabling to power a wireless sensor node from RF and wind.

One of the key factors affecting the energy harvesting are the materials as they determine functionality from charge formation, to the aeroelastic properties and the effective contact area for charge formation. Moreover, the biodegradability and interactions of the artificial components with the plant ecosystem is an important aspect to address in the future. Achieving biodegradable artificial leaves for energy harvesting by triboelectric effects depends on suitable biodegradable materials that can generate sufficient charges, in quantities comparable to those generated on silicones or fluorinated polymers. The combination of efficient charge generation and on-demand environmental biodegradability remains a challenge that requires further research. Thus, tuning materials through their surface and bulk chemistry will be the key tool to expand energy harvesting capability of the systems and their application as autonomous micro power sources.Fig. 2(h)summarizes the design loop that the artificial leaves may go through for further improving their capabilities combining synthesis, and testing, as well as predictions through modellinge.g., the mechanical properties of the composite materials. Further testing requires also evaluating the effects of the environment like changing weather conditions, frost, heat, dust, and changes in materials and plants over time under outdoor conditions are general aspects that need further understanding.

As demonstrated in our examples above, the perceived limitations of using plant-derived materials or even living plants in robotics, energy harvesting, and sensing can instead lead to significant advantages.

A clear advantage of learning to utilize materials intrinsically present in the environment for technical purposes such as energy harvesting or actuation is the reduction of the need to introduce entirely artificial systems into an ecosystem. For example, using the plant as a half electrode of a TENG reduces the need for an artificial material by at least 50% (or more using the leaf coatings presented above). Another example is the reuse of actuation mechanisms developed by plant fruits and seeds in a small-scale robot like the HybriBot: this approach reduces the need to manufacture artificial actuators at that scale, which can be challenging. This is especially important when plant-like functions should be accomplished by artificial and robotic systems, like seed dispersal. To this purpose, we have recently shown the first example of hybrid sustainable self-dispersing machine inspired by wild oat fruits, which use dead plant tissues as biological actuator and made with 100% biodegradable materials.44This approach can lead to a new concept of “biohybrid robot” and can potentially be exploited for many other plant-like machines inspired by seeds and fruits that can autonomously adapt to complex multi-environments.

We recently powered for example an ion delivery system,53or ion pump, directly from the energy harvested from plant leaf motion in the wind. Such systems could also deliver larger molecules like hormones stimulating plant growth as shown previously by Bernacka-Woijciket al.129Moreover, it has been observed that insects and pests likeHalyomorpha halysintroduce specific vibration patterns and electrical charges on leaves that can be measured with electrodes in the tissue.130Such system could lead to new pest sensing approaches but further research on the understanding of charge formation on leaves, the combination of electrodes and feasibility is required. Especially, the time-dependent interaction of the artificial system and the plant needs to be observed and how materials exposed and interacting with the tissue remain functional. A crucial point is thereby the biocompatibility and the sustainability of the artificial materials that are introduced that still should be as biodegradable and harmless as possible as mentioned above.

Despite the advantages of biohybrid systems, several challenges and limitations must be considered.

For example, although HybriBot presented significant advantages, it relies on dead plant tissues as biological actuators and a key challenge of this approach is that the availability and consistency of these natural materials can vary significantly.44Unlike synthetic actuators, which can be manufactured in a controlled and repeatable manner, sourcing and processing plant-derived actuators at scale presents logistical and standardization challenges.

Another example includes wind and leaf-powered ion pumps, but optimizing their efficiency and stability for real-world applications and varying environmental conditions like wind speed remains yet a challenge in the early stage of such technologies.53Similarly, sensors embedded in plant tissues have been used to detect pest-induced vibrations and electrical charges, yet further studies are needed to understand charge formation on leaves and improve the integration of artificial electrodes with biological systems130including outdoor performance. A major challenge is still that artificial materials and devices are often static and cannot dynamically respond and evolve functionality adapting to variable external conditions.

As this is still an emerging field, further interdisciplinary research is needed to optimize biohybrid designs, enhance functionality, and address these limitations.

This feature article highlights the main contributions of the authors in the field of plant-inspired and/or plant-hybrid machines, showing significant progress in soft robotics, energy harvesting, and sensing technologies.

We show how researchers are extracting key principles from nature, especially plants, to design materials and robots able to not only interact but also preserve the ecosystems.

We have focused on the “chemistry” behind plant-inspired and/or hybrid machines for the phytosphere, by highlighting the manufacturing processes and materials, and exploring the energy harvesting advancements. Moreover, we have highlighted the most recent advances for adapting a biohybrid approach in robotics and material science as well as advantages and current challenges of the approach.

Despite in the recent years a growing number of studies has been performed in the plant-inspired and hybrid robotics field, many aspects remain unexplored. For example, the authors have shown novel plant-inspired machines able to attach to plant leaves for targeted drug-delivery into plant vascular tissues.33Although precision medicine is a well-known approach in humans (i.e.,viamicroneedle patches,132,133“precision plant medicine” could create a novel market to precisely deliver pesticides, nutrients and/or fertilizers into plants, helping preserving the ecosystem and the phytosphere). A few studies have been performed in this direction,132and it could be interesting in future studies combine plant-inspired micropatterned materials into soft robotic arms134for precision agriculture applications. In addition, biohybrid plant-like machines are also a growing research field in which many works still have to come. It could be interesting in future studies combining different biohybrid approaches by extracting living plant tissues (i.e., living chloroplasts54) and combining it with biodegradable and responsive materials. We believe that energy autonomy is a key aspect that should be integrated from the initial design stages of any technology. The more such technologies are applied in environmental contexts, the greater the need for methods that avoid introducing pollution, may biodegrade, and still generate electricity for compatibility with our electronic technologies.

The energy conversion technologies presented here provide an overview of research and application possibilities, drawing inspiration from plants and utilizing biohybrid components to achieve functionalities that would be difficult or impossible with purely artificial systems. Further development of new functional materials, processable at multiple scales (from micro to macro) with a broader catalogue of biodegradable, sustainable materials will drive further process in the field. Especially the opportunity to combine multimodal functionalities such as energy conversion, actuation, tailored degradation, without the need for complex control systems but realized through physical intelligence, that is achieved through materials chemistry and its dynamic adaptation to the environment will allow next upgrades of the presented systems. A crucial aspect is also testing the systems in real environment where complex interaction could affect functionality drastically. Therefore, it is required that lab-scale fabrication methods and material systems allow to realistic outdoor tests with enough relevant replicates. Considering these aspects, and near future developments, sustainable, energy-autonomous robotics will significantly contribute to a broad technological platform for environmental monitoring, approaches for sustainable agriculture and for facilitating ecological restoration through advanced biohybrid robotic interventions.