Oral fluid sampling offers advantages over other biological matrices, mainly due to its noninvasive procedure avoiding privacy intrusion. The fully automated sample preparation procedure is based on salting‐out assisted liquid–liquid extraction (SALLE) combined with high‐efficiency LC‐MS/MS methods for both screening and confirmation of 37 drugs and incorporates novel features enabling direct injection of acetonitrile extracts into an innovative chromatographic system. The methods' drug panel includes opioids, benzodiazepines, benzodiazepine‐like drugs, cannabinoids, and stimulants. A full method validation was performed using OF/buffer from Greiner Bio‐ONE International and Quantisal saliva collection devices. The validation included assessments of linearity, sensitivity, precision, accuracy, extraction recovery, matrix effects, process efficiency, stability, and carryover. All compounds demonstrated linearity across the concentration range 1–25 ng/mL, withR2≥ 0.99. Both methods' limit of detection ranged between 0.001 and 0.03 ng/mL, and the limit of quantification ranged between 0.02 and 0.09 ng/mL. Precision was ≤ 14.8% for screening and ≤ 8.5% for the confirmation method. Accuracy was ± 13.6% for screening and ± 8.7% (except at 0.5 and 1 ng/mL, where it was ± 25.3% and ± 17.6%, respectively) for the confirmation method. Extraction recoveries ranged from 40.0% to 95.1%, except for hydromorphone (27.4%) and morphine (34.4%). Although matrix effects were observed for a large number of compounds to varying degrees, they were largely compensated for by the use of deuterium‐ and13C‐labeled internal standards (IS). IS‐corrected overall process efficiency ranged from 100.7% to 119.1% with precision (CV%) ≤ 10.8% for all compounds. Spiked calibrators and QC samples in OF were stable in autosampler for up to 72 h and in the freezer for 3 days. Methanol working solutions were stable for 6 months. No significant carryover was observed. The methods have been successfully implemented in the routine analysis of approximately > 1000 samples per month since March 2024.

The analysis of drugs and their metabolites in biological fluids is extensively conducted in the fields of clinical and forensic toxicology, as well as therapeutic drug monitoring. Many analytical methods for drug analysis have historically relied on techniques such as immunoassays and spectrophotometry, which lack specificity and sensitivity. In recent decades, mass spectrometry has emerged as a powerful tool in toxicological laboratories, revolutionizing drug analysis [1].

Nowadays, mass spectrometry is widely utilized in nearly all areas of clinical diagnostics, particularly in analyzing drugs of abuse (DoA). It offers significant advantages in measuring small molecules compared to immunoassays due to its enhanced specificity, superior sensitivity, and adaptability to a wide variety of applications [1,2,3,4]. The primary approach for DoA monitoring in urine involves initial drug screening using immunoassay techniques, followed by confirmation of preliminary positive results with more specific methodologies based on chromatographic separation and mass spectrometric detection [4,5]. LC‐MS/MS has largely supplanted gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC‐MS) as the gold standard for confirmatory analysis in DoA testing [6,7,8]. LC‐MS/MS allows for the direct analysis of aqueous samples without the need for time‐consuming sample preparation steps, such as hydrolysis, derivatization, and sample clean‐up, which are typically required for GC‐MS. Moreover, LC‐MS/MS effectively addresses the analysis of hydrophilic, thermolabile, and nonvolatile analytes that GC‐MS cannot sufficiently handle, making LC‐MS/MS a superior alternative to GC‐MS in pharmacology and toxicology testing laboratories [6].

The most abused drugs include opioids, cocaine, cannabis, amphetamines, and new psychoactive substances (NPSs). Most drug use disorders are associated with cannabis and opioids. Drug abuse is strongly linked to suffering, increased mortality, and violence. There is a crucial need to develop specific and sensitive methods for detecting legal and illicit drugs in the fields of toxicology, roadside testing, workplace drug testing, and rehabilitation programs [9].

The common biological matrices for drug testing include whole blood, plasma, serum, and urine specimens. Plasma and serum are frequently used to monitor drug concentrations due to the absence of interfering red blood cells and the water solubility of most drugs [10]. Urine specimen is the most common matrix for the analysis of DoA and is considered the gold standard. Urine sampling is easily performed and generally contains relatively high concentrations of drugs and their metabolites, extending the detection time window [11]. However, urine samples may be easily adulterated, diluted or substituted, which can lead to potential false analysis results. Additionally, drug concentrations in urine are affected by factors such as pH, urine flow rate, and metabolism. Positive findings of drugs in urine do not necessarily indicate that an individual is currently under the influence of drugs nor do they reveal whether the drugs were used sporadically, accidentally or systematically [12]. Thus, alternative biological matrices have become increasingly important for the detection of DoA in the last decade, offering distinct advantages over traditional samples used in toxicological testing [10,13,14].

Saliva, more accurately referred to as oral fluid (OF), has become an important alternative matrix for drug detection [15]. Recently, the use of OF has gained popularity in forensic and toxicological laboratories due to its simple and noninvasive sampling method, which avoids privacy intrusion [16]. OF is now generally considered as the most appropriate alternative matrix for assessing the current use of psychoactive drugs [17]. The transfer of drugs from blood into OF occurs mainly through passive diffusion and ultrafiltration, which are regarded as the main mechanisms for drug migration [18]. The slightly acidic pH of OF compared to blood leads to higher concentrations of weak basic compounds, such as many psychoactive substances including cocaine and amphetamines, due to the ion trapping process. This environment also results in higher concentrations of other substances, such as opioids, benzodiazepines, and synthetic cathinones [17,19,20,21]. Despite its advantages, the composition of OF can be influenced by several factors, including gender, age, therapeutic use, diet, smoking, and circadian rhythm. These variations represent significant limitations of the use of OF in certain applications [22,23,24].

The most common sample preparation methods for the determination of DoA in OF using GC‐MS and LC‐MS systems include solid phase extraction (SPE), liquid–liquid extraction (LLE), and liquid–liquid microextraction (LLM) assays, all of which involve time‐consuming evaporation steps [25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36]. Additionally, the evaporation of extracts may lead to the loss of volatile compounds, such as amphetamines, and pose challenges in dissolving highly nonpolar substances, including cannabinoids, resulting in poor quantification and recovery. Alternative methods employing the dilute‐and‐shoot technique are also available. However, these methods accommodate a limited number of analytes, typically up to 13 [17,37,38]. The extraction of compounds from the matrix prior to analysis is essential to achieve the sufficient analytical sensitivity required for relevant detection and quantification of multianalytes in OF. Additionally, this process extends the life span of analytical columns and MS components, thus minimizing LC‐MS maintenance [39]. SALLE is a sample preparation technique derived from traditional LLE and represents a significant advancement in the preparation of biological samples for drug analysis. This technique utilizes a salt to induce phase separation between the aqueous matrix and the water‐miscible organic solvent, facilitating the efficient extraction of a wide range of compounds with various physicochemical properties. SALLE offers several advantages over other existing sample preparation techniques, including increased simplicity, higher throughput, and enhanced extraction of polar compounds [40,41,42,43]. The extraction efficiency of compounds using SALLE is influenced by several factors, such as matrix pH, type of salt, salt concentration, and the choice of organic solvent [44]. The analysis of multiple drugs in OF is challenging due to considerably lower drug concentrations compared to those in urine, requiring concentration steps to increase method sensitivity using LLE and SPE sample preparations.

The present study aimed to develop a rapid and efficient automated high‐throughput multicomponent method for both screening and confirmation, based on the SALLE procedure utilizing an MS‐compatible salt. This method is capable of injecting saturated organic solvent directly into LC‐MS/MS without sample extract evaporation, concentration or reconstitution, representing a novel chromatographic feature. The methods have been fully validated for a 37‐drug panel and have been successfully implemented in routine analysis, delivering results within 1–2 days.

The reference substances and internal standard stock solutions were purchased as methanol or acetonitrile (AcN) solutions in ampoules (1 or 10 mg/mL) from Chiron AS (Trondheim, Norway), LGC Standards (LGC GmbH, Louis‐Pasteur‐Str. 30, D‐14943 Luckenwalde, Germany), Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States), and Cerilliant Co (Round Rock, TX, United States), as detailed in Table2. Methanol and AcN of LC‐MS grade, ammonium bicarbonate, and ammonium formate were obtained from Honeywell Riedel‐de Haën (Wunstorfer Strasse 40, D‐30926 Seelze, Germany). Formic acid (≥ 99%) and 2‐Propanol of “normapur” grade were purchased from VWR International (Geldenaaksebaan 464, B‐3001 Leuven, Belgium). Ultrapure water (> 18 MΩ/cm) was prepared in‐house using a MILLI‐Q water purification system (Millipore Co., Bedford, MA, United States). A 12‐M ammonium formate buffer solution and a 4.4‐M alkaline salt solution of ammonium bicarbonate were prepared in ultrapure water. Ammonium acetate (≥ 99.9%), sodium chloride (NaCl, ≥ 99.9%), and magnesium sulfate (≥ 99.9%) were purchased from Merck KGaA (64 271 Darmstadt, Germany).

Mass spectrometric parameters used in the LCP‐MS/MS confirmation method. The same settings were used for the screening method, but with only one product ion. The source companies that supplied the reference compound ampoules are also provided.

The ampouled stock solution was diluted with methanol to prepare working solutions for calibrations containing 20, 40, 100, 200, 300, 400, and 500 ng/mL of analytes. The working solutions for quality controls (QCs) were prepared by diluting a separate and dedicated ampouled stock solution with methanol to achieve concentrations of 10, 20, 60, and 400 ng/mL. Calibrators were prepared at seven concentration levels (1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 ng/mL), and QC samples were prepared at four concentration levels (0.5, 1, 3, and 20 ng/mL) by adding 100 μL of each respective working solution separately to 1.9 mL of blank OF samples, followed by vortexing for 2 min. Spiked calibrators and QC samples in OF were prepared daily before analysis. QC samples at all concentration levels, as well as blank OF samples, were included in every batch. The stock solution of the internal standards was prepared in methanol at a concentration of 1000 ng/mL and stored at −80°C, with a maximum storage time of 12 months. The working solution was prepared by diluting the stock solution 200‐fold with AcN to a final concentration of 5 ng/mL and was stored at −20°C for up to 2 months.

The saliva collection devices, Greiner Bio‐One (International GmbH) and Quantisal (Immunalysis Corp., Pomona, CA, United States), were used for the collection of OF samples. OF samples from real patients were sent to the laboratory from workplaces and medical institutions for routine drug testing. These samples were centrifuged at 4200gfor 5 min and stored at 4°C until analysis. For method development and validation, negative OF samples were collected from healthy, drug‐free volunteers in the laboratory using both kits according to the manufacturers' instructions. The collected samples were centrifuged at 4200gfor 5 min, and aliquots of 1.9 mL were transferred to 5‐mL polystyrene tubes and stored at −20°C prior to analysis. The Greiner Bio‐One device collects approximately 4.1 mL of saliva, which is then combined with 4 mL of extraction buffer. The percentage of OF in the Greiner Bio‐One content was determined photometrically using a DxC 700 AU Chemistry Analyzer (Beckman Coulter) to confirm proper sample collection. The acceptance limits were established with reference ranges of 11% to 85% OF, and patient samples outside these ranges were excluded from analysis. The Quantisal device can collect 1 mL of saliva, which is then combined with 3 mL of buffer. All the experiments in this project, as well as the analysis of real patient samples, were conducted using saliva collected into collection buffers. These samples were deidentified by removing all labels ensuring that the achieved data remained unlinked to any specific patient.

A Hamilton MicroLab Star M liquid handling robot (Hamilton Co.), equipped with eight pipetting channels and a barcode reader, was used for automated sample preparation. The LC‐MS/MS system consisted of a Thermo Fisher Scientific Vanquish Flex UHPLC, equipped with a membrane‐based degasser, a binary pump F solvent system, a column compartment H, and a split sampler FT autosampler, connected to a Thermo Fisher Scientific TSQ Quantiva triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. The system was operated using the following software: Thermo TSQ Tune Master (Version 3.2.2625.33) and Trace Finder Clinical Research (Version 4.1 SP5). The heated electrospray interface (HESI) was used with the instrument operating in positive ion mode. Nitrogen was used as sheath, auxiliary, and ion sweep gas, whereas argon was used as a collision gas. Chromatography was performed using a Kinetex 2.6 μm, 100 mm × 2.1 mm (i.d.), PS (positive surface) C18 column (Phenomenex, 411 Madrid Ave., Torrance, CA 90501, United States), preceded by a PS C18 precolumn (5 × 2.1 mm) from the same supplier. The liquid chromatography system was operated in gradient mode with a flow rate of 600 μL/min. Small differences in the gradient profile between the screening and confirmation method resulted in different selectivity and were sufficient to achieve high chromatographic performance in both methods (Table1). Solvent A consisted of 10 mmol/L ammonium formate and 0.005% (v/v) formic acid, whereas solvent B contained methanol with 10 mmol/L ammonium formate and the same amount of formic acid as in solvent A. Needle wash was performed after each sample injection using 400 μL of a mixture consisting of equal volumes of methanol, AcN, 2‐propanol, and ultrapure water with 0.5% (v/v) formic acid. The injection volume was 2.0 μL, and the column oven temperature was set at 60°C. The total analysis time for both the screening and confirmation methods was 5.2 min.

Gradient profile used in the LC‐MS/MS confirmation method. The gradient profile used in the LC‐MS/MS screening method is similar and is provided in TableS1b.

The following conditions were applied in the mass spectrometer: a peak width of 0.70 Da for both Q1 and Q3, collision gas pressure of 1.0 mTorr (argon), capillary temperature at 325°C, vaporizer temperature at 380°C, sheath gas pressure of 60.0 Arb units, ion sweep gas pressure of 0 Arb units, auxiliary gas pressure of 12.0 Arb units, spray voltage of 3000 V, and source fragmentation voltage of 5 V. The selected ions, RF lens voltage, collision energy, and dwell time used for each compound are detailed in Table2for both methods. Only one MRM transition was used in the screening method. The acquisition time ranged from 0.60 to 4.2 min, with each analyte monitored within a time segment of ± 0.30 min of the expected retention time.

A total of 250 μL OF sample (OF and buffer from both collection devices) was spiked with a calibrator to achieve a final concentration of 5 ng/mL, followed by mixing with 375 μL of AcN containing internal standards (5 ng/mL) in 12‐mL polystyrene tubes. After addition of 100 μL of 12‐mM ammonium formate, the tubes were vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged for 5 min. Subsequently, 250 μL of the organic upper phases (AcN extract) was transferred to separate tubes and alkalized with 30 μL of 4.4‐M ammonium bicarbonate. Finally, 2 μL of the alkalized extract was injected onto the following reversed‐phase analytical columns: a YMC‐Triart C18 ExRS (100 × 2.0 mm, 2.9‐μm particles; Scandinaviska Genetec AB, Västra Frölunda, Sweden), a Genetex column (100 × 2.1 mm, 1.7‐μm particles; Phenomenex, 411 Madrid Ave., Torrance, CA 90501, United States), a YMC‐Triart C8 (100 × 2.0 mm, 1.9‐μm particles; Scandinaviska Genetec AB, Västra Frölunda, Sweden), and a Kinetex column (100 × 2.1 mm, 2‐6 μm particles, PS C18 positive surface; Phenomenex, 411 Madrid Ave., Torrance, CA 90501, United States). Each column was tested with acidic, neutral, and basic mobile phases to evaluate the impact of pH and buffer composition on chromatographic selectivity, peak shape, and method sensitivity.

The SALLE in routine was performed in a 96‐well format using a liquid handling robot. Each analytical batch included three calibration levels (1, 10, and 25 ng/mL), a blank OF sample, one low QC (3 ng/mL) and one high QC (20 ng/mL) for every tenth OF sample. A volume of 250 μL of OF was aliquoted into the wells of the 96‐well plate, together with 375 μL of AcN containing internal standards at a concentration of 5 ng/mL. The plate was shaken for 1 min to ensure complete homogenization of the contents. Following this, 100 μL of 12‐M ammonium formate solution was added to each well, and the plate was shaken for an additional 1 min before being allowed to settle for 2 min to induce phase separation. Subsequently, 450 μL of the lower aqueous phase was completely removed and discarded. To the remaining organic phase (salted‐out AcN) 30 μL of saturated ammonium bicarbonate solution was added, resulting in more basic pH of the organic phase. The plate was then sealed with a Cap‐mat 96‐well 7‐mm Round Plug Pre‐Slit Silicone/PTFE (Waters Co) and centrifuged at 4200gfor 3 min. Finally, 2 μL of the upper SALLE extract was directly injected into the LC‐MS/MS system for analysis. This sample preparation procedure was used for both the screening and confirmation method. Figure1down below displays the extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) for the quantifier product ions (Q1) in the confirmation method at 1 ng/mL. The EIC (FigureS1b,c) for all product ions and internal standards for the screening and confirmation method, respectively, can be found in theSupporting Information.

The EIC of the Q1 product ions in the confirmation method for the 1 ng/mL calibrator.

The initial screening analysis of the patient OF samples was conducted using one product ion for the target analyte and one for the internal standard, operating in MS/MS multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode (Table2). For the subsequent confirmation analysis, a new aliquot of the OF sample was taken and analyzed using a different chromatographic gradient profile (Table1). This confirmation analysis was also performed in MS/MS MRM mode with two product ions per analyte and one product ion for the internal standard (Table2). The criteria for compound identification during the confirmation analysis included a combination of correct retention times (± 0.02 min for each analyte and internal standard compared to the calibrators) and relative ion ratios (between the product ions for each analyte within 10%–50% of the reference value) [45,46]. Target values for ion ratios and absolute retention times were derived from the calibration standards and updated for each analytical batch. For screening purposes, the identification criteria for detected compounds were based on the correct retention time, as described above, and the presence of the product ion. Positive identification of all product ions in both methods required a signal‐to‐noise ratio of ≥ 10 for quantifier ions (Q1) and ≥ 3 for qualifier ions (Q2). An analytical batch was approved if all analytes fulfilled the identity criteria, recalculated concentrations of calibration standards were within ± 15% of their nominal values (± 20% for calibrator level 1 ng/mL), the concentrations of QC samples were within ≤ 15% relative standard deviation (RSD) of the target values, and chromatographic peaks for analytes in the blank sample were either absent or constituted no more than 20% of the peak area of the cutoff level calibrator at 1 ng/mL.

Method validation was performed in accordance with the ICH guideline M10 on bioanalytical method validation [47], as well as the European guidelines for workplace drug testing in OFs [46]. This validation was also based on recommendations provided by Matuszewski et al. [48] and Peters et al. [49], addressing both screening and confirmation methodologies. The validation encompassed a comprehensive assessment of sensitivity, specificity, calibration linearity, precision, accuracy, extraction recovery, matrix effects, process efficiency, carryover, stability, ruggedness, and a comparison between automation and manual sample preparation performance. Twelve negative OF samples from volunteers were used for the method validation. The same group of individuals provided OF samples using both the Greiner Bio‐One and Quantisal collection kits, allowing direct comparison of the results between the two kits. OF samples from both kits were alternated systematically throughout the entire method validation process. To simulate test results from real‐case situations in a routine laboratory, sample preparations throughout the method validation were carried out by three different chemists, ensuring that the results reflected typical variations in routine testing.

The limit of detection (LOD) was defined as the lowest concentration of a compound generating a distinct peak with a signal‐to‐noise (S/N) ratio of ≥ 3 for both Q1 and Q2 transitions. The limit of quantification (LOQ) was determined as the lowest concentration of a compound resulting in a S/N of ≥ 10 for Q1 and ≥ 3 for Q2. LOD and LOQ were estimated using negative OF samples collected with the Greiner Bio‐One and Quantisal sampling kits from six different volunteers, spiked to concentrations of 0.4, 0.3, and 0.2 ng/mL for the 37 analytes. The lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) was established through the extraction and analysis of 15 QC samples across three separate sets at a concentration of 0.5 ng/mL, corresponding to half of the cutoff concentration level. The LLOQ was determined based on the fulfillment of criteria for both RSD and accuracy (≤ 30%), as well as meeting ion ratio and retention time requirements.

Specificity was defined as the absence of interferences from matrix components or exogenous compounds, including the major venlafaxine metabolites O‐desmethylvenlafaxine (ODV) and N‐desmethylvenlafaxine (NDV), which share the same precursor mass (m/z264) as tramadol [50]. To evaluate specificity, 10 blank OF samples collected using both Greiner Bio‐One and Quantisal collectors were analyzed using the final developed analytical methods, which included both screening and confirmation, with and without the use internal standards. Interferences were considered present if the analyte peak area response in the blank samples exceeded 20% of the average analyte peak area response observed in the cutoff samples (1 ng/mL) for each analyte or if the internal standard peak area in the blanks exceeded 5% of the average internal standard peak area response in the cutoff samples [47]. Specificity was determined by analyzing 10 blank samples from healthy, drug‐free volunteers. Additionally, two blanks containing internal standards were spiked with both ODV and NDV and subsequently analyzed to evaluate the potential for false positive tramadol detection.

The linearity was evaluated using a matrix‐matched calibration curve constructed through linear regression analysis from seven distinct concentration levels ranging from 1 to 25 ng/mL (1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 ng/mL), prepared and analyzed on three different occasions over three consecutive days. The calibration curves were weighted as 1/x(1/x2for HHC and THC), and the linearity was assessed using the equationy = mx + b, excluding the origin. Calibrators were considered to be within the linear range if their back‐calculated concentrations were within ± 15% of the nominal values at all levels and within ± 20% at the cutoff level. Additionally, the linear determination coefficients (R2) had to be ≥ 0.99 for each compound. Linearity was assessed for both screening and confirmation methods. Details can be found in TableS4.

Intra‐assay, interassay, and total‐assay precision (expressed as coefficient of variation in percent, CV%) and accuracy (expressed as bias percentage) were investigated by analyzing five replicates at five QC concentrations (0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 20 ng/mL) using the confirmation method and at four QC concentrations (1, 2, 3, and 20 ng/mL) using the screening method for each compound. This analysis was based on three series conducted within a week, with daily calibration in each batch. Seven calibration levels were included in every batch. Accuracy was calculated as the percentage difference between the mean measured concentrations and the nominal concentrations. Accuracy was accepted if it was within ± 30% for the ½ cutoff level, ± 20% for the cutoff level, and ± 15% for all other QC levels. The acceptance criteria for CV% were set at ≤ 30% for the ½ cutoff level, ≤ 20% for the cuttoff level, and ≤ 15% for all other QC levels.

The CV% for IS corrected extraction recovery for each compound and concentration level should meet the criterion of ≤ 15%.

The CV% for IS corrected matrix effects for each compound and concentration level should fulfill the criterion of ≤ 15%.

The CV% for IS corrected process efficiency for each compound and concentration level should meet the criterion of ≤ 15%.

Carryover was evaluated for all compounds by analyzing blank OF samples collected with Quantisal (n= 2) and Greiner Bio‐One (n= 2) without IS, directly following spiked OF samples with concentrations of 1000 ng/mL for both Quantisal and Greiner Bio‐One collectors. The acceptance criterion for carryover was that the area response for the analytes in the subsequent blanks did not exceed 20% of the area response observed for the lowest calibrator 1 ng/mL and the area response for internal standards did not exceed 5% of the average area response of internal standards across all calibrators (n= 7).

Processed authentic positive patient samples and two QC samples at different concentration levels were analyzed directly after preparation, as well as after 24 and 72 h of storage in the autosampler. These results were compared to the concentrations measured on Day 0.

To evaluate the stability of each compound in both devices, triplicates of both QCL (3 ng/mL) and QCH (20 ng/mL) levels were analyzed directly after preparation, as well as after 3 days and 5 days of storage in the freezer.

To evaluate the stability of each compound in methanol, both QC levels (3 and 20 ng/mL) were analyzed directly after preparation and after 6 months of storage in the freezer.

The freeze–thaw stability of the analytes was assessed by spiking three blank OF samples from both sampling kits to a concentration of 10 ng/mL. The samples were subjected to three freeze–thaw cycles over three consecutive days and analyzed after each cycle to evaluate any changes in concentration and potential degradation.

The ruggedness of the method was evaluated by assessing its ability to withstand changes in the experimental conditions. Reproducibility and robustness were evaluated using data obtained from linearity, precision, and accuracy analyses, which introduced variations in solutions, mobile phase lots, LC column lots, and technical staff.

Before the methods were implemented in routine analysis using automated sample preparation, the method performance of the liquid handling robot was validated for accuracy, imprecision and linearity. This was conducted by analyzing three batches of calibrators covering the analytical measuring range, as well as high (n= 15) and low (n= 15) QC samples. Additionally, QC data were monitored over a period of 6 months to detect any deviations from the validated method. The laboratory follows College of American Pathologists (CAP) toxicological checklist requirements regarding internal quality assessment in order to discover potential bias or other unexpected trends, to maintain the robustness of the method.

Developing an effective and robust chromatography method is extremely challenging when performing multicomponent analysis of compounds with varying physicochemical properties. The selection of an appropriate column and compatible mobile phases is crucial for specific sample preparation procedures, enabling the direct injection of saturated organic extracts into the LC‐MS system without compromising chromatographic efficiency. This process should also produce Gaussian‐distributed and highly resolved peaks, which are essential for analyzing complex biomatrices with very low limits of quantification. The primary goal is to achieve optimal peak shapes for all target compounds while ensuring sufficient sensitivity, short analysis times, and adequate separation from potential endogenous and exogenous interferences.

A review of the literature revealed several studies highlighting the benefits of using straight phase chromatography (HILIC) with SALLE [44,51]. Because AcN is commonly used as an extraction solvent, employing HILIC would facilitate the direct injection of sample extracts into the LC‐MS without the need for time‐consuming evaporation and reconstitution steps. However, nonpolar compounds may not be retained on the HILIC stationary phase and can be eluted rapidly with the dead volume of the column [52]. Considering that a chromatographic system should enable the measurement of all analytes in a single run, reverse phase (RP) chromatography based on C8 or C18 stationary phases was selected for this purpose. When the AcN extract was injected directly into the LC‐MS system, significant peak broadening and poor chromatographic peak shapes were observed, particularly for more polar compounds. Figure2illustrates these peak shape distortions for 6‐AM, amphetamine, ephedrine, ethylmorphine, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, codeine, MDA, MDMA, methamphetamine, morphine, and oxycodone when injected onto the RP C18 column. Several factors may contribute to this occurrence. Because the injected AcN solvent is stronger than the initial composition of the mobile phase, the formation of the injection plug results in both an insufficient concentration of the compounds at the column inlet and a decrease in their solubility in the stationary phase of the column [53]. Another contributing factor is the pH of the final extract, which affects the compounds' interactions in the stationary phase due to the protonation of their amino groups. Increasing the pH to a level closer to the pKa of the amino groups enhances the un‐ionized form of the basic compounds, thereby increasing their hydrophobic interactions with the stationary phase of the column [53,54].

The chromatogram showing peaks of mostly polar compounds when saturated AcN extract of OF injected onto the RP C18 column.

To address these issues, multiple combinations of RP columns and mobile phases were tested to evaluate how each column and mobile phase composition affected peak shape, separation efficiency, and sensitivity. Because residual silanols or polar groups on the stationary phase may secondarily interact with the functional groups of weakly basic drugs, causing peak broadening and tailing, a silica modified stationary phase with a positive surface (PS) was chosen to prevent the secondary interactions (Figure3). Several attempts were made to increase the compounds' hydrophobicity by altering the pH in the saturated AcN extract to achieve high chromatographic performance for all compounds. This could be accomplished by employing a saturated basic salt solution that is compatible with the LC‐MS instrument and does not cause degradation of the stationary phase. Additionally, the saturated salt solution should not precipitate at higher proportions of organic solvent during the chromatographic gradient.

The chromatogram showing peaks of polar compounds when saturated AcN extract of OF injected onto the RP PS C18 column.

Taking all these factors into consideration, a saturated solution of ammonium bicarbonate was selected and tested in triplicate by adding 10, 30, and 50 μL to 375 μL of saturated AcN extracts prepared using an OF calibrator concentration of 1 ng/mL. The pH adjustment of the saturated AcN extracts with 30 and 50 μL of ammonium bicarbonate eliminated band broadening, resulting in significantly improved chromatographic peak shapes with Gaussian distribution for all compounds, including the polar ones (Figure4). However, the addition of 10 μL of ammonium bicarbonate was insufficient to achieve high chromatographic performance, as it resulted in distorted peaks, particularly for hydrophilic compounds. Furthermore, the addition of ammonium bicarbonate enhanced method sensitivity without adversely affecting MS performance.

The chromatogram showing peaks of mostly polar compounds when saturated AcN extract of OF prepared calibrator 1 ng/mL after addition of 30‐μL ammonium bicarbonate injected onto the RP PS C18 column.

Employing SALLE as a sample preparation approach for LC‐MS analysis requires the selection and optimization of an appropriate organic extraction solvent and a salting‐out agent. An ideal organic solvent should be fully water‐miscible, capable of effectively precipitating salivary proteins, and able to extract a wide range of compounds with varying physicochemical properties [55]. The salting‐out agent should be fully MS‐compatible and capable of inducing clear phase separation. Furthermore, alkaline salts are more beneficial for basic compounds, as they become predominantly unprotonated and thus more lipophilic under basic conditions. This leads to partitioning to the organic phase thereby enhancing extraction recovery.

Using a saturated salting‐out solution for SALLE rather than a solid salt simplifies sample preparation and increases the robustness of the method. Three different water‐miscible organic solvents (isopropanol [IPA], AcN, and tetrahydrofuran [THF]) and four different saturated solutions of salting‐out agents (ammonium acetate, ammonium formate, magnesium sulfate, and sodium chloride) were mixed with saliva in various combinations and volume ratios to determine which organic solvent yielded the clearest phase separation. The addition of any of the salt solutions resulted in complete phase separation between saliva and both AcN and THF. The incomplete phase separation observed with IPA is likely due to its higher water content (24.3%) compared to AcN and THF (10.3% and 5.99%, respectively) [56].

THF provided clearer extract phase separation with each salt compared to AcN, likely due to its lower polarity, which reduces its solubility in the aqueous phase and results in a lower water content. This suggests a limited ability of THF to extract more polar substances from aqueous mixtures, as supported by the lower MS area responses observed for most compounds when using THF compared to AcN in our experiments. Additionally, the reduced area response may be a result of the ion suppression effect caused by THF. In contrast, the presence of π‐bonds in both AcN and many target analytes enhances intermolecular interactions, thereby improving extraction recovery even further. Based on the experimental results, AcN was found to be the most suitable solvent for further optimizing the extraction method.

Several experiments were conducted to evaluate the effects of the following salting‐out reagents: 10‐mM AmAc, 10‐ and 12‐mM AmF, 6.2‐M NaCl, and 2.9‐M MgSO4, on extraction recovery and their ability to provide adequate sensitivity for most compounds. The use of NaCl solutions resulted in increased MS responses for all compounds, particularly for early‐eluting analytes such as amphetamine and morphine. MgSO4produced similar results to NaCl, except for benzodiazepines, which generated the lowest MS responses among all the salts tested. The higher pH of the NaCl solution may have influenced the ionization state of the compounds contributing to these differences. Using high concentrations of NaCl or MgSO4could lead to the formation of solid precipitates, thereby reducing the extraction recovery of analytes due to adsorption on the saturated precipitates, as reported earlier [57]. Additionally, the AcN phase might still contain nonvolatile salts as well as water, which could be harmful to mass spectrometers and cause significant ion suppression and compound adducts. To avoid this, volatile and MS‐compatible salts were further evaluated in the method development.

The use of volatile salt solutions at 12‐ and 10‐M AmF had no significant effect on MS responses; however, the 10‐M AmAc and 12‐M AmF provided more defined phase separation. The use of a 10‐M AmAc solution showed a notable improvement in peak area responses for opioids, except for buprenorphine, fentanyl, and methadone. This improvement may be attributed to the more basic properties of AmAc, which contribute to the deprotonation of the amino groups in opioids to a greater extent. The observed increase in peak areas for morphine, as shown in Figure5a,b, is likely due to this change in polarity. Buprenorphine, fentanyl, and methadone showed minimal differences in peak area responses between AmF and AmAc, likely due to their hydrophobicity and strong π‐bonding interactions with the AcN phase. The results in Figure5a,bindicate that AmAc and AmF are suitable salting‐out agents, as they induced clear phase separation and provided adequate MS response at the cutoff concentration. Although AmAc provided higher peak areas for compounds within the opioid group compared to AmF, it had some limitations. The salt precipitated as crystals when the solution was stored in the refrigerator, making it less suitable for routine analysis due to impaired robustness. Furthermore, the AmF solution was less viscous than AmAc and was perceived as easier to handle, making it the preferred choice for the daily high‐throughput routine analysis of many patient samples. The method was further optimized by evaluating the effects of adding 20, 50, and 100 μL of 12‐M AmF solution to 250 μL of OF samples, with each condition tested in triplicate. To ensure enhanced extraction reproducibility during sample preparation, the addition of 100 μL of saturated 12‐M AmF solution was found to be necessary for consistent phase separation and stable pH adjustment when using 375 μL of ISs AcN solution mixed with 250 μL of various OF samples from different patients. Considering the option of using a fully automated 96‐well plate extraction procedure, the lower aqueous layer of the sample was completely discarded, and 30 μL of 4.4 M ammonium bicarbonate solution was added to each deep well prior to the injection of the saturated AcN extract directly into the LC‐MS/MS system.

(a, b) The MS response for a selected number of compounds chosen with different polarities using the following salting‐out reagents: 10‐M AmAc, 10‐ and 12‐M AmF, 6.2‐M NaCl, and 2.9‐M MgSO4. The displayed area represents the average across three replicates.

The LOD determined from the spiked QC samples in the confirmation method ranged from 0.001 ng/mL (benzoylecgonine) to 0.03 ng/mL (oxazepam) for Q1 and from 0.003 ng/mL (midazolam) to 0.009 ng/mL (THC) for Q2. The LOQ ranged from 0.002 ng/mL (benzoylecgonine) to 0.1 ng/mL (oxazepam). The LLOQ level for 15 QC samples, spiked at 0.5 ng/mL for all analytes, met the established criterion with precision ≤ 19.1% and accuracy within ± 30%. Additionally, the ion ratio criteria for compounds in the confirmation method were in accordance with the reference values [46]. As for the screening, the LOD ranged from 0.001 ng/mL (midazolam) to 0.02 ng/mL (oxazepam), whereas the LOQ ranged from 0.002 ng/mL (midazolam) to 0.09 ng/mL (oxazepam). The LLOQ for 15 QC samples at 0.5 ng/mL met the minimum set criterion with a precision ≤ 14.8% and accuracy within ± 30%.

The obtained results confirmed that any potential endogenous interferences present in the OF blank samples were either well‐resolved chromatographically from the target compounds or exhibited a peak area less than 20% of the peak area at cutoff level concentrations (1 ng/mL) and less than 5% of the internal standard response at the corresponding retention time. This demonstrates that no interferences compromised the specificity of the method. However, monitoring tramadol at the MRM transitions shown in Table2may result in interferences arising from the intake of new‐generation serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors. Tramadol and venlafaxine share certain structural similarities (Figure6), which may lead to coelution during rapid chromatographic runs. Although these substances have different molecular weights, the two major metabolites of venlafaxine, N‐desmethylvenlafaxine (NDMV) and O‐desmethylvenlafaxine (ODMV), have the same molecular weight as tramadol. This structural similarity can lead to the formation of identical co‐eluting precursors, resulting in the production of the same product ions. To address this issue, chromatographic gradient profile was adjusted to resolve ODMV from tramadol preventing false‐positive tramadol results (Figure7).

The structure of Tramadol, Venlafaxine, and its metabolites.

The calibration curves demonstrated satisfactory linearity across the concentration range of 1–25 ng/mL, with coefficients of determination (R2) consistently ≥ 0.99 for each analyte. The calibration equations for the analytes in both methods remained consistent across three different occasions over 3 days, as detailed in TableS3for the confirmation method and TableS4for the screening method. The calibration equations were weighted by 1/x, except for HHC and THC, which were weighted by 1/x2. The origo was excluded, and the relative error of the back‐calculated concentrations was within ± 15% for each analyte at all calibrator levels.

The results from intraday, interday, and total precision and accuracy assessments for both methods, evaluated at five QC levels (0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 20 ng/mL) for the confirmation method and four QC levels (1, 2, 3, and 20 ng/mL) for the screening method, are summarized in TableS5. The screening method demonstrated accuracy and precision that met the ± 15% acceptance criteria across all analytes and QC concentration levels. The confirmation method showed acceptable levels of precision and accuracy. Hydrocodone and hydromorphone displayed lower accuracy at 0.5 ng/mL, with values of ± 25.3% and ± 22.1%, respectively, but still within the acceptable range. Notably, good results were also obtained for HHC (CV% ≤ 13.5% and accuracy ± 6.3%) despite the absence of a deuterium labeled IS. However, the minor difference in results between the two methods can be explained by random variations in the measurements. Additionally, an adjustment of the ion probe position was performed during the method development to improve reproducibility of all the compounds.

The extraction recovery, matrix effects, and process efficiency for each compound at both concentration levels (QCL and QCH) are detailed in Table3. The evaluation of extraction recovery was conducted using only the confirmation method, as the same sample preparation procedure was applied for both methods. The observed recovery ranged from 28.9% to 95% at QCL and from 27.4% to 86.4% at QCH. More polar substances, such as amphetamine and morphine, yielded lower extraction recovery compared to more hydrophobic compounds. However, these substances demonstrated high reproducibility and low imprecision.

Data for extraction recovery and matrix effect for both screening and conformation methods (for ME values, > 0 indicates ion enhancement, and < 0 indicates ion suppression).

The variation in extraction recoveries is primarily attributed to the choice of organic solvent and the inherent physicochemical properties of each substance, as they underwent the same sample preparation procedure. The results shown in Table3suggest that the higher recovery observed for benzodiazepines may depend on their unique fused ring system, consisting of a benzene ring and a diazepine ring, with an additional benzene ring attached to the fused structure. Similarly, Z drugs such as zopiclone and zolpidem, which contain a cyclopyrrolone and an imidazopyridine core structure, respectively, also exhibited high recoveries.

The complex benzodiazepine ring system, with its high density of π‐bonds, enhances interactions with the π‐bonds in AcN, thereby facilitating improved extraction efficiency through increased intermolecular forces. Additionally, AcN contains a nitrile group with a dipole moment and a methyl group with nonpolar properties, allowing it to effectively dissolve both polar and nonpolar compounds. An increase in the nonpolarity of a compound, whether due to nonpolar functional groups or nonpolar elements in its structure, generally results in greater extraction recovery.

Opioids such as buprenorphine, methadone, and fentanyl exhibit higher extraction recoveries compared to other opioids. Although buprenorphine shares a core structure with other opioids, its additional nonpolar elements enhance its lipophilicity, leading to improved extraction efficiency. Methadone and fentanyl, which lack the core opioid structure, contain two benzene rings that increase π‐bond interactions with AcN.

Conversely, highly polar compounds tend to have lower extraction recoveries due to their greater solubility in the aqueous phase. Replacing the methoxy group (‐OCH3) in codeine and hydrocodone with a hydroxyl group (‐OH) in morphine and hydromorphone increases polarity, which in turn decreases their extraction recovery. Furthermore, hydrocodone demonstrates a higher extraction recovery than codeine, whereas hydromorphone shows higher recovery than morphine. This difference is attributed to the presence of a ketone group in hydrocodone and hydromorphone, as opposed to the hydroxyl group in codeine and morphine.

In the stimulant category, replacing a hydrogen atom with a methyl group, as seen in the transition from amphetamine to methamphetamine, reduces polarity, thereby enhancing extraction recovery. Additionally, cocaine, with its nonpolar elements and additional π–π interactions, demonstrates superior recovery due to its favorable structural characteristics.

The absolute matrix effects, as shown in Table3, indicated varying degrees of ion suppression (e.g., zopiclone, 6‐AM) and ion enhancement (e.g., oxazepam), which vary widely and might be influenced by several factors, including the OF sampling methodology, the sample preparation procedure, chromatographic conditions (e.g., ion suppression observed for 6‐AM in the confirmation method and simultaneously causing ion enhancement for 6‐AM in the screening method), injection volume, and mass spectrometry (MS) conditions. Matrix effects caused by co‐eluting drugs may also lead to inaccurate measurements, as investigated by Remane et al. [58]. In this study, for example, the absolute ion suppression effect ranged from −24.9% to −43.4% due to the coeluting compounds 6‐AM, methamphetamine, and MDA. However, the matrix effects were largely compensated for by ISs, expressed as the IS‐corrected ME%. The IS‐corrected ME% was quantitatively assessed for both methods, with values ranging from −15.7% to 12.0% at QCL and −13.6% to 3.5% at QCH for the confirmation method. For the screening method, the IS‐corrected ME% values ranged from −14.9% to −2.8% at QCL and from 6.9% to 15.2% at QCH. The variability (CV%) of IS‐corrected ME% was also assessed, with all compounds maintaining CV% ≤ 11.1% across both methods and QC levels. These results confirm that both the screening and confirmation method comply with the requirements set by international validation guidelines. It is also worth noting that the ME experiment for screening and confirmation was conducted using OF samples obtained from different healthy, drug‐free volunteers.

The recovery was determined as a “true” recovery value, unaffected by matrix effects. The overall process efficiency was assessed by multiplying the value of the matrix effect by the recovery values [47]. The overall process efficiency was estimated using IS correction for both screening and confirmation methods at the QCL and QCH levels, ranging from 100.7% to 119.1%. Additionally, the precision (CV%) of the IS‐corrected overall process efficiency was ≤ 10.8% for all compounds at the QCL and QCH levels, demonstrating low imprecision.

Carryover was calculated by comparing the peak areas in the blank for all compounds to the corresponding peak areas in the cutoff calibrator at 1 ng/mL within the same batch. Following the injection of a high concentration (10 000 times the cutoff concentration), no carryover was found in any matrix, except for fentanyl (25.6%), cocaine (22.5%), MDA (20.4%), methadone (22.3%), and bromazepam (40.1%), which exhibited area responses > 20% in the first blank of both matrices. It is noteworthy that none of the analytes are considered to have significant carryover. However, when analyzing real patient samples, analytes at even higher concentrations can be detected [59]. This may lead to carryover issues in the autosampler from the preceding positive samples, which should be reviewed carefully and potentially reanalyzed. No carryover peaks were observed for ISs in the blanks.

Stability tests were performed on 15 positive authentic oral OF patient samples and internal QCs at two concentration levels (2 and 6 ng/mL). After storage for 24 and 72 h, the calculated concentrations of all compounds in the positive authentic patient samples were within ± 7.49% of the initial values. The internal QCs remained within ± 10%, except for phenazepam, which showed a deviation of −15.1%.

Three replicates at each QC level (3 and 20 ng/mL) ineach matrix were analyzed after storage in the freezer for 3 and 5 days, using freshly prepared calibrators for calibration in each stability assessment test. All compounds remained stable for 3 days, with measured concentrations ranging within ± 14.7% compared to the concentrations of freshly prepared QC samples. However, stability after 5 days showed slightly higher deviations, with concentrations ranging within ± 15.6%.

To evaluate the stability of each compound in methanol, both QC levels (3 and 20 ng/mL) were analyzed directly after preparation in six replicates of each concentration level and after 6 months of storage in the freezer (−80°C). After storage, neither QCL nor QCH showed any significant deviations, with concentrations remaining within ± 13% compared to Day 0.

The results showed that all of the analytes remained stable after three freeze–thaw cycles over three consecutive days, with recovery rates within ± 15% of the initial concentration on Day 0. This indicates that the three repeated freeze–thaw cycles did not significantly impact the concentration for any of the compounds.

To evaluate the ruggedness of the method, the sample preparations were carried out by three different chemists. Moreover, the mobile phases were prepared using multiple lots, and two different batches of chromatographic columns were utilized throughout the entire validation process to ensure robustness.

The results demonstrated that the liquid handling robot provided consistent performance in automated sample preparation. The imprecision and accuracy for the QC samples were ≤ 4.0% and ± 13.4%, respectively, which indicated higher analytical performance as compared to manual sample preparation. Additionally, the continuous monitoring of QC data over 6 months remained within ± 10.6% for both the methods. Good linearity was achieved for all compounds over the measurement range (1–25 ng/mL) withR2≥ 0.99 and the back‐calculated concentration ± 15% (± 20% for Calibrator 1). These results support and confirm the accuracy and reliability of the automated method.

The developed and fully validated methods have been successfully applied in our laboratory for routine drug testing since March 2024. The samples analyzed were collected from workplace drug testing programs and outpatient psychiatric and addiction clinics in the Stockholm area of Sweden. The cutoff limits used in these methods were determined based on routine drug testing of OF samples from patients suspected of using illicit drugs. Currently, there are no standardized cutoff limits for drugs in OF; however, several recommendations have been proposed by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) for workplace testing, as well as by European guidelines for workplace drug testing in OFs [46,60]. The cutoff limit of 1 ng/mL for saliva/buffer solution was primarily selected based on the sensitivities of the analytical methods employed, as well as the advantage of maintaining a low and consistent cutoff value for all compounds when handling results. In general, OF samples with high drug concentrations exceeding the linear range were not diluted and reanalyzed, as only qualitative determinations were reported. Additionally, no samples were overloaded on the LC‐MS system to the extent that they failed to meet the MS identity criterion. A total of 3050 samples were screened over a period of 3 months using LC‐MS/MS, with 87.5% returning negative results and 12.5% positive.

Out of the screening positive samples, 0.8% were present in very low concentrations close to cutoff values and were confirmed with concentration levels slightly below cutoff due to the methods imprecision. Figure8a,bshows the distribution of positive LC‐MS/MS screening findings per sample during a 3‐month period. The relatively large percentage of buprenorphine (18%) positive findings was expected, as most of the samples were sent to the laboratory from a drug rehabilitation program. Positive findings of these substances reflect their use in opioid substitution therapy within opioid substitution clinics. Additionally, the use of amphetamines (49%) might be attributed partly to the use of amphetamine for treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and attention deficit disorder (ADD). The use of THC (20%) seems also to be widespread among the users of illicit drugs in Sweden. Occurrence of OF samples with polydrug was common, and 37% of the positive samples contained ≥ 2 drugs (Figure9).

(a, b) The distribution of positive findings screened by LC‐MS/MS positives during a period of 3 months.

Number of positive findings per sample screened positive by LC‐MS/MS.

Many specimens received at the laboratory were screened using an immunoassay based on Homogeneous Enzyme Immunoassay (HEIA) from Immunalysis (Immunalysis Corporation, CA, United States) because the number of samples reached a level that overloaded the LC‐MS/MS capacity of the laboratory due to the limited number of LC‐MS/MS systems available. In comparison to the LC‐MS/MS methods, the cutoff levels in the immunoassay are much higher due to the challenges in achieving the sensitivity required for the detection of drugs in OF. Our analytical laboratory approaches OF testing with preliminary screening using immunoassay, followed by confirmation of presumptively positive results using LC‐MS/MS, as another confirmatory technique is required according to EWDTS and SAHMSA [46,60].

A total of 15 742 samples were analyzed over the course of 3 months of which 0.5% were confirmed positives. All the positive samples from the immunoassay screening were confirmed with 28% false positives and 72% true positives. Due to the lower cutoff levels used in LC‐MS/MS, seven samples (1.8%) screened positive in the immunoassay and proved to be positive for additional drugs from the screenings panel when analyzed with MS, indicating a greater number of false negatives not being detected by the immunoassay. Although the immunoassay technique is very efficient and cost‐effective, it is still limited to the number of drugs to be detected compared to MS.

However, the development and implementation of a faster sample preparation method, such as SALLE, which allows for direct extract injection covering a wide drug panel, present a very attractive alternative that fulfills clinical healthcare needs. The use of an automated liquid handling system, the Microlab Star M from Hamilton, enabled a more ergonomic approach and high throughput of samples, with a preparation time of 30 min for a 96‐well plate. This resulted in minimizing the risk of human error and exposure to organic solvents. Moreover, the robotic method has been optimized to meet the necessary validation criteria. The performance of the method has also been evaluated by the analysis of internal QC samples after every ninth patient sample. Low and high QC samples for each analyte, analyzed during a 3‐month period, demonstrated low method imprecision (≤ 10%) and high accuracy (± 10.9%) for both the screening and confirmation methods. However, the minor differences in the results between the two methods can be explained by random variations in the measurements. The detailed data are provided in TableS7.

The aim of this study was to develop highly efficient screening and confirmation methods utilizing novel features in the sample preparation procedure and chromatographic conditions. A simple and rapid procedure was developed and fully validated for the simultaneous determination of 37 substances, including both illicit and legal drugs, in OF samples. Compared to previously published studies, the main advantages of the developed methods include easier and faster sample processing, a wide range of analytes covered, and high analytical sensitivity, as an organic extract of the diluted OF samples, is directly injected. The newly developed methods also demonstrated high accuracy, precision, and robustness during validation and routine use for all basic compounds, including both polar amphetamines and nonpolar THC and its analogs. Analyzing amphetamines, which are volatile compounds, and THC, which is highly lipid‐soluble, presents significant challenges, particularly when the extraction solvent must be evaporated and redissolved. Avoiding evaporation of the extracts in these methods proved highly beneficial for preserving volatile compounds, which was demonstrated for amphetamine and methamphetamine during validation, resulting in high extraction recovery, accuracy, and precision. An exclusion of the reconstitution step also offered an additional benefit, as redissolving highly lipophilic compounds such as THC is very problematic and may compromise quantitative results. Moreover, injecting saturated AcN extracts containing uncharged THC molecules decreases the solubility of the compound in the mobile phase, as the initial mobile phase composition is weaker than that of the injected AcN. This will reduce contact of basic lipophilic compounds (e.g., THC and HHC) with the chromatographic system components during injection and transfer into the stationary phase of the column, thereby minimizing potential losses of these compounds. The use of a silica‐modified stationary phase with a positive surface, combined with increased hydrophobicity of the compounds by altering the pH of the injected extract, provided the high chromatographic resolution necessary for comprehensive multicomponent analysis with high sensitivity and selectivity. Employing LC‐MS/MS for both screening and confirmatory methods, with a total run time of 5.2 min, effectively combines specificity and accuracy with high efficiency and throughput, thereby bridging the gap between the methods. The developed screening LC‐MS/MS has gained popularity compared to immunoassay screening, as it covers a wide panel of drugs and does not require confirmation in clinical routine due to its higher selectivity and sensitivity. Currently, these methods have become the preferred choice for DoA testing in OF among clinical services and WPDT. The newly developed sample preparation procedure may also be considered as a new general method for the simultaneous detection of a wide range of compounds with variable physicochemical properties, easily adaptable to include a growing number of synthetic cannabinoids and NPSs. Finally, the combination of this sample preparation procedure with the superior LC‐MS/MS technique, which offers inherent flexibility, can be easily adapted to other biomatrices such as urine, plasma, and blood, facilitating the expansion of analytical methods that are increasingly important in clinical and forensic investigations.

The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.

Table S1bGradient system used in the LC‐MS/MS screening method.

Table S3Linearity data for the confirmation method.

Table S5The data for precision and accuracy for screening and verification methods.

Table S7Low and high QC samples for each analyte, using screening and confirmation methods, during a period of three months.

Figure S1bThe EIC for all product ions and internal standards in the screening method for the 1 ng/mL calibrator.

Figure S1cThe EIC for all product ions and internal standards in the confirmation method for the 1 ng/mL calibrator.

Funding:The authors received no specific funding for this work.