Low‐value care (LVC) is increasingly the focus of debates on how to reduce the use of healthcare resources while maintaining quality care. General practitioners (GPs) are often considered central to this aim. Although GPs facilitate early disease detection, disease prevention and coordinated medical care, they must do so while aiming to protect both patients and the healthcare system from the harmful effects of medical overactivity. Public healthcare systems with gatekeeping practices, such as Denmark, lack many of the identified economic and structural incentives for LVC. Why then does LVC persist? Drawing on ethnographic observations and interviews with practising GPs, we explore how Danish GPs handle the difficult task of drawing a line between what requires medical attention and what should be left untreated or monitored. Our findings suggest that LVC literature may overlook the value of some interventions when used by GPs to improve patient trajectories over a longer term, maintain the relationship between patient and practitioner or balance the use of time and resources across the healthcare system. We clarify this point by unpacking the relational and context‐dependent work of GPs, which is central to their capacity to serve as trusted gatekeepers.

As the consultation progresses, the patient resists the GP's suggestion that the problem might not be physical. Instead, he asks for a referral to a cardiologist–an expensive and unnecessary escalation of care for a patient understood to be healthy. In previous sessions at the conference, speakers stressed that this approach may lead to overdiagnosis of abnormalities that do not need clinical attention. To help audience members practice avoiding unnecessary care, the GPs pause and ask us to continue the role‐play in small groups. We team up with an experienced Danish GP, Dr. Kenneth, who is familiar with the kind of patient portrayed in the role‐play: the ‘worried well’, as they are sometimes called. He agrees to play himself, and a woman seated beside us takes the role of the patient. The room fills with chatter as other groups begin. Unhurriedly, Dr. Kenneth turns to his patient. Gently, he asks what she's experiencing. She recites the list of symptoms and demands a referral. We expect Dr. Kenneth to respond with all the reasons this is unnecessary. Instead he listens attentively, warmly, his face unblemished by doubt. He asks if she has a family history of heart trouble and whether anything else is going on in her life. Her stance begins to soften. ‘I just want to be sure I'm okay’, she tells him. Dr. Kenneth nods slowly. ‘Let's have a look’, he says, adding: ‘One can never be entirely certain’.

Despite many years of research on how best to reduce medical overactivity, unnecessary testing and interventions remain a problem in primary care (Moriates2023). To understand how and why these issues persist, researchers have identified diverse drivers of medical overuse, including structural factors, patient resistance, lack of time and doctors' overreliance on ‘low‐value care’ (Caverly and Hayward2020; Verkerk et al.2022). Low‐value care (LVC) is defined in many ways, but it most commonly refers to ‘care that has limited benefits for patients, possibly harms them and stresses limited healthcare resources’ or care that has ‘little or no value to the patient’ (van Bodegom‐Vos and Marang‐van de Mheen2022, 1964–1965). LVC research focuses on identifying or typologising LVC by retroactively evaluating the efficacy—and thus value—of specific tests or treatments, such as MRI for new‐onset low back pain. Researchers also aim to develop de‐implementation strategies, which are tied to promises of delivering ‘only high‐value care’ to patients (Verkerk et al.2022, 1514). The latter points to a need to understand drivers of LVC—for instance, financial incentives associated with delivering particular forms of care, patient expectations, lack of time and fear of medical errors or malpractice—in order to systematically de‐implement them (Kroon et al.2022; Raudasoja et al.2024).

LVC has been identified as an intractable global problem and a driver of overdiagnosis, harm, costs within healthcare systems and carbon emissions (Barratt et al.2022). De‐implementation strategies are aimed at mitigating the effects of a global ‘system and culture that promote low‐value care’ including ‘the pharmaceutical and medical device industry, fear of malpractice litigation, biased evidence and knowledge, medical education and a “more is better” culture’ (Verkerk et al.2022, 1514). Thus, they pinpoint broadly recognisable factors or forces, such as economic incentives, laws and patient expectations, that play a role in systemically incentivising LVC. Yet, this framing remains agnostic about how particular instances of LVC take shape at the local level and how they differ across contexts.

In this paper, we draw on interviews with GPs and ethnographic observations to explore the complexities of identifying LVC in Danish primary care. By focusing on Denmark, we highlight the challenge of applying the notion of a global ‘system and culture’ driving medical overactivity to local contexts and infrastructures. Welfare states such as Denmark lack many of the incentives identified in the literature. Moreover, general practitioners work within a gatekeeping system, in which GPs are tasked with the complex and sometimes contradictory goals of caring for the patient by providing access to treatment while also caring for the healthcare system by limiting or titrating access to resources (Birk et al.2024). We explore how Danish GPs negotiate the use of LVC in a context‐dependent way, where examinations and testing can do important socially and clinically relevant ‘jobs’ other than—or in addition to—providing immediate clinical benefit for the patient. By examining such cases in our ethnographic research, we raise questions about whether the conceptualisation of value in LVC is sufficiently broad, and we point to the possibility that ambitions to eliminate all LVC may have unintended consequences for patients and healthcare systems. Finally, we call for greater nuance in de‐implementation literature through a closer examination of LVC in local contexts.

In our analysis, we build on scholarship on continuity of care, how GPs develop and maintain trusting relationships with patients in service of delivering efficacious and cost‐effective care (Brown et al.2020), and how GPs use ‘relational care’ to incorporate patients' circumstances into decision‐making to improve clinical outcomes (Shah et al.2023). This research suggests that the long‐term context of general practice positively affects patients' outcomes and well‐being and reduces healthcare costs (Maarsingh et al.2016; D. J. P. Gray et al.2018). However, these studies do not provide a mechanistic understanding of how continuity of care effectuates better outcomes and resource savings. Although these works take the perspective that good care facilitates the efficacy of interventions, we consider the inverse: namely, that interventions are also used to facilitate good care, depending on the context. This empirical work provides insight into why medical overactivity persists in gatekeeping healthcare systems, where structural incentives for LVC are greatly reduced.

GPs play a pivotal role in the Danish healthcare system's commitment to the efficient use of healthcare resources, undertaking preventive and curative measures to mitigate the necessity for hospitalisations and emergency visits. It is estimated that about 90% of all medical cases in Denmark are handled in primary care (Birk et al.2024) and that 99% of Danish residents are registered with a specific GP. GPs are gatekeepers for the healthcare system, deciding whether and which patients should receive treatments, tests or access to secondary care or specialists. Similar to other Nordic states, the Danish welfare system is funded through taxation. Most healthcare services are delivered free of charge, but there is a copayment on some services such as prescription drugs and adult dental care, which are reimbursed according to a sliding scale. Meanwhile, there is a strong political wish to strengthen the gatekeeping function of general practice as the use and costs of healthcare services have increased substantially.

Our research is based on material collected between 2020 and 2024, including analysis of 20 semi‐structured interviews with general practitioners in Denmark, 2 days of observation at a conference focused on reducing medical overactivity, 4 h of observations during consultations at a GP clinic and analysis of a policy report from the Danish Ministry of Health (Kommission for Robusthed i Sundhedsvæsenet2023). During observations, detailed fieldnotes were taken regarding subjects' interactions, tools and materials they used, paralinguistic cues and gestures and their setting and surroundings. These were converted into digital text for review. Taken together, these interviews and observations alerted us to how GPs perceive and attempt to mitigate medical overuse and how negotiations about testing and treatment play out in practice. Recruiting GPs for qualitative research is challenging in Denmark as GPs do not have officially available email addresses and experience high demand for research participation. Our recruitment strategy therefore relied on advertisements for participation on social media and via the research networks of the authors. The interviews have an equal gender distribution and variation in years of experience in general practice. We aimed for diversity in location and patient populations of GPs, but we ended up with more GPs from the capital region, which includes Copenhagen and its suburbs. For our purposes, this is not considered a disadvantage as the problem of reducing LVC is experienced as higher among patient groups with a higher average income.

We by no means take the results of our analysis to be representative of Danish GPs in general. As some GPs were recruited from a conference focused on reducing medical overactivity, it is likely that GPs with this interest are overrepresented. Although this makes the research less representative, it also makes the presence and utility of LVC in their practice even more surprising. We draw on their experiences to better understand the challenge of balancing patient demands, medical needs and the commitment to prioritise healthcare resources. All interviews were audio‐recorded and transcribed verbatim, and quotes were translated into English by the authors. Both authors read the interview transcripts closely in their entirety and discussed relevant themes as they emerged, then individually selected quotes and reviewed the results together. Analysis of the themes emerged through writing and further discussion. The ministry report was examined by the first author, who also reviewed the appendix and reference materials; selections from those documents were shared for discussion. All interview data have been collected through informed consent and handled in accordance with the EU General Data Protection Regulation. The project was approved by the ethics committee at the University of Copenhagen.

I visit Dr. Kenneth at his office a few weeks after the conference. He's in the exam room, tidying up after his final patient. He waves me in for our interview, still rummaging around the office. For the next hour, we discuss his work at his busy Copenhagen clinic, where he has practiced medicine for over twenty years. He explains how, in Denmark, people can't just show up at the hospital or specialist to be seen: they must be triaged by emergency services or sent by their own GP. On a day‐to‐day basis, he manages the complex work of differentiating among patients who will get better without intervention, who can be treated in the clinic, who can wait for a specialist, or who should be attended to urgently in secondary care.

Given that Danish GPs can simply refuse to give patients a referral, test, or treatment they judge to be unnecessary, I'm surprized when Dr. Kenneth says that his job is to be ‘honest and caring’, and to ensure that his patients feel taken seriously. He continues, ‘I have a lot of mundane consultations. Mundane in the sense that there's nothing dangerous going on [with the patient]. But they're worried. And I need to have the kind of expertise where I can safely say ‘there's no reason to be examined further’. […] The other important thing is—‘if I can hold people on this side of the line’. Dr. Kenneth clasps his hands together and slices through the air to indicate the invisible line. ‘Here we have the healthy and fit, the normal people, the primary health sector. Little things, things that are not serious—that's here. On the other side of the border—’ Dr. Kenneth chops the air again, ‘—there you are inside the hospital system, and there you are an ill, ill person. You have an illness’.

Similar to other GPs we met, Dr. Kenneth put significant effort into avoiding unnecessary treatment. He places his work at the border between primary and secondary care, keeping healthy patients well and connecting the truly ill with secondary services. As Dr. Kenneth describes it, triaging patients in primary care keeps healthy people from usurping the costly and limited attention of specialists, controls escalation to more invasive healthcare services and thus may help reduce medical overactivity. Similarly to initiatives aimed at reducing LVC, gatekeeping is oriented towards a vision of healthcare as both a scarce resource and a pharmakon—that which is helpful at the right dose and harmful at the wrong dose.

Dr. Kenneth's vision of a clear‐cut distinction between primary and secondary care is often invoked in gatekeeping practices. Particularly for ‘worried well’ patients, gatekeeping is both an affective and economic activity. To effectively ‘hold the line’, GPs like Dr. Kenneth must balance what a patient wants (e.g., ‘personalised value’), the potential efficacy of a test or treatment (‘technical value’) and the ‘allocative value’ of that decision: How granting a particular resource to a particular patient weighs against the cost of using up that good in an environment of scarcity (M. Gray et al.2017). The practice of gatekeeping is thus a way of ‘extend[ing] population‐level allocation concerns to interactions between an individual doctor and patient’, which entails broadening the scope of GPs' ethical responsibility from the good of the patient to the good of the patientandsociety (Moleman et al.2022, 1–3). In Denmark thus far, trust in healthcare (and in GPs) remains high, even though patients are aware that GPs may deny them desired or potentially efficacious care. However, this trust is not unconditional, and gatekeeping can invite speculative ire from patients who wonder whether they were denied a test or treatment based solely on cost.

In primary care, gatekeeping is a practice that mobilises a set of interpersonal and medical tools to avoid unnecessary escalation while maintaining trust and keeping patients involved and invested in their care. Critical to this is the time‐consuming work of ‘relational care’, which includes listening to patients' worries and adapting care to patients' unique backgrounds and preferences (Shah et al.2023). Like Dr. Kenneth, many GPs insisted that their foremost obligation was to listen in ways that gave patients the feeling of being taken seriously. Although Dr. Kenneth's ‘line’ suggests a border separating those who receive treatment from those who do not, in practice, GPs take care to avoid giving patients the sense that they were being kept out of care. During observations, we found that layered into exchanges of information, examinations and the provision of resources, GPs seemed closely attuned to patients' affective level of concern (e.g., how worried or sceptical they were) and attempted to attenuate that worry to preserve a cooperative, open dynamic. GPs described offering many different forms of assurance to patients, including affective reassurance (e.g., ‘I'm not worried’), additional explanations, follow‐up visits and (as we will describe in the following section) medical care, tests or treatments, which intersected or overlapped with the work of diagnosis. These affect‐full exchanges—in which patients air their worries and GPs listen, examine, ask questions, give explanations and reassure themselves and their patients—created a foundation from which GPs felt they were better able to persuade patients away from unnecessary tests or treatment.

In particular, GPs described the critical role of time in managing patient worries and uncertainty in primary care: They use consultation time to explore the depth of patients' worries and reduce diagnostic uncertainty by observing whether symptoms and worries persist over time. The goal is to keep patients' worries tolerable long enough to determine if intervention is necessary. For instance, many GPs described postponing interventions by offering a new appointment in a few days. This was intended to avoid acting prematurely on uncertain symptoms or signs while assuring patients that they would be fully heard if they continued to experience symptoms or worries, a strategy described as the ‘test of time’ in Irving and Holden's (2013) analysis of UK general practice.3One GP described this as a pedagogic tool—that is, asking patients to wait and see if things got better—as a way of demonstrating that the body could overcome minor symptoms on its own. Another GP explained that he sometimes offers ‘time‐delayed’ prescriptions (i.e., medicine to be picked up the next day only if symptoms persisted) for overly concerned patients who would likely improve on their own. These, he explained, were almost never filled. Time‐delayed prescriptions fit the definition of LVC in the sense that they may be considered clinically unnecessary. Yet, the GP sees this as a means of moderating the risk of overuse while maintaining a trusting relationship with the patient.

GPs explained that failing to successfully reassure patients can have consequences for both patients' health and the healthcare system. Even when patients turned up with a complaint that was not medically significant, which one GP estimated comprised 80%–90% of his work, GPs resoundingly agreed that it was always ‘good to have that chat’. This is, GPs explained, both because patients themselves often cannot know whether their complaint is medically serious and because patients who felt adequately listened to and understood would be more likely to return with new, potentially serious complaints and trust the advice or treatment offered (or not offered) in the future. When unnecessary treatment is avoided through a wait‐and‐see approach, Dr. Kenneth told us, ‘then I've done some good’. However, there is a cost when this does not work, he explained, with the risk that patients ‘doctor shop’ to find a GP who is willing to provide the desired test or treatment. In other words, maintaining a rigid stance on gatekeeping in the short term can be costly to both patients and the healthcare system in the long run.

Sometimes I ask them – I say, I can see in your eyes you're still worried. And then I might come up with some little test or whatever. And I tell them, we can take this so you are absolutely certain that everything is normal. So they don't call [urgent care] and have to be hospitalised because they had heart palpitations on a Saturday night […] So I think it's me who judges, on the whole, it's better to take this test now [rather] than that they have to take a bunch of tests later.

Thus, in cases where time and relational care have not closed the gap, weighing the harms and value of care becomes more complex. In the following section, we look more closely at the roles LVC comes to play in managing complex patient trajectories and gatekeeping in general practice.

Dr. Tim, a family physician in his 50s, switches on his computer at a clinic in rural Denmark, about an hour outside of Copenhagen. Through an open window, we hear the sounds of patients arriving and making their way to the clinic's entrance. Dr. Tim glances through his schedule and quickly scans the electronic patient record. A few seconds later, he's out the door to greet the first patient of the day.

Erik, a heavyset man in his 30s, enters, accompanied by his wife. His left eyelid is red and swollen, so inflamed that he can't open it. It's been like this for a few days. Erik gestures towards his wife, explaining that she insisted he come to the doctor. After a chat and examination, Dr. Tim offers to write a prescription for an antibiotic eyedrop. If there's an infection, Dr. Tim explains, it should soon clear up. After a moment, Eric tentatively asks, ‘I was hoping maybe you could just drain it?’ Dr. Tim nods amenably and responds: ‘You mean, take a needle and stick it in, and pus would come out?’ The gory image silences the room as we wonder what we're about to see. Then Dr. Tim continues, ‘Unfortunately, if I did that, only blood would come out’. Erik's wife lets out a relieved laugh, which soon spreads. Moments later, Erik and his wife are on their way out the door again. Once they've left, Dr. Tim explains that it is unlikely the eyedrops will help Erik. Out of 10 patients who use the drops, only a few will actually benefit. The rest will get better on their own. This, he says, is called the number needed to treat. This was also a topic at the medical conference, where presenters discussed the difficulty of explaining to patients that for many drugs, statistical benefits only begin to emerge when dozens of patients receive treatment. ‘But if it were me’, Dr. Tim says, turning back to the screen, ‘I would want the drops’.

While visiting Dr. Tim, we are curious about how GPs decide to offer treatment if they are not certain it will help. In Erik's case, a strategy aimed at reducing LVC might mean forgoing the antibiotic in favour of a wait‐and‐see approach. However, the number needed to treat was not Dr. Tim's only concern—so was Erik's trajectory as a patient in his clinic. GPs tell us that patients, such as Erik, who live in rural areas and are in poor overall health, are less likely to book follow‐up appointments, may delay care until they are much more ill, hold back important questions or relevant health information or decline treatment because they worry about wasting the doctor's time—decisions that may negatively affect their health, increase inequity and also increase future medical costs. The concern of wasting the GP's time is particularly salient in the Danish context, where patients are often reminded of their obligation to conserve healthcare resources; Erik insisted that his wife made him come and leaving without any treatment might suggest that the visit was indeed unnecessary. Taking into consideration the context of the patient, it is possible that erring on the side of conservation may ultimately create more harm than benefit. Although Erik's eye appeared incredibly painful, it is possible that his primary worry was whether his visit was merited. In caring for Erik as both a present and future patient, Dr. Tim might be wary of the risk that he will not come back if more serious symptoms arise.

Although LVC seems easy to measure retroactively, it is far more difficult to define which of GPs' myriad practices and strategies add up to health and economic benefits across years of care (Ljungholm et al.2022). Continuity of care—a hallmark of primary care—has been shown to improve health, reduce costs and reduce medical overactivity in the long run (Cabana and Jee2004; Barker et al.2017). This kind of relationship building is championed within Danish healthcare, in which primary care is the front line of an expansive medical system that reaches all residents in all corners of the country (J. K. Olsen and Kristensen2023). Maintaining relationships was important to many GPs we spoke with, including Dr. Hanne, a GP with 17 years of experience practising in a rural area, who told us that she cannot promise patients a cure, but she can promise to be ‘with [them] on the journey’. To do so, as we described in the previous section, GPs rely on a bricolage of approaches to build and maintain cooperative relationships, including practices that might be considered LVC.

From the moment the patients walk in the door, it is all about finding out what it is that they are wondering about. So it's one thing, what symptoms they have; it's quite another thing what they actually worry about. Because they can easily come in and say they have a sore throat. Then I look at their throat and say, well, you don't have strep throat. But if it's actually tonsil cancer they're worried about, because there's some uncle far removed who has it, then they won't be relieved just to be told they don't have strep throat, right? So, first of all, it's about aligning expectations. Then it's about doing an examination that they understand and that makes sense to them.

Here, communication and alignment refer to the relational work of ‘finding out what it is that [patients] … are actually worried about’ and then following with an investigation and solution that the patient will ‘understand and that makes sense to them’—in the space of 10 or 15 min. As we described in detail in the previous section, this entails listening to and reassuring patients, but very often, it also entails pairing a worry framed in medical terms with an approach that ‘makes sense’ to the patient as appropriately medically informed.

This bears upon Dr. Tim's exchange with Erik—a patient who was hesitant to accept medicine and yet was not informed that time was the likeliest cure. Dr. Tim's assessment of the patient's specific situation—his overall poor health, hesitance to make an appointment and clear desire for relief—informed a treatment approach that could be read as paternalistic and low value or personalised and equitable. Although a more robust ethical reflection on this specific dilemma is beyond the scope of this paper, the case illustrates that immediate clinical outcome is not the only concern or benefit GPs have in mind when offering intervention.

[I say], ‘Let's try with the two drugs there are. Can we get you feeling better?’ And if people think they're getting better, that's fine. We didn't do any harm. Many come back and say that there is no difference, [so they realize] they have to go and live with this disease as it is. […] And then they might live easier with chronic pain, because we have tried the medicine. […] Or maybe they get a little better. But in terms of the side effects–and you have to take it for the rest of your life? No thanks.

To build a model of understanding and find the right treatment, Dr. Hanne lets patients try different approaches. In addition to the chance that the medication will help, she sees a benefit in allowing the patient to see that the medicine does not work or that it comes with intolerable side effects—in other words, to experience for themselves the limits of medicine. The outcome, she says, is that patients ‘live easier’ with their illness after seeing the scope of their injury in a scan or finding out that a medication does not help. This way of practising conflicts with official guidelines she values, follows and contributes to as an advisor to the Danish Health Authority. Yet, in her view, it gives patients a better understanding of their bodies and disease, keeps them engaged in care and in many cases leads to discarding an unhelpful treatment.

Sometimes you can get away with just looking them in the eye and just, you know, listening to the heart. But sometimes it can be harder to convince the patient that there's nothing wrong with them. And then, yeah, sometimes I also [order] blood tests. But it's… it does serve a purpose. It's also for me to feel more certain in my assessment.

Once many years ago, during such a conversation, I decided we should probably get a blood test. And that blood test showed […] he actually had an elevated metabolism, which also causes the palpitations and the feeling of anxiety. It wasn't the only explanation, but it did increase his anxiety. It's something I experience maybe one out of a few hundred times. So the risk of overlooking something is very small. But […] it would be stupid to overlook an infection, an anemia, a metabolism that is too high. And therefore, I take [a test] without thinking that it is. And even though it's only a small risk, we have to rule it out.

Although the blood test is unlikely to result in clinical benefit, to Dr. Kenneth, it has clear advantages for mitigating uncertainty and meaningfully engaging with the patient. This suggests that some LVC serves the purpose of assuring both the GP that they have not missed something important and convincing the patient that they are receiving the right care. These are not medical outcomes, but they are not trivial. To GPs, this style of managing resources produced value in terms of potential clinical relevance, facilitating patient trajectories, protecting more costly medical services, providing what felt to GPs such as good care and maintaining relationships with patients that would support a continuation of efficacious care.

When we asked GPs directly whether they used LVC, they explained that their approach to care was grounded in properly diagnosing or producing beneficial biomedical outcomes. Some described occasionally acquiescing to patients' demands for unnecessary testing when they were tired, behind schedule or when patients continued to insist despite many efforts to dissuade them. One GP told us that she tried to avoid LVC, but given the pressure of time and resource constraints, ‘it's just not so simple. [Sometimes] it's easier to give the patient what they want’. Frustrated by this challenge, she also attended the workshop on medical overuse to hear how other GPs manage these situations. Although admissions of this type were rare in our study, they suggest that GPs sometimes use LVC to manage conflicting priorities, for example, the insistent patient in the consultation room who takes time away from the patients in the waiting room or their waning energy and a packed schedule. GPs can thus face a difficult dilemma: They are encouraged to reduce LVC to optimise services and free up healthcare resources, but doing so requires resources in terms of time and energy to explain to patients why a test is not recommended.

In the previous sections, we explored how GPs manage the complex task of striking a balance between providing care, managing worry and uncertainty and safeguarding both patients and the healthcare system from the adverse consequences of excessive medical intervention. They navigate these tensions through a combination of medical expertise, relational work (Shah et al.2023; Bandelj2020) and interventions that sometimes fit the definition of LVC. Our empirical material points to the need for renewed focus on how GPs' management of patient concerns affects the broader healthcare economy4and to an important misalignment between how GPs care for patients in practice and how value is defined in LVC literature.

Our observations suggest that the value of care resists a simple quantitative definition. Current definitions of LVC frame the value of medical care as primarilytechnicalor how efficacious and cost‐effective it is within a set period of time (M. Gray et al.2017). This fails to capture important ways in which medical interventions accrue value differently in different contexts. In Denmark, we observed that GPs who are interested in reducing medical overactivity sometimes use LVC to achieve what they considered the best possible trajectory for a specific patient. Rather than focusing only on immediate clinical relevance, these GPs extended their notion of value to include a broader temporal, structural and affective horizon of good care. Although they acknowledged that some LVC can and should be avoided, the same interventions can also be used to facilitate good care. Primary care entails inherent diagnostic uncertainty about complex and often nonspecific symptoms, and distinguishing between LVC on paper and in practice can be difficult. This perspective offers insight into why educational efforts to reduce LVC often fall short (Soong and Shojania2020) and why eliminating LVC may make sense in policy but prove counterproductive.

A reconceptualisation of LVC should consider how the value of an intervention is affected by the social and structural context of the healthcare system and individual patient. Our empirical material, for instance, shows that tests and treatments fitting the definition of LVC play a role in effective gatekeeping. Although the gatekeeping metaphor suggests a simplistic, spatial dichotomy of ‘in’ or ‘out’, gatekeeping also has temporal, affective and managerial components. GPs attend to complex ‘care‐objects’—the persons, parts, ideas, structures, resources and pathways that are enacted by caregiving and towards which the work of care is oriented (Mol2008; Kajamaa2010). Patients who are kept ‘out’ at one door may find other, more costly and potentially harmful paths ‘in’, for instance, by going to a private clinic or calling the acute care number. GPs used tests and treatments to avoid more costly and potentially harmful escalation of care, to keep vulnerable patients engaged in continuous care and to preserve their own ability to work effectively within time and resource constraints. This suggests that GPs' perception of value is informed by a dynamic understanding of clinical outcomes, patient preferences, healthcare infrastructures and resource management specific to working within a gatekeeping system.

Although we acknowledge that reducing ineffective care is important for both patients and healthcare systems, our findings call for more nuanced understanding of the diverse and context‐dependent ways value is created. However, healthcare policies increasingly adopt the more technical definition of value, and thus LVC is made instrumental to the ambition of cutting costs by eliminating care that does not improve near‐term clinical outcomes. Our empirical examples provide insight into the difficulty of drawing a sharp line between healthcare that is valuable and unnecessary and to the importance of reconceptualising LVC to account for context.

Current approaches to understanding ‘too much medicine’ point to structural factors, such as reimbursement models, as well as medical education and patient expectations as drivers for unnecessary care (Caverly and Hayward2020; Verkerk et al.2022). From this perspective, reducing LVC is a matter of providing better information to doctors and patients and modifying guidelines or policies to curtail medical interventions with limited benefit. The failure of these initiatives to eliminate LVC has resulted in calls for policy change and ‘forcing functions and automation’ to reduce LVC (Soong and Shojania2020, 354). In Denmark, this would mean curtailing the flexibility of GPs to initiate medical interventions that are considered to be low value.

We have argued that Danish GPs sometimes employ interventions that would be considered LVC by standard definitions, yet they do so with the aim of achieving good outcomes for patients and maintaining low costs for the healthcare system. These practices unfold within the context of a welfare state with a gatekeeping system, in which GPs often maintain long‐term contact with patients—a context that differs considerably from other models of healthcare systems, such as the United States. The Danish healthcare system lacks many of the identified structural drivers of LVC, and physicians and patients share a well‐established moral obligation to conserve healthcare resources. In addition to this, we have argued that the concept of LVC fails to fully account for different forms of value GPs administer in relation to society and the healthcare system. GPs in gatekeeping systems must consider possible long‐term trajectories of patients that may respond in different ways to the hesitancy of providing requested examinations or tests, and they are tasked with managing a broad set of medical, social and systemic concerns, which unfold across time and vary by context. They are also sensitive to resolving patient worries in a way that keeps them engaged in care and maintains trust.

What are the consequences of de‐implementation strategies that fail to take these practices into account? Let us elaborate on this with an example. The conceptualisation of LVC as a global phenomenon suggests that the value of care can be determined independent of context. This became apparent in Denmark in 2022, when the Danish Ministry of Health and Interior Affairs authorised a 200‐page ‘robustness report’ of the Danish healthcare system, which drew heavily from international studies of medical overactivity and LVC. The report included a widely publicised estimate that ‘15%–30% of the activities in the Danish healthcare sector are inappropriate or irrelevant’, meaning that they have little effect on the patient, potentially do ‘more harm than good’ and should be considered unnecessary (Kommission for Robusthed i Sundhedsvæsenet2023, 70–71; authors' translation). Although the research cited in relation to this figure was not conducted in Denmark, the report relied on international research to help generate a ‘rough estimate’ of overuse in Denmark (ibid.).

The report was positively received by experts, who acknowledged the need to prioritise evidence‐based distribution of healthcare resources. However, our analysis suggests that operationalising a narrow concept of value risks cutting too close to the bone for both patients and the healthcare system. For instance, the robustness report cited a systematic review of majority US‐based studies to determine that ‘imaging for non‐specific lower back pain’ is ‘most often of low value’ (ibid.).5This point was highlighted widely in national news media, including a newspaper article reporting that patients with back pain do not benefit from MRIs, and some clinics specialising in back pain have already reduced their usage of these scans (Würtz and Heissel2023). The article also included an interview with a patient who was diagnosed with a herniated disc and whose request for an MRI was rejected. In this case, the patient decided to schedule an MRI at a private clinic by using her supplementary health insurance (SHI). In the interview, she explained that it was important for her to see an image of the herniated disc to better understand the source of pain, what she could do to improve it and to maintain hope that it would get better.

This example further illustrates the challenge of reducing LVC broadly without risking the trust of patients—something that GPs seemed attuned to disambiguating on a case‐by‐case basis. Moreover, it shows how initiatives to reduce LVC can result in the unintended consequence of stimulating the market for private health insurance (and in some cases also the use of alternative treatments). Reliance on SHIs is a concern for GPs as private systems may drain healthcare personnel from the public healthcare system and GPs associate SHIs with inequality and risks of overtreatment. Thus, what appears to be a straightforward decision at the policy level to reduce waste without affecting clinical endpoints is more complex from the perspective of the patient or GP, because both might consider alternative access routes and long‐term effects of stricter gatekeeping. A closer look at the relationship between gatekeeping and (reduction of) LVC is thus a pressing issue.

We take Dr. Kenneth's suggestion that ‘one can never be entirely certain’ as a reminder of the limits of medicine and metrics intended to measure its value. By limiting the value of care practices to immediate and direct clinical outcomes, the current LVC framework implicitly limits the purpose of healthcare to the short‐term resolution of specific complaints. As we have argued, when good and cost‐effective care is measured only in this way, important parts of the picture are missing. Our aim has been to draw attention to the important roles that both relational and medical practices play in clinical contexts that address patients' worries, promote trust and cooperation, facilitate gatekeeping, help patients understand their bodies and diseases and may result in beneficial clinical outcomes and conservation of resources. In such contexts, some forms of LVC can play a constructive role for both doctor and patient—a process that seems to perform critical, yet less measurable, functions in healthcare. We argue that this calls for a reconceptualisation of LVC that more explicitly accounts for contextual factors that affect value and perceptions of good care.