Immunochemotherapy has demonstrated high cure rates in primary mediastinal large B‐cell lymphoma (PMBCL). Recent findings from the IELSG 37 study show that certain specific dose‐dense treatment regimens are more likely to eliminate the need for consolidative radiation therapy, thereby reducing long‐term toxicity. Here, we report our experience with DA‐R‐EPOCH in a cohort of 70 patients treated at our cancer center. This retrospective, observational, single‐center study includes patients treated between 2013 and 2021. Treatment response was evaluated using positron emission tomography‐computed tomography (PET‐CT) scans and assessed according to the Deauville Score. With a median follow‐up of 36.4 months, 29% of patients achieved a complete metabolic response (CMR) on interim PET‐CT, while 71% achieved CMR at the end of treatment. Despite these results, 3‐year overall survival (OS) and progression‐free survival (PFS) rates were 99% and 93%, respectively. Our findings highlight the importance of tailoring treatment regimens, allowing for reduced reliance on consolidative therapies in line with recent advancements. Notably, none of the patients who achieved CMR on interim PET‐CT experienced relapse, and no disease progression was observed beyond 1 year after completing DA‐R‐EPOCH. Additionally, our results indicate that dose intensification beyond level 2 does not appear to improve survival, emphasizing the important implications for minimizing treatment‐related toxicity. We also analyzed the management and outcomes of refractory and relapsed cases, underscoring the challenges in treating non‐responding patients identified by interim PET‐CT, the limited efficacy of salvage immunochemotherapy, and the interesting role of radiation therapy in these cases.

Mediastinal Large B‐cell Lymphoma (PMBCL) is a rare (< 5%) subtype of B‐cell lymphoma [1,2]. Its pathological and clinical features, along with its gene expression signature and mutational landscape, overlap with those of nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin lymphoma (NS‐cHL), distinguishing PMBCL from other aggressive lymphomas, particularly Diffuse Large B‐cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) [3,4].

Originating from medullary thymic B‐cells, the malignant cells in PMBCL express B‐cell markers but may lack surface immunoglobulin. Most PMBCL cases are CD30‐positive (with weak and partial staining, unlike cHL) and CD23‐positive. Transcriptional profiling has shown reduced expression of B‐cell receptor signaling in PMBCL. Molecular alterations involve key signaling pathways, including constitutive activation of NF‐κB and JAK‐STAT deregulation [5]. Amplification of the 9p24.1 region is common and leads to increased expression of programmed cell death protein 1 ligands (PD‐L1/CD274) and PD‐L2, providing a genetic mechanism for immune escape [6,7,8]. Additional genetic alterations contributing to immune escape include loss of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II, as well as structural variants in the MHC class II transactivator that reduce MHC class II expression [9,10,11,12].

PMBCL is typically characterized by the rapid development of an anterior mediastinal mass, often complicated by compressive syndrome, pleural, or pericardial effusions. Advanced‐stage disease is less common in PMBCL (ranging from 9.3% to 42.5% [13,14,15,16,17]) compared to DLBCL. It most often occurs in young female patients during their third and fourth decades of life.

The optimal frontline treatment for PMBCL remains a subject of debate. Standard treatment with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone administered every 3 weeks (R‐CHOP21) with radiation therapy (RT) has been compared to more intensive regimens, such as Dose Adjusted Rituximab, Etoposide, Prednisone, Vincristine, Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubicin (DA‐R‐EPOCH) or R‐CHOP given every 2 weeks (R‐CHOP14). All of these regimens provide good disease control and prolonged overall survival. However, R‐CHOP21 without RT appears to yield inferior outcomes [14,18,19]. More intensive regimens have shown the potential to eliminate the need for consolidative RT in patients with complete metabolic response, as demonstrated by recent results from the IELSG 37 study [20]; a finding that aligns with previous research [21]. This is significant as it reduces the long‐term toxicities associated with treatment, especially in the younger, predominantly female population affected by PMBCL [22,23]. Nevertheless, many patients, including those with a Deauville Score (DS) of four to five at the end of treatment (EoT), may still experience good disease control with frontline therapy [24,25].

A small subset of patients will be refractory or eventually relapse after frontline treatment, with a poor prognosis [26]. Few of these patients will achieve a complete metabolic response (CMR) after salvage immunochemotherapy prior to high‐dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation (HDC/ASCT). Therefore, new therapeutic options, such as anti‐PD1 therapy, Brentuximab‐Vedotin, and Chimeric Antigen Receptor T‐cell (CAR‐T) therapy are of significant interest [27,28,29,30].

This manuscript presents our single‐center experience with the management of PMBCL, including patient characteristics, treatment approaches, response assessments, and long‐term outcomes. Additionally, we discuss the implications of these findings in the context of current clinical practice.

The database of the Institut Paoli Calmettes (Marseille, France) was reviewed to identify all newly diagnosed PMBCL patients aged ≥ 18 years who were treated at the center following the introduction of DA‐R‐EPOCH as the recommended treatment in our local guidelines in 2013. Dose adjustments were made according to the protocol described by Dunleavy et al. [13].

Medical records were thoroughly reviewed to ensure that clinical and pathological features aligned with the World Health Organization (WHO) classifications' criteria [31,32,33]. 18F‐FDG PET‐CT data were analyzed by one nuclear medicine physician (TR) using Siemens SyngoVia software. Metabolic Tumor Volume (MTV) was calculated using a supervised segmentation of the tumor regions, applying a 41% SUVmax threshold to automatically detected hypermetabolic areas [34]. The Total Metabolic Tumor Volume (TMTV) was defined as the combined metabolic volume across all individual lesions.

All patients were assessed by an interim (iPET‐CT) and an end of treatment (ePET‐CT) 18F‐FDG PET‐CT according to the Lugano criteria [35].

Survival probabilities were assessed from the start of treatment until the occurrence of the event of interest. For overall survival (OS), the event was death from any cause, and for progression‐free survival (PFS), the events included progression, relapse, second lymphoma treatment, or death. Patients who did not experience any event were censored at the date of their last contact. OS and PFS probabilities were calculated using the Kaplan‐Meier method, and univariate associations were evaluated using the log‐rank test. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA), with a nominal level of statistical significance (two‐tailed) set at 0.05.

We retrospectively collected the data from 74 patients with a diagnosis of PMBCL treated at our center between January 2013 and December 2021, (see Figure1; 4 patients excluded from analysis).

Flow chart. cHL, Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma; PMBCL, Primary Mediastinal B Cell Lymphoma.

The median follow‐up for these patients was 36.4 months (95% CI: [30.2–45.3]). The median age at diagnosis was 34.4 years, with 68% of patients being female. B symptoms were present in 40.3% of patients, while 79.2% had localized disease. Bulky disease was common, with 61.4% of patients presenting with a mass larger than 10 cm. Local extranodal involvement was observed in 23.6% of patients. Low International Prognostic Index (IPI) was observed in 72.9% of patients (see Table1).

Seventy patients (97.2%) received DA‐R‐EPOCH, with only 2 patients receiving an R‐CHOP21‐like treatment due to poor ECOG performance status. Debulking chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone—COP) was administered at the discretion of the treating physician to 21 patients (29.2%) prior to initiating frontline immunochemotherapy. Five patients (6.9%) received RT at the EoT—four for partial response at iPET‐CT and one for partial response at ePET‐CT. Additionally, five patients (6.9%) underwent consolidative HDC/ASCT. All consolidative therapies were performed between 2013 and 2016, with none administered thereafter.

The median follow‐up was 36.4 months (95% CI: 30.16–45.31). With only one death, related to lymphoma, the 3‐year OS rate was 99% (95% CI: 0.90–1) (see Figure2). After censoring patients with consolidative treatment, the results were found to be similar for those patients (98% (95% CI: 0.89–1)) (see Supporting InformationS1).

Overall Survival (OS) (A) and progression free survival (PFS) (B) for the whole Cohort treated with DA‐R‐EPOCH (70 patients).

Three patients experienced progression during treatment, and two relapsed after completing treatment. The 3‐year PFS rate was 93% (95% CI: 0.83–0.97) (93% [95% CI: 0.83–0.97] after censoring). Four out of the five patients who relapsed underwent a new biopsy to confirm the relapse. Two patients initially diagnosed and treated as PMBCL with DA‐R‐EPOCH were later reclassified as having Mediastinal Gray Zone Lymphoma (MGZL) with cHL features upon biopsy at relapse and were therefore excluded from this analysis.

An iPET‐CT was performed for all patients, with 44.3% undergoing it after 2 cycles and 1.4% after 4 cycles prior to 2018. After 2018, 54.3% of patients underwent iPET‐CT after 3 cycles, in accordance with our updated guidelines. Patients with a DS of 5 on iPET‐CT had significantly shorter PFS (p= 0.001; HR = 0.63 [95% CI: 0.23–0.86]) in univariate analysis. The same trend was observed for DS 5 on ePET‐CT, as shown in Figure3(p< 0.001; HR = 0.60 [95% CI: 0.13–0.88]).

Progression‐free survival (PFS) stratified by Deauville Score on (A) interim PET‐CT (iPET‐CT) and (B) end‐of‐treatment PET‐CT (ePET‐CT) of patients treated with DA‐R‐EPOCH.

Univariate analysis of other baseline characteristics (see Supporting InformationS1) revealed no significant impact on outcomes, except for the presence of pericardial effusion. The maximum dose level (≤ 2 or > 2) did not significantly influence outcomes (p= 0.125), nor did the IPI (≤ 1 or > 1) or NCCN‐IPI (≤ 2 or > 2), consistent with previous observations [19]. Due to the low number of events, multivariate analysis and a meaningful analysis of OS could not be performed.

Dose level adjustments were made according to the protocol outlined by Dunleavy et al. [13].

All patients received prophylactic medications, including Cotrimoxazole, Valaciclovir, and Granulocyte Colony‐Stimulating Factor. Blood counts were monitored once weekly. None of the 43 patients, for whom data was available, developed tumor lysis syndrome (TLS).

Hematological toxicity was the most common side effect, as defined by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, Version 5.0. Grade 4 neutropenia was the most frequent adverse event and the primary reason for not increasing the dose level, while grade 4 thrombocytopenia was rare.

Dose levels were never reduced due to grade 4 hematological toxicity. Only two patients required a dose reduction due to grade 3 mucositis, which necessitated prolonged hospitalization. Febrile neutropenia of grade ≥ 2 occurred in 29 out of 70 patients, while infectious complications of grade ≥ 2 were observed in 24 patients. No treatment‐related deaths occurred.

The median time from treatment onset to relapse or progression was 6.11 months (95% CI: [3.75–16.53]), with no relapses occurring beyond 12 months after the completion of treatment.

The first refractory patient initially had stage IAX disease and showed progression on ePET‐CT after achieving only DS 5 with PMR on iPET‐CT. A biopsy confirmed the progression. The patient received two salvage regimens—Rituximab‐Dexamethasone High‐dose Cytarabine (R‐DHAC) and Rituximab‐Ifosfamide Etoposide Cytarabine Methotrexate (R‐IVAM), but did not respond. He was subsequently referred for RT targeting the mediastinal mass (50 Gy) as a bridging treatment for Axi‐Cel, achieving good local control. Unfortunately, progression occurred at other sites before CAR T‐cells reinfusion in April 2020. After reinfusion, the patient experienced a slow but steady response and achieved an ongoing CMR after 7 months.

The second refractory patient had stage IIBX disease at diagnosis. The patient had progressive stage IA disease on ePET‐CT after achieving a DS 5 PMR on iPET‐CT. She subsequently received RT (28 Gy) and achieved DS 4 PMR at the EoT, remaining relapse‐free 20 months later.

The third refractory patient also had stage IIBX disease. She only achieved DS 5 stable disease on iPET‐CT. A new biopsy confirmed the diagnosis. Due to the high MTV, she was not eligible for RT. She then received four different treatments (R‐DHAC, Ifosfamide Carboplatin Etoposide [ICE], IVAM, Brentuximab‐Vedotin‐Doxorubicin Vinblastine Dacarbazine [BV‐AVD]), but eventually died from disease progression.

The first relapsed patient had stage IIAX (CNS‐IPI 1) disease and received consolidative RT due to a DS 4 PMR on both iPET‐CT and ePET‐CT. She experienced an isolated central nervous system (CNS) relapse, confirmed by biopsy, 4 months after the EoT. She then underwent high‐dose salvage treatment (Cyclophosphamide, Vincristine, Prednisone, Folinic Acid, Doxorubicin, Methotrexate/COPADM), which was unsuccessful. She was subsequently referred for palliative whole‐brain RT (dose unknown) and remained relapse‐free for 78 months.

The second relapsed patient had stage IIBX disease. She achieved a DS 4 PMR on iPET‐CT and a DS 3 CMR on ePET‐CT. Ten months later, she relapsed with stage IA mediastinal disease, confirmed by biopsy. She failed salvage therapy (R‐ICE) with local progression and received local RT, achieving CR before undergoing Axi‐Cel therapy in May 2021. She has remained relapse‐free since.

Our results confirm the efficacy and safety of DA‐R‐EPOCH as a frontline treatment for patients with PMBCL, with a 3‐year PFS of 93% and a 3‐year OS of 99%, consistent with previous studies [13,15,36,37,38,39,40] (see Supporting InformationS1). The main toxicities observed were in line with those reported in the literature [13,36,37,41,42]. Notably, no patients in our cohort developed TLS, and therefore, we do not routinely prevent nor monitor it. CNS relapse was rare (1 in 5), in line with previous studies, ranging from 2.9% to 37% [14,15,38,40].

No study has directly compared different intensive regimens, making it challenging to speculate on the superiority of one over another. Any comparison should also account for the associated toxicity. The IELSG37 trial prospectively evaluated the role of RT in patients achieving CMR after chemoimmunotherapy. The trial found no significant difference between the RT and observation groups, but it was not designed to assess the impact of different chemoimmunotherapies [20]. Nonetheless, the study highlighted the importance of intensive regimens compared to R‐CHOP21, in achieving EoT CMR [18,20], thereby reducing the need for RT. In the IELSG37 trial, patients treated with R‐CHOP21 had a higher risk of a DS of 5 (25%), whereas regimens like DA‐R‐EPOCH had a DS 5 rate of less than 10%. In our cohort, 7.3% of patients had a DS 5 (see Figure4). Other studies have similarly demonstrated the benefits of more intensive regimens for better disease control [14,19,37]. The LYSA group reported retrospective outcomes from both clinical trials [19] and real‐world settings [14]. The R‐ACVBP and R‐CHOP14 regimens showed superior PFS and OS when compared to R‐CHOP21. The R‐CHOP14 regimen in these studies showed promising results, with a 3‐year PFS of 89.4% and 3‐year OS of 100% [14], and a 4‐year PFS of 78% and 4‐year OS of 89% [19]. However, 31.6% and 14.5% of these patients received consolidative HDC/ASCT or RT. In contrast, only 6.9% of our cohort received consolidative HDC/ASCT, and 6.9% received RT. This reflects the refinement of our treatment guidelines after 2017, incorporating PET‐CT assessments without compromising outcomes. Consequently, it is difficult to conclude that R‐CHOP14 is non‐inferior to other intensive regimens.

Interim and end of treatment (EOT) PET‐CT response according to the Deauville Score (70 patients treated with DA‐R‐EPOCH). iPET‐CT, Interim positron emission tomography—computed tomography (PET‐CT); ePET‐CT, end of treatment PET CT.

In our cohort, there was no significant difference in outcomes between patients who received a higher dose of treatment (dose level ≤ or > 2;p= 0.125). A similar report [15] showed comparable results with dose levels ≤ or > 3. These findings are notable because they suggest that dose escalation can be mitigated to reduce toxicity while maintaining efficacy. Of particular interest, none of the patients (29%) who achieved a CMR on the iPET‐CT relapsed, demonstrating an excellent negative predictive value (100% for iPET‐CT and 98% for ePET‐CT), consistent with other studies [24,39]. This observation allows for safely omitting ePET‐CT in patients with a CMR and potentially avoiding unnecessary treatments and escalating doses in this subgroup.

In contrast, all patients with R/R disease had a positive iPET‐CT according to the Deauville Score. A DS of 5 at the end of treatment was associated with a higher risk of relapse, but this also highlights the poor positive predictive value of a DS of 4 or 5, as only 6.7% of patients with DS 4% and 40% with DS 5 experienced relapse or progression [15,25]. This underscores the need for a new core or excisional biopsy before initiating second‐line treatments, whenever possible, to rule out residual inflammation and/or fibrosis [24,43]. In our experience, larger resections are preferable since smaller biopsies often yield necrotic tissue or inflammation, which can be misleadingly reassuring. Systematic biopsies also help refine the diagnosis. Two patients were found to have MGZL with cHL features at relapse.

If an excisional biopsy is not feasible, we suggest two approaches. For patients with a DS of 4, “watch and wait” or serial PET‐CT scan at 3‐month are reasonable options. For patients with a DS of 5, consolidative RT to the residual lesion should be considered to avoid the need for more aggressive salvage treatments. Among other baseline parameters, only the presence of pericardial effusion was associated with worse PFS in univariate analysis, a finding also reported in other studies [14,44].

Another noteworthy practical finding is that none of the R/R patients relapsed beyond 1 year after completing treatment, consistent with other observations [39].

Finally, our experience in managing R/R patients highlights the interesting role of RT whenever feasible, as emphasized by others [15,45]. Indeed, among the four patients who received RT, two were cured, and one achieved a CMR before undergoing CAR T‐cell therapy. Currently, there is no standard treatment for patients ineligible for RT. Our data also underscores the poor efficacy of immunochemotherapy in the salvage setting, with no response observed in the four patients who received it, consistent with findings from another group [26]. One study reported interesting outcomes, but 57% of the patients had not received Rituximab as part of their frontline treatment, and 87% had also received RT prior to HDC/ASCT [46]. While HDC/ASCT can be highly effective [45], achieving a metabolic response beforehand remains a challenge. Two trials [27,28] have demonstrated the potential of anti‐PD‐1 monoclonal antibodies, with overall response rates ranging from 48% in monotherapy to 73.3% when combined with anti‐CD30 antibody‐drug conjugates (Brentuximab‐Vedotin). Some reports also suggest that this combination could be useful as a bridging therapy [47]. The use of CAR‐T in R/R PMBCL shows promise, but clinical trial data remains limited and mostly comes from retrospective series [29,30,48]. Currently, there is no consensus on the optimal consolidative strategy following response induction. Based on our experience, the salvage approach for advanced disease, when RT is not feasible, involves combining Brentuximab Vedotin and Nivolumab before proceeding to consolidative treatments, including RT, CAR T‐cell therapy, or HDC/ASCT.

Despite the retrospective nature of our study and its inherent limitations, DA‐R‐EPOCH remains a safe and effective treatment for newly diagnosed PMBCL, curing most patients without the need for consolidative RT. Our data indicate no survival difference between patients treated with dose levels ≤ 2 or > 2. Therefore, dose escalation may not be necessary for patients achieving CMR in iPET‐CT. Additionally, in patients achieving CMR with a DS of 1–3, the ePET‐CT can be safely omitted. Furthermore, our findings highlight the importance of performing an excisional biopsy to confirm relapse and rule out differential diagnoses such as MGZL before initiating second‐line treatment. Finally, our study emphasizes the interesting role of RT in managing R/R patients. However, there is a need for more accurate tools to better discriminate between patients with a DS of 4–5. As such, our future work will focus on identifying improved PET‐CT metrics for PET‐positive patients.