Athlete development is considered a multi‐factorial and dynamic overtime process. Thus, understanding what factors and behavioural activities contribute most to development is important. The present study examined longitudinal relationships between training time and maturity status with physical performance indices in youth volleyball players. Prospective mixed longitudinal tracking over 3 years. Participants wereN= 78 selected male volleyball players, aged 11–15 years (M= 13.81,SD= 1.20 years) fromN= 41 competitive Swiss clubs. Alongside coach‐reported weekly training time, participants completed standardised anthropometric and physical performance tests (e.g., standing long jump [SLJ]; 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint). Linear mixed models (LMM) examined longitudinal independent and interacting relationships between training time and maturity status (years from peak height velocity; PHV) with physical performance. For SLJ, both training time and maturity status explained curvilinear longitudinal performance development, but nonlinear maturation status interactions were most influential, moderating relationships. In agility sprint, similar trends were apparent, with training time influences diminishing when maturity status was added in LMM analyses. Across time points of maturational growth, increased training engagement was not associated with enhanced physical performance benefits, whereas maturational status progression better accounted for performance differences and development. For coaches and sports‐science practitioners, findings question the rationale for heightened training engagement at circa‐PHV directed towards physical performance development purposes, a recommendation aligned with the need for maturational‐growth associated injury prevention. Instead, due to musculoskeletal and proprioceptive disturbance during maturational growth, training emphasis on technical/biomechanical skill acquisition remains important.

Coaches and sports‐science practitioners need to recognise that a significant proportion of physical performance development could be attributed to inter‐individual maturity‐related processes rather than training hours in standard volleyball field test performance.

Coaches and sport‐science practitioners should understand that, during maturation and the associated heightened growth period (PHV), comparable rates of physical performance improvement may be achieved with reduced training hours. As a result, findings question practitioner decision‐making and rationale for increasing training time for physical performance development purposes at circa‐PHV.

Early sporting engagement intensification (i.e., associated with higher training hours in a single sport context) focused on physiological capabilities (not skill acquisition per se) during maturation may be less valuable for longitudinal progression.

Optimal athlete development is considered a multi‐factorial, nonlinear, overtime process, occurring without deleterious consequences (e.g., physical injury and mental health problems—Cobley et al.2021). As such, identifying key factors, among a possible array, which independently and/or interactively account for more optimised rates of development, is valuable to identify from a research perspective and is informative for professional practice (Den Hartigh et al.2018). At earlier age stages of athlete development, two factors (1) exposure to accumulated structured training (Robinson et al.2022) and (2) biological growth and maturation have been identified as influential to both skill and physiological‐based performance development (Meylan et al.2010; Sieghartsleitner et al.2019). In fact, both commonly underpin performance indice developments (e.g., lower/upper limb capability, sprint speed and endurance) during adolescence (Towlson et al.2018), have been shown to affect athlete evaluation or selection (e.g., maturity bias—Abbott et al.2021), and therefore, affect coach/practitioner decision‐making (Leyhr et al.2023). However, the question remains whether there is a consistent benefit from accumulated training independent of maturation in youth performance contexts.

Within skill‐acquisition and expertise‐based literature, the accumulated time spent invested in task‐specific training (e.g., deliberate practice or otherwise) has consistently been associated with skill development, contributing towards performance in artistic and sport‐associated tasks (Ericsson and Harwell2019; Ericsson et al.1993). Thus, recommendations to maximise training exposure from early ages have intuitive, heuristic appeal and have been generally reinforced by sporting organisations or within coaching practice. That said, depending on the sport task in question and developmental time points considered, the training requirements for skill‐based and physiologically based development may differ and change along with the potential contribution of underpinning factors. For instance, within physiologically based literature examining physical performance tasks, meta‐analytical studies of youth samples have illustrated the beneficial effects of increased training parameters on performance (e.g., session duration and frequency—Lambert2016). In power‐based sports (e.g., volleyball, athletics and basketball), J. Moran et al. (2017) and J. J. Moran et al. (2017) identified how increased training duration (in weeks; > 8 weeks) led to larger performance gains in sprint velocity (ES = 2.06) and countermovement jump (ES = 5.04 – J. Moran et al.2017; J. J. Moran et al.2017). Meanwhile, training frequency (sessions per week; ES = 0.29‐1.53) and volume (i.e., distance covered/training session; ES = 0.80‐0.94) were—although to a lesser extent also associated with performance gains (Engel et al.2018). However, interestingly, development gain effect sizes also varied according to proxy maturity stages with a suggested removal of training effects coinciding with time points of peak growth (J. Moran et al.2017; J. J. Moran et al.2017).

A marked (re‐)acceleration in growth occurs during maturation. The chronological time point of peak growth is referred to as peak height velocity (PHV—Mirwald et al.2002) with accelerating and decelerating growth rates occurring pre‐ and post‐PHV, respectively. Characterised by observable increases in anthropometric characteristics (e.g., height, body mass and limb length), more progressed maturity status is likewise explanatory of physiological development (e.g., strength and maximal oxygen uptake—Almeida‐Neto et al.2021) and motor capability development gains (e.g., coordination and balance—Freitas et al.2016). In Caucasian populations, PHV is typically attained between 13 and 15 years in males (i.e., ‘normative maturing’). PHV can be attained at more varied chronological time points, yet still resides within normative (healthy) boundaries at 11–12 (i.e., ‘earlier maturing’) and 15–16 years of age (i.e., ‘later maturing’—Granados et al.2015). Meanwhile, for Caucasian females, the ‘normative’ age range for PHV attainment is between 11 and 13 years, with potentially ‘earlier’ and ‘later‐maturers’ PHV occurring between 9.5–11 and 13–14 years, respectively (Granados et al.2015). As a result, substantial inter‐individual differences in maturation timing, tempo and magnitudes of physiological change contribute to potentially considerable performance variations in physiologically dependent sports tasks.

Volleyball is one context where more progressed maturation, relative to others in similar age groups, provides short‐term anthropometric and physiological performance benefits. For example, in Mostaert et al.’s (2022) longitudinal study, they examined anthropometry, physical and motor coordination performance indices in junior male and female Flemish volleyball players (10–13 years;N= 1730) for the purposes of identifying distinguishable factors between youth (sub‐)national‐level selection. Mostaert et al. (2022) identified maturity status as influential to body length, vertical jump and standing broad jump performance, which were subsequently associated with selection level at Under 16–21's (Mostaert et al.2022). When combined with interpretations from training‐related studies, these findings suggest a potential overriding influence of growth and maturation above training‐associated physiological gains during peak maturity‐related growth, thereby questioning the contributory value of enhanced training parameters at this developmental time point. In support of the assertion, a recent longitudinal study by Guimarães et al. (2023) in male youth basketball players (11–15 years) assessed relationships between training time (i.e., hours/week and years of structured training, respectively) and performance indice development. Although they did not explicitly assess maturity status, they suggested the relationship between training time and physical performance indices (e.g., agility and lower body power) may be moderated by maturation (Guimarães et al.2023). Thus, determining whether increased training time remains beneficial to performance gains or whether the influence is reduced or nullified during peak growth remains to be verified.

The primary purpose of this study was to examine the longitudinal relationships between training time, maturity status and performance in volleyball‐associated field tests in a youth player sample (Aim 1). More specifically, the study aimed to determine the relative contributions of training time and maturity status on performance development and whether interactions were apparent (Aim 2). Although we hypothesised that training time and maturity status would both independently affect physiological performance gains generically, we proposed that the influence of training time would be reduced or negligible on performance gains during peak maturational growth (within +/− 1 year from PHV). We contended that study findings would provide valuable knowledge and practice information to researchers, coaches and associated practitioners (e.g., strength and conditioners) alike. First, the study would establish evidence for a heightened or overriding influence of maturational growth upon physical performance indices during adolescence. Second, and importantly, findings would identify when training hours (or associated parameters) could be decreased while achieving equivalent physical performance gains within specific developmental time points.

Following Magglingen Institutional Review Board approval (Nr.200LSP052023), initial participants enrolled in volleyball talent selection camps were boys (N= 92) aged 11–18 years (M= 14.2,SD= 1.5 years) fromN= 42 competitive youth volleyball clubs across Switzerland. As part of Swiss Volleyball Federation talent programmes, participants were invited to annual preseason selection camps held across (N= 14) Swiss regions during August/September. Upon preliminary data inspection, data were screened to include only participants between age ranges associated with maturation (i.e., males = 11–15 years) and more specifically aligned with potential observed PHV (Malina et al.2021). Further, given the longitudinal study design, a minimum of three repeated measures per participant were required across three consecutive years of camp attendance. These steps, therefore, led to a refined sample for examination. At baseline, final study participants wereN= 78 male players, aged 11–15 years (M= 13.81,SD= 1.20 years) fromN= 41 youth competitive Swiss volleyball clubs.

At talent selection camps, a series of standardised data was collated over three years from 2016 to 2018 (inclusive). Data included the reporting of weekly training engagement by club coaches alongside the completion of standardised anthropometric and physical fitness assessments. Participants completed annual physical fitness assessments in the same indoor volleyball facility (gymnasium) to permit controlled environmental conditions (e.g., weather and hard floor surfaces). Each assessment was conducted by two trained assessors according to standardised protocols (Nowotny et al.2020). Two field‐based physical fitness assessments were conducted, namely the standing long (broad) jump and agility sprint (9‐3‐6‐3‐9).

Respective club coaches recorded weekly training hours spent in volleyball‐specific training and reported to the research team. At the end of each season, individual participant's weekly training hours recorded were then aggregated and divided by the number of exposure weeks across the competitive season (i.e., September–March/April). Calculated mean weekly training hours for each participant were taken forward for analysis. Time spent in training was used as a proxy measure of aggregated physiological and skill‐related work performed during each session. According to coaches, training sessions followed a general structure: warm‐up (with ball), followed by volleyball‐specific activities (e.g., receiving, passing and attacking), tactical training (e.g., set‐plays), physical conditioning (e.g., cardiorespiratory, sprint and mobility exercises), simulated game‐play activities and finishing with a cool down (e.g., stretching).

Anthropometrics were measured according to the International Society for the Advancement of Kinanthropometry (ISAK) standards by trained researchers (approx. one per region). Standing and sitting height was measured to the nearest 0.1 cm (cm) using a portable stadiometer (Seca 217, Seca, Hamburg, Germany). A standard 60‐cm box was used when measuring the sitting height. Body mass was measured to the nearest 0.1 kg (kg) using digital scales (Seca 876, Seca, Hamburg, Germany). All measures were collated in duplicate to within 0.4 cm/kg and the average recorded.

Using the obtained anthropometric assessment data, player maturity status was calculated. The predictive equation described by Mirwald et al. (2002) based on chronological age at measure (CA), body mass, standing height, sitting height and leg length was used to estimate male somatic maturity status: maturity offset (years) for boys = −9.236 + (0.0002708 × [leg length × sitting height]) + (−0.001663 × [CA × leg length]) + (0.007216 × [CA × sitting height]) + (0.02292 × [weight by height ratio × 100]—Mirwald et al.2002). The Mirwald et al. (2002) equation estimates maturity offset as years from peak height velocity (YPHV). On average, the maturity offset method has been shown to correctly estimate the time (years) from peak height velocity with a standard estimated error of 0.59 years (Mirwald et al.2002). To determine the absolute agreement between repeat maturity timing measures over time, intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were calculated and assessed according to the following criteria: > 0.90, 0.75–0.90, 0.50–0.75 and < 0.50 indicated excellent, good, moderate and poor reliability, respectively. The mean absolute agreement indicated excellent measurement reliability, and thus, the consistency of maturity timing estimates at each measurement occasion (ICC = 0.91, 95% CI 0.87–0.94).

Horizontal (broad) jumping distance reflects lower‐limb power capabilities necessary for volleyball performance (Tsoukos et al.2019) and is closely associated with volleyball‐specific demands (e.g., lunging, leaping and diving—Lockie et al.2020). Thus, a SLJ test was implemented as a reliable assessment of maximal horizontal jump distance capability (Safrit1995). Players were permitted to initiate a countermovement jump with arm swing and were instructed to assume an approximate knee flexion angle of 60–90° with feet planted behind a marked line upon take‐off and to jump forward as far as possible, without falling backwards. The distance from the start line to the closest heel to the start line after landing was measured using a fibreglass measuring tape in centimetres (cm). If players fell backwards upon landing, the attempt was not recorded. Players completed three attempts, each separated by 2 minutes. The attempt with the longest horizontal distance was recorded for data analysis. Inter‐rater absolute agreement analyses indicated excellent measurement reliability between two trained assessors (ICC = 0.98, 95% CI 0.97–0.99).

The 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint was used to determine the player change of direction speed and agility capability (Mielgo‐Ayuso et al.2014; Sporis et al.2010). The test is a timed maximal sprint consisting of 180‐degree change in directions at set distance points along an 18‐m marked playing court (Figure1). A light signal was used to start each sprint trial. Players were required to run to Point B (9m), then to Point A (3m), to Point C (6m) and back to Point B (3m) before finishing at Point D (see Figure1). Players were instructed to touch each marked point with one hand and to complete the circuit as quickly as possible. Players were allowed to complete the test using forward, backwards, or sideway running styles. Two trained researchers measured the time taken to complete the 18‐m circuit (e.g., start to Point D; Figure1) using a handheld stopwatch (Hetzler et al.2008). Players completed two attempts, each separated by 3–5 min rest. The attempt with the lowest time score (i.e., the fastest) was recorded for data analysis. Inter‐rater absolute agreement analyses indicated excellent measurement reliability between two trained assessors (ICC = 0.98, 95% CI 0.97–0.99).

A visual illustration of 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint test with 180‐degree turns (from Mielgo‐Ayuso et al.2014).

To examine longitudinal relationships between training time and maturity status with the physical performance indices of SLJ and 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint, linear mixed models (LMM) were utilised (Bates et al.2015). LMM modelling procedures included training time (coach‐reported weekly average training hours) and maturity status (e.g., YPHV) as fixed effects, whereas participant ID (intercept) and maturity status (slope) were added as random effects to account for the nonindependence of repeated measures and between‐individual variance, respectively. To examine potential moderating influences, interactions between continuously scaled training time and maturity status indices were added and compared. Statistical significance was set atp< 0.05 and conditionalR2estimated the variance accounted for by the fixed and random effects within respective models. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) and a change in Akaike's information criterion (AIC) and likelihood ratio (LL) statistics were used to test model fit. The presence of interactions, changes inR2and changes in model fit statistics were all utilised to determine if, and when, training time had decreased influences (relative to maturity status) on physical performance gains. Model diagnostics for each performance test were inspected, including linearity and homogeneity of variance assessment with Q–Q and residual scatterplots examined. Quadratic interaction terms for maturity status were fitted when linearity assumptions were not met. Otherwise, data met statistical assumptions for homogeneity of variance in the residuals. Only participants with complete anthropometric, physical fitness and coach‐recorded weekly training engagement data across three consecutive years were examined; thus, no missing data handling was required.

Table1summarises descriptive anthropometric, maturity, training time characteristics and physical performance data according to years across longitudinal tracking. Descriptively, anthropometric and maturity status indices, expectedly, increased across measurement time points. Descriptive improvements in SLJ and 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint performance were also apparent. At baseline, coaches reported that individual players had been training forM= 7.34 h (SD= 3.57) per week (not including competition time) within club‐based programmes with descriptive increases in weekly training hours over time. Coach‐reported training engagement hours descriptively trended upwards across age groups at baseline (i.e., under 12s ‐M= 6.35 h/week; under 15s ‐M= 9.22 h/week). However, within age‐groups, variation in weekly training time (e.g., under 12s ‐SD= 3.12; under 15s ‐SD= 3.63) and maturity status was apparent (under 12s ‐M= −1.17,SD= 0.48; under 15s –M= 1.79,SD= 0.68). Residual plot checks also identified that coach‐reported training time according to chronological age did not vary between volleyball clubs (see Supporting Figure1), indicating participants were not necessarily engaging in more or substantially less training time at one or more clubs.

Descriptive summary (N; Mean ± SD) of anthropometric, maturity, training time characteristics and physical performance assessments inN= 78 males according to measurement time points.

indicates years from peak height velocity (YPHV) according to Mirwald et al. method (Mirwald et al.2002).

indicates years from peak height velocity (YPHV) according to Moore et al. method (Moore et al.2015).

indicates years from peak height velocity (YPHV) according to Fransen et al. method (Fransen et al.2018); APHV indicates the age of attained peak height velocity (APHV) according to the Mirwald method (Mirwald et al.2002).

Refer to Supporting Table1for a summary of analytical model steps and accompanying results. Sequential step‐building LMMs identified that random intercepts (participants) and random slopes (maturity status) best explained the positive longitudinal relationships between training time and maturity status with SLJ (AIC = 1838.2,χ2= 10.14,p< 0.01, MarginalR2= 0.63, ConditionalR2= 0.93). More specifically, significant interaction effects identified that the relationship between weekly training time and SLJ performance depended upon nonlinear changes in maturity status (quadratic interaction effect:t= −2.41 [1, 159.95],p= 0.02,ttraining= 0.71 [1, 196.39],p= 0.48,tYPHV= 8.68 [1, 157.38],p< 0.01). Independent training time contributions to SLJ performance (marginalR2= 0.18) disappeared when maturity status was introduced into statistical modelling, which accounted for significantly more SLJ variance (marginalR2= 0.43). With independent effects of training time absent in the presence of maturity status, any SLJ performance differences explained by training time did not emerge across the developmental stages examined (see Supporting Figure2). Figure2visually summarises how curvilinear changes in maturity status influenced the relationship between training time and SLJ over time. The relationship between maturity status and performance is shown according to high sample training time (i.e., 13 h per week), mean training time (i.e., 9 h per week) and low sample training time (i.e., 5 h per week). Interestingly, both statistics and Figure2illustrated how more progressed maturity status with increased weekly training hours was associated with marginally decelerating performance progression. By contrast, reduced training hours (e.g., ≤ 9 h per week) during peak maturational growth (i.e., at ± 1.5 YPHV) were associated with greater longitudinal performance gains post‐PHV (i.e., > 1.5 YPHV). However, at > 2.5 YPHV, the potential influence of maturity may also wane with training time contributions upon SLJ performance potentially re‐emerging.

Longitudinal relationship between maturity status (years from peak height velocity) with standing long jump performance (centimetres) according to training time (hours per week).

Refer to Supporting Table2for an overview of analytical model steps and results. Sequential LMMs building identified that random intercepts (participants) best explained the significant negative longitudinal relationships between weekly training time and maturity status with 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint time (ttraining= −0.79 [1, 229.47],p= 0.43,tYPHV= −8.35 [1, 209.85],p< 0.01, AIC = 113.26,χ2= 59.86,p< 0.01 MarginalR2= 0.33, ConditionalR2= 0.68). Independent training time contributions to 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint time (MarginalR2= 0.10) were statistically removed when maturity status was introduced to LMMs applied across the developmental stages examined (see Supporting Figure3). Maturity status was most influential, accounting for significantly more variance in 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint performance relative to training time (∆MarginalR2= 0.23). While not significant, interaction effects also provided a similar, yet less parsimonious, explanatory model (Linear interaction effect:t= −1.47 [1, 199.00],p= 0.14, ΔAIC = −0.17,χ2= 5.56,p= 0.18, MarginalR2= 0.34, ConditionalR2= 0.69; Quadratic interaction effect:t= −1.82 [1, 179.80],p= 0.07, ΔAIC = 0.44,χ2= 5.56,p= 0.14, MarginalR2= 0.69, ConditionalR2= 0.80). Figure3summarises the longitudinal relationships between training time and maturity status with 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint performance development. Figure3also illustrates minimal/no training‐related differences upon 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint performance gains around peak growth (± 1.5 YPHV). Following approximately 1.5 YPHV, the influential contribution of training time potentially re‐emerges as maturational growth subsides.

Longitudinal relationship between maturity status (years from peak height velocity) with 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint performance (seconds) according to training time (hours per week).

Related to Aim 1, findings identified general significant longitudinal relationships between weekly training time and maturity status with SLJ and 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint time. More importantly, LMM analyses established evidence for a heightened, overriding influence of maturity status (SLJ ‐R2m= 0.43; agility sprint ‐R2m= 0.23) progression relative to training engagement (SLJR2m= 0.18; agility sprintR2m= 0.10) upon physiological performance indices. Aligned to Aim 2, interaction effect results identified curvilinear changes in maturity status and influenced longitudinal relationships between weekly training time and SLJ. Similar interaction effects were also close to significance (p= 0.07) for agility sprint. For both physical tests examined, curvilinear interaction statistics described how longitudinal relationships between weekly training time with SLJ and 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint performance gains varied and were dynamic across maturity stages. For instance, increased training time had negligible contributions towards physical performance gains leading up to peak maturational growth (i.e., ± 1.0 YPHV). During peak maturational growth, there were no statistically significant benefits from training time on performance gains. However, following peak growth (i.e., > 0.5 YPHV), increased training time was associated with subsiding (or lower) performance gains. Meanwhile, reduced training time during maturational growth was associated with steadier, continuous, performance progressions during and post > 0.5 YPHV (see Figures2and3). Visual inspection of interactions in Figure2confirmed how increased weekly training time were associated with accelerated SLJ performance gains pre‐PHV yet were connected with lowered subsequent progression at PHV and post‐PHV time points. In the agility sprint, interaction Figure3confirmed longitudinal training time–performance trajectories converged during peak growth periods (± 1 YPHV) and visibly appeared to re‐emerge following peak growth cessation (i.e., > 2 YPHV). These observations again point towards an overriding influence from maturity‐related growth.

Although existing reviews (J. Moran et al.2017; J. J. Moran et al.2017) and individual independent studies (Lloyd et al.2011) intimated the possibility of changing influences of training parameters (e.g., duration and frequency) upon physical performance circa‐PHV, explicit measurement and analysis of both training exposure and maturational growth did not occur in these studies and was not necessarily the focus of prior‐related studies. Thus, the present research question, design, measures included and analytical approach were novel. Present findings indicated that maturity status better explained inter‐individual physical performance development and progression and how weekly training time may have reduced contributions towards physical performance development during, and around, peak growth (i.e., within ± 1 YPHV). Not until peak growth subsided did increased volleyball training time likely equate with enhanced physical performance gains. Present findings also justify attempts by researchers in many contemporary adolescent/youth‐focused studies to assess and control for maturation when examining the relationships between factors associated with physical performance (Mostaert et al.2022).

There are several explanations for why weekly training time may have a reduced impact on physical performance progression during peak growth. First, anthropometric changes including increased limb and torso size (e.g., length) are relatively rapid. Following PHV in boys, the body also undergoes rapid increases in body mass, in particular, increased lean muscle mass which is positively associated with improved physical performance indices (i.e., strength and power ‐ Almeida‐Neto et al.2021). In a previous longitudinal study, Abbott, En Leong et al. (2023) also identified how maturation status development fully explained the relationships between upper‐body strength gains with front‐crawl performance progression in adolescent male swimmers. Such observations align with literature, also indicating how skeletal muscle growth may follow predictably behind (i.e., 0.5–1 YPHV) maturity‐related height accumulation (Brown et al.2017). Second, during time points of heightened growth tempo, movement skill coordination capabilities have been shown to be acutely disrupted, temporarily impacting physical performance (Abbott, Ibarcena, et al.2023). Therefore, increases in physiologically based training time may not necessarily lead to equivalent physical performance change or progression, particularly if movements are underpinned by coordination or skill proficiency requirements. These two processes may—to a greater or lesser extent—account for the changes in physical performance observed across the physical tests examined and why the influence of training time reemerges as growth trajectories subside.

Although the present study was the first to examine the research question, future studies examining the same or similar question(s) may want to consider the following. The present sample consisted of male volleyball players with a higher competitive baseline proficiency; therefore, present trends may not apply to a male lower‐skilled sample, female equivalent samples or hold true when examining alternative performance tasks. As sporting background information was not obtained, we also could not account for training hours invested in alternative sports or physical activity modalities prior to or during tracking. Such parallel training and (prior) involvement may contribute to physical development within the tasks examined. Similarly, information pertaining to the specific types of training conducted (e.g., resistance, aerobic and technical skills/drill conducted within training) and intensities (e.g., heart rate, rate of perceived exertion and internal/external training loads) within volleyball were not able to be captured. Future studies are, therefore, recommended to assess more sensitively—where possible—the purpose and structure of training time engagement. Further, more frequent reporting of training activities within the competitive season may help better estimate player training engagement patterns. Finally, although isolated field tests relevant to youth volleyball were examined in this study, findings should be verified in other physical performance tasks and cohorts prior to generalisation.

For the sample and context examined, longitudinal LMMs identified developmental relationships between training time and maturity status with performance in SLJ and 9‐3‐6‐3‐9 agility sprint tests. Most aligned with our research aims, relationships between training time with SLJ and agility sprint were better explained by maturity status. Interaction terms suggested the relationship between training time and SLJ performance varied according to maturity status and with no independent training time influences upon SLJ and agility sprint during heightened growth time points (± 1.5 YPHV).