Type 2 diabetes is an inflammatory, non-infectious disease characterized by dysfunctional pancreatic β-cells and insulin resistance. Although lifestyle, genetic, and environmental factors are associated with a high risk of type 2 diabetes, nutrition remains one of the most significant factors. Specific types and increased amounts of dietary fatty acids are associated with type 2 diabetes and its complications. Dietary recommendations for the prevention of type 2 diabetes advocate for a diet that is characterized by reduced saturated fatty acids and trans fatty acids alongside an increased consumption of monounsaturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, and omega-3 fatty acids. Although following the recommendations for dietary fatty acid intake is important for reducing type 2 diabetes and its related complications, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. This review will provide an update on the mechanisms of action of fatty acids on glucose metabolism and type 2 diabetes, as well as dietary recommendations for the prevention of type 2 diabetes.

The fatty acid composition of dietary fat can affect various metabolic processes, including energy balance, chronic inflammation, glucose tolerance, and insulin action. In this review, the mechanisms of action of fatty acids on glucose metabolism and type 2 diabetes will be discussed.

This narrative review involved a literature search of the PubMed, Google Scholar, Web of Science, Scopus, Oxford University Press, Wiley, and Taylor & Francis databases, accessed through the libraries of both Anadolu and Gazi Universities, up until January 2024. Only studies published in English were included. The review focused on literature from 2005 onwards, with over 90% of the citations in this article being published within the last 5 years. The following keywords were used for the literature search: “Glucose Metabolism” OR “Insulin Resistance” OR “Type 2 Diabetes” OR “T2DM” AND “Fatty Acids” OR “Saturated Fatty Acids” OR “Short Chain Fatty Acids” OR “Medium Chain Fatty Acids” OR “Monounsaturated Fatty Acids” OR “Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids” OR “Trans Fatty Acids” AND “Dietary Recommendations” OR “Nutrition”.

The effects of fatty acids with different numbers of double bonds on type 2 diabetes are shown inTable 1.

Palmitic acid, which accounts for 27% of the total fatty acids and is commonly found in animal-derived foods, has been demonstrated to stimulate nitric oxide production, inflammation, and oxidative stress.21,22These effects can disrupt insulin signaling and lead to lasting damage to cardiometabolic health.13,21Palmitic acid contributes to insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes through several mechanisms (Figure 1). One primary mechanism by which palmitic acid contributes to insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes involves inducing lipotoxicity through elevated levels of diacylglycerol (DAG) and ceramide. DAG activates protein kinase C (PKC), which phosphorylates insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) at serine residues, thereby impairing the insulin signaling pathway. Additionally, DAG activates the inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa beta (NF-Κβ) kinase (IKK), leading to activation of the NF-κB pathway, further disrupting insulin signaling and promoting inflammation. Ceramide accumulation further exacerbates insulin resistance by inducing interleukin (IL)-1β release and activating protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and PKC, which inhibit the insulin signaling pathway and trigger inflammation.2The second mechanism involves the disruption of endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial function by palmitic acid. Endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis disruption leads to inflammation, activating pathways such as NF-κB, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and the NOD-like receptor pyrin domain 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, and promoting apoptosis, particularly in β cells. In addition, increased palmitic acid transport into the mitochondria, due to elevated non-esterified fatty acid (NEFA) levels, leads to incomplete fatty acid oxidation and increased generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). This results in mitochondrial stress and the formation of lipid hydroperoxides and reactive aldehydes, which can modify and activate uncoupling proteins. Ultimately, this process leads to cellular damage and insulin resistance.2,23Third, palmitic acid can activate toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) with the assistance of fetuin A. High-fat diets lead to elevated lipopolysaccharide levels and alter the gut microbiota, both of which serve as activators of TLR4. Lipopolysaccharides trigger inflammation via the TLR4 pathway and induce the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines (such as IL-6) into the plasma. This cascade further amplifies the activity of the IKKβ–NF-κB pathway.2,17Furthermore, palmitic acid induces pro-inflammatory responses and leptin resistance by affecting hypothalamic leptin signaling.24However, this mechanism is not fully characterized.

Diets rich in MUFAs improve insulin sensitivity by reducing glycemic load and insulin requirement. MUFAs protect β cells from apoptosis by improving insulin sensitivity and glucose control, while improving blood lipid profiles.48However, some of their effects are not fully understood. Despite the favorable effects of MUFAs, their intake was not found to be associated with a reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes.7,15Additionally, increased plasma MUFA levels may adversely affect the incidence of type 2 diabetes.49Evidence suggests that metabolic effects may differ between different MUFAs.

Replacing a portion of palmitic acid intake with oleic acid intake has been shown to markedly reduce the adverse effects of saturated fat intake on adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, liver, and β cells.2Likewise, substituting a diet high in oleic acid with one rich in SFAs enhances insulin sensitivity. Oleic acid plays a role in preventing the decline in AMPK activity induced by palmitic acid. Notably, AMPK serves as a recognized therapeutic target for type 2 diabetes and is activated by metformin. Several studies have indicated that oleic acid shares similar protective properties with metformin, both effectively countering the adverse impacts of palmitic acid. This suggests that oleic acid may possess metformin-like qualities.2Further studies are needed to uncover the specific mechanisms through which oleic acid safeguards against the onset of type 2 diabetes in humans. However, it is essential to investigate whether this potential beneficial effect is attributed to the composition of fatty acids derived from vegetable oils or whether other dietary components, such as dietary fiber, polyphenols, and vitamins, play a significant role.

The findings on the relationship between dietary LA intake and the incidence of type 2 diabetes remain unclear. While there are studies are showing an inverse association between dietary LA intake and type 2 diabetes risk,58there are also studies finding no association.7,59In a meta-analysis of prospective cohorts, higher LA biomarker levels were associated with a 35% lower risk of type 2 diabetes.60That study quantitatively summarized the findings from published prospective cohort studies on the association between dietary intake, LA biomarkers and the risk of type 2 diabetes in the general population. However, since LA biomarkers reflect diet as well as other factors like metabolism, differences in type 2 diabetes risk should not be considered solely attributable to dietary LA.

A study conducted by Miao and colleagues63revealed that dietary w-6 fatty acids and the presence of circulating w-6 fatty acids, particularly gamma-linolenic acid, might elevate the likelihood of developing type 2 diabetes. This increased risk is thought to arise from a mechanism that disturbs the diversity and composition of the gut microbiota.

Research has shown that EPA and DHA are pivotal in diminishing the risk of lipotoxicity and preserving insulin sensitivity.76–78However, certain studies have not identified a significant association between w-3 fatty acids and glycemic indicators, including fasting plasma glucose, insulin, and HbA1c.77,79A randomized controlled trial of 15 480 participants investigating whether w-3 fatty acid supplementation benefits cardiovascular disease in participants with diabetes showed that 0.84 g/day of w-3 supplementation did not make a significant difference in the incidence of serious vascular events.80A systematic review of randomized controlled trials showed that w-3, w-6, and total PUFAs had little or no effect on preventing or treating type 2 diabetes.81These discrepancies may be attributed to differences in study methods, such as study design and duration, ethnicity of participants, and dosage administered.

In the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) study, examining the relationship between plasma total trans fatty acid levels and type 2 diabetes in adults in 1999–2000 and 2009–2010, it was found that high concentrations of total trans fatty acids, especially elaidic acid, had a significant positive relationship with the risk of type 2 diabetes in adults after adjustment for risk factors. The study reported that increasing plasma trans fatty acids increased the risk of type 2 diabetes by 2.19 and 1.59 times, according to the data between 1999–2000 and 2009–2010, respectively.16This difference may be related to the country’s policies on trans fatty acids in these years.

Other factors, including study design, population characteristics, and confounding factors may have led to inconsistent findings regarding the association between trans fatty acids and diabetes. More importantly, the years in which these studies were conducted are likely to have been an important factor. The nutrition policies and guidelines in force play an active role in this regard.

The evidence indicates that lifestyle changes can prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes, with nutrition being a crucial factor in reducing its incidence. The quantity of fat in the diet and the specific fatty acid types significantly contribute to the prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes.

Dietary fats encompass various fatty acids with distinct chemical structures and biological functions, playing a pivotal role in metabolic pathways that influence the risk of type 2 diabetes. The impact of dietary fatty acids extends to tissue and organ insulin sensitivity, affecting cell membrane function, hormone release, gut microbiota diversity and composition, glucose metabolism, and markers of inflammation.

Contemporary dietary recommendations for the prevention of type 2 diabetes advocate for a diet that is characterized by reduced total fat and animal fat consumption, while emphasizing a higher intake of vegetable fats. Furthermore, these guidelines suggest an increased consumption of MUFAs, PUFAs, and w-3 fatty acids, alongside a decrease in the consumption of SFAs and trans fatty acids.

The effectiveness of dietary fatty acids varies according to the source, dose, frequency of consumption, and individual differences. Therefore, further studies are needed to elucidate the mechanisms responsible for the effects of fatty acids on the development of type 2 diabetes in humans.

Figure 1was created withwww.freepik.comand PowerPoint. The authors would like to thank the Gazi University Academic Writing Application and Research Center for proofreading the article.

Dilek Sivri, 
Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Health Science, Anadolu University, Eskişehir, Türkiye.

Yasemin Akdevelioğlu, 
Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Health Science, Gazi University, Ankara, Türkiye.