The poultry sector is the largest contributor, in terms of the livestock sector to the Gross Domestic Product in Sri Lanka, providing economic security to the country and food security to people. There are three farming systems: broiler, layer and backyard chicken. The backyard chicken farming system is widespread across Sri Lanka. The population in Sri Lanka comprises five ethnic groups, four religious practices and is from a wide spectrum of economic classes.

The study was conducted to explore the political, economic and cultural discourse surrounding backyard farming in the Western and North‐Western Provinces of Sri Lanka. The overall purpose is to identify challenges and enablers to make backyard chicken rearing a sustainable economic activity.

This study used qualitative research methodology. Thirty‐eight semi‐structured interviews were conducted among backyard poultry farmers in two provinces and the data were transcribed, tabulated, coded and themes were generated. Then, data under the ensuing themes were analysed using critical discourse analysis.

The data revealed how backyard chicken rearing and its associated practices, such as feed formulation, issues associated with biosecurity, marketability and sustenance of the sector, are influenced by political, economic and cultural factors, turning it into a complex discursive space.

There are political, economic and cultural factors that may act in juxtaposition in backyard chicken farming in Sri Lanka. The results of this study can be used to underpin policy formulation, taking into account the prevailing political, economic and cultural practices and beliefs of backyard poultry farmers.

Backyard chicken farming is practised widely across diverse communities in Sri Lanka. This study exploring the political, economic and cultural factors affecting backyard chicken farming in the Western and North‐Western Provinces in Sri Lanka aims to identify the challenges and enablers to enhance the sustainability of the sector.

The livestock sector plays a major role in providing economic and nutritional security for people, contributing around 1% to the total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in Sri Lanka (Department of Animal Production and Health (DAPH), Sri Lanka 2021). Among the key livestock industries operating in Sri Lanka, the poultry sector holds a prominent position, primarily attributed to its substantial contribution to the national GDP and its capacity to generate greater tax revenue when compared to other livestock and fisheries industries (Manjula et al.2018).

The poultry sector in Sri Lanka ranges from intensive commercial systems to backyard chicken production. In intensive production systems, birds of exotic and mixed breeds are reared under high‐input management with intensive use of capital and labour (Manjula et al.2018; Samanta, Joardar, and Das2018; Silva et al.2014). The intensive system functions under large‐scale operators, and they are highly commercialized market‐oriented systems. In contrast to this, backyard chicken rearing systems consist of indigenous poultry stocks that are ‘allowed to roam freely and scavenge for their feed. It's a low‐risk, low‐investment, low‐production, low‐return enterprise system with an extensive form of management’ (Korale‐Gedara et al.2018; Silva et al.2014). Backyard chicken rearing mostly consists of small flocks kept under low or minimal biosecurity measures (Conan et al.2012; Kumar, Dahiya, and Ratwan2021) and mostly consists ‘of free indigenous unselected breeds of various ages, with various species mixed in the same flock’ (Conan et al.2012). Backyard chicken‐rearing is also used as an effective means to improve the ‘socioeconomic and nutritional status among rural poor people of the society due to availability of a cheap source of protein (egg and meat), for eradication of malnutrition, generation of self‐employment and supplementary income’ (Kumar, Dahiya, and Ratwan2021, 1477). Backyard chickens play a vital role in providing livelihoods to many rural households in the developing world (Idamakoro and Hosuq2022; Alders et al.2018). The output of backyard chickens is lower than that of intensively reared birds, ‘but it is obtained with a minimum input in terms of housing, disease control, management and supplementary feeding’ (Alders and Pym2009, as quoted in Alders, Bagnol, and Young2010, 434).

Although commercial layer and broiler production systems are the predominant contributors to the Sri Lankan market in terms of supplying eggs and meat through organized industries, the backyard system operates through its own unique methods. Abeykoon et al. (2014) emphasize that the potential of backyard chicken rearing to provide nutrition and enhance income for rural farmers has not been fully realized. It is important to investigate the reasons behind the backyard chicken‐rearing sector's failure to emerge as a profitable industry. In the backyard sector in Sri Lanka, ‘limitations in inputs such as land, feed and breeding stocks were the main drawbacks’ (Abeykoon et al.2014, 163).

The local backyard chicken‐rearing sector transcends mere economic activity, intertwining with capitalism, markets, income, livelihoods, tradition, culture, religion and beliefs. Rearing backyard chickens becomes a complex discursive activity, representing a space constructed through diverse and politically, socially and culturally charged discourses.

In Sri Lanka, the cultural fabric is mainly made up of Sinhalese, Tamils, Burghers and Muslims and a smaller proportion of indigenous communities. In terms of religion, the majority of Sinhalese follow Buddhism and others follow Christianity, Hinduism and Islam (as shown in Tables1and2).

Composition of population by ethnicity (Central Bank of Sri Lanka2022).

Composition of population by religion (Central Bank of Sri Lanka2022).

These culturally diverse groups follow different practices and subscribe to different norms and values. These norms, values and beliefs affect the existence of people belonging to different groups as a whole, defining how they engage in a particular economic activity. Rearing backyard poultry is an activity conducted across the spectrum of these cultures and is carried out using different processes and practices. This may lead to various tensions and dissonance.

In order to unearth the discourse and explore the ontological and epistemological perspectives, the research paradigm used was social constructivism. Within social constructivism, the qualitative approach was followed as it would yield non‐statistical data which can be analysed through non‐statistical means because this method will allow multiple stories to emerge without reducing the findings to numerical data (Dornyei and Ushioda2011). Qualitative research attempts to study ‘human behaviour within the context in which that behaviour would occur naturally and in which the role of the researcher would not affect the normal behaviour of subjects’ (Seligner and Shohamy1989, 118).

Sri Lanka is slowly recovering from the economic crisis of 2023 (https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/srilanka/overview), and backyard poultry can be promoted as a pragmatic means to reduce unemployment and ensure nutritional security across Sri Lanka. Ongoing work and experience with the backyard poultry sector demonstrate that this is not a business‐oriented venture but has the potential to be so.

The study aimed to explore the political, economic and socio‐cultural discourse surrounding backyard chicken‐rearing farming systems in the Western and North‐Western Provinces of Sri Lanka. The overall goal was to identify the enablers and barriers to making backyard chicken rearing a successful economic activity in the country.

In this manuscript, the term ‘political’ means the elements of power, how power operates and the power relations that exist between the different entities discussed in this manuscript. For example, the different power dynamics between the veterinarians and the farmers in trying to get the farmers to adhere to vaccination schedules, biosecurity practices and regulations are discussed in the manuscript. By ‘economic practices’, we refer to the variables dealing with the income or expenditure. For example, in terms of income, the income generated through selling eggs, meat and birds for other purposes is discussed in the article. In terms of expenditure, the costs incurred in the physical construction of chicken coops, sourcing feed and sourcing veterinary medicines are explored in the manuscript. By ‘socio‐cultural aspects’, we directly study various cultural elements in terms of religious beliefs, practices related to black magic and other various local practices associated with backyard chicken rearing in Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka consists of nine provinces. Two provinces, namely, the Western Province and North‐Western Province, were selected on the basis that they had the highest poultry density across Sri Lanka (Central Bank Report, 2022), and data were collected to cover the respective districts of these two provinces (as shown in Map1). The Western Province, also known as the commercial hub of Sri Lanka, consists of three districts, namely, Colombo, Gampaha and Kaluthara. The poultry densities of these three districts are 4826.63, 1597.84 and 780.60/km2, respectively. The North‐Western Province, which consists of two districts, Kurunegala and Puttlam, is the other poultry‐dense geographical space in Sri Lanka. The poultry densities of Kurunegala and Puttlam are 1522.87 and 1291.09/km2, respectively (Table3).

A map of Sri Lanka denoting the two provinces (Western and North‐Western) selected for the study.

Poultry density in Western and North‐Western Provinces in Sri Lanka (Central Bank of Sri Lanka2022).

Though data about the number of registered backyard farms are available in reports produced by the Department of Census and Statistics and the Department of Animal Production and Health, they do not contain information about the number of birds in a farm or the poultry density across Sri Lanka. It must be stated that the number of backyard chicken‐rearing farms is not an indication of the number of birds or their density. Likewise, the statistics present on backyard chicken‐rearing farms do not represent whether these farms are operative or not because backyard chicken‐rearing is not a well‐organized economic activity in Sri Lanka. Therefore, the most poultry‐dense districts were selected based on the statistics presented by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka due to their reliability and validity. In addition to this, chicken density was used as a criterion, as marketing and food channels are readily available and are in operation in these provinces. This is essential for backyard farmers to obtain food and sell the products. Moreover, farmer associations, farmers, information about farming and data about farming activities are readily available as opposed to other provinces where chicken density is low. The ethnic and religious spread of people is another reason for selecting these provinces, which is relevant to the study.

The interviews were conducted with 38 backyard chicken farmers (as shown in Table4) who were selected on a convenience sampling basis. These participants were selected with the assistance of the divisional veterinary department through the registry they maintained with the support of the veterinarians employed in the particular province. Table5presents the inclusion and exclusion criteria used in selecting the farmers for the study. The same inclusion and exclusion criteria were used in both provinces.

The interviews were conducted in the province they were domiciled in, within their own farms. The participants were not requested to come to any other location or a different location. The participants were first given an introduction to the research and its objectives. Their consent was then gained, and permission was also taken to audio‐record the interviews. They were also informed that they could opt out of the interview at any given point in time, but none of the participants did so. Interviews were conducted by two of the principal investigators while the other researchers took down notes and observed the scenario. The interviews were carried out in the participants’ preferred language. A single interview lasted from 30 to 35 min. The participants were also told that they could view their interview transcripts if they wished, but again no such requests were made. To avoid interviewer bias, we asked the same questions of those who were interviewed. This process was facilitated further as the researchers used a semi‐structured template containing the questionnaires. After a considerable number of interviews, similar rhetoric began to emerge from participants, and then it was understood that data saturation had been reached. Therefore, the interviews after that were stopped.

The research was conducted through a qualitative approach. When carrying out research based on discourse studies, the qualitative approach will allow the researchers to explore the phenomena studied in an in‐depth manner. Semi‐structured interviews were used as the research/data collection tool because this will allow the participants to state their perceptions without hindrance. Thus, the interview guide consisted of a number of main questions and several sub‐prompts which were developed by the research team covering the dimensions of backyard poultry farming in relation to Sri Lanka. The interview guide consisted of registration information, vaccination techniques and medication, economic assistance, awareness of farmers related to poultry farming, challenges faced by farmers, disease conditions, bio‐security‐related issues, female empowerment and the religious and socio‐cultural practices associated with chickens. The interview guide was then piloted in the two chosen districts, and necessary amendments were made. New prompts were added according to the feedback received, and some other minor adjustments were also made. Then the actual interviews were carried out on a face‐to‐face basis, and they were carried out in Sinhala. The interviews were carried out within a period of 6 weeks.

The audio recordings were initially transcribed in Sinhala and then translated into English by the main researcher. The second researcher confirmed the contents of the translation. The translated transcripts were then re‐read several times, and the emergent codes were tabulated (Saldana2009). The recurrent codes were used to generate themes. The emergent overarching themes were the distribution of backyard chicken and its associated network, feed practices, biosecurity, the political, economic and cultural significance of backyard chicken and lastly, the religious ideologies associated with backyard chicken. These themes were validated and verified. This process of validity was ensured by following an intercoding reliability process where all the researchers independently coded a sample of transcriptions. These codes were compared, and a level of agreement was reached. The researchers then agreed on the emerging themes. This ensured that the coding process was consistent and could be applied reliably by different individuals. The headings of the results section are organized under the themes that emerged from the data analysis. The data coming under these themes were then analysed by the researchers using critical discourse analysis (Fairclough2013; Wodak2014), and deconstruction was used as the major theoretical formulation when conducting the analysis.

The rearing of backyard chickens is neither a structurally organized system based on public/private administrative principles nor a structurally state‐governed system. But this is not to state that the system is structureless, as it has its own modus operandi developed through years of locally developed practices. But without serious techno‐scientific interventions or administrative structuralizations, rearing backyard chickens has survived for ages.

One‐month‐old chicks are generally distributed freely among interested parties through the divisional veterinary offices under various government‐aided projects for backyard chicken farmers. The month‐old chicks are purchased by the veterinary offices from the Karandagolla (Karandagolla farm, also known as the Central Poultry Research Station, is located in Kurunegala District, North Western Province, Sri Lanka) or Kotadeniyawa (Kotadeniyawa farm is in Gampaha District, Western Province, Sri Lanka) breeding farms. If not, some private individuals who own hatcheries sell day‐old chicks to interested parties. These hatcheries operate at various levels, where some use imported egg hatching machines while others use locally sourced and locally produced hatching machines made from disused refrigerators or Rigifoam (rigid foam sheets made from polystyrene) boxes. Hatchery owners at times source eggs from selected backyard farms or their own farms for hatching purposes.

Likewise, there are a small number of individuals who hatch eggs using natural methods by allowing hens to incubate naturally. Primarily, these eggs find their market among neighbours and interested individuals who either directly purchase from the farm or through sales at nearby shops; prices range from LKR. 30–35 (0.08–0.09 USD)/chick as of 2022 (Supporting Information).

When discussing the feed practices followed in backyard chicken‐rearing systems, backyard chickens will survive on household food scraps, kitchen vegetable waste and green grass and will source their own feed with little supervision (Abeykoon et al.2014; Alders, Bagnol, and Young2010; Kumar, Dahiya, and Ratwan2021). The validity of these observations and statements depends on several decisive factors such as the size of the flock and the space/location the farm is set in. Furthermore, backyard chickens’ genetic makeup also plays a role in determining the feeding practices.

The same idea was iterated by respondents whose flock did not exceed 5–15 birds, depending on the location (i.e., the availability of land) in which their farms are situated. These farmers were not worried about the number of eggs the chickens produce, as most of the eggs are used for domestic consumption, and whatever is left would be either given to neighbours or sold off to a shop.

But problems arise when commercial interests are put forth, especially in terms of increasing the number of birds in order to receive a higher yield of eggs and meat. Then, if the land area in which the farm is situated is not large or spacious enough, which is now the case across Sri Lanka due to rapid urbanization, the chickens do not have enough grounds, or anything left in the grounds to scavenge from.

[w]ith the rise in poultry feed prices, it is hard to find money to buy feed. And it is reducing our profit margins too. We have to increase the price of eggs and meat both if so and also make sure egg production is more (Respondent NW6, Field Interviews, 2022).

Furthermore, despite such advice, many of the farmers either had not started to follow the practice or were even reluctant to start it. When questioned why, they merely pointed out that they should start it in the time to come. Their reluctance itself alludes to the fact that they trust commercial feed over homemade feed and that they are unsure whether it would increase their chances of gaining a profit.

Another interesting aspect of backyard chicken rearing is the adherence, or lack thereof, to biosecurity practices. Backyard chicken production is characterized by low biosecurity measures or the lack of adherence to biosecurity measures as propagated through Western scientific medicinal practices (Conan et al.2012; Correia‐Gomes and Sparks2020; Samanta, Joardar, and Das2018). Biosecurity is defined as measures or safety practices which should be followed or adhered to by the farmers to prevent the entry of diseases into and out of the chickens to other animals and humans, which will improve both human and animal health (Samanta, Joardar, and Das2018). Therefore, biosecurity is ‘an established international policy concern, with its own terminologies, governance structure, and expert science base’ (Maye et al.2012, 150–151).

Nevertheless, these measures are not followed due to a lack of knowledge (Correia‐Gomes and Sparks2020) or lack of capital (Samanta, Joardar, and Das2018), which makes the uptake of the ideals presented by biosecurity very low (Bleich, Pagani, and Honhold2009). It is interesting to note that many backyard chicken‐rearing farmers, despite attending training programs, do not know what the term biosecurity means at a conceptual level.

Therefore, farmers, despite not knowing the term biosecurity or its conceptual background, know that practices to safeguard themselves and the flock should be followed. The only reason why most of them cannot implement such strict practices is due to the lack of capital. If they do spend, as shown by respondent W13, they would have to increase the price of eggs and meat, which would lead them to lose their market share or the customers.

In terms of structural biosecurity, all the backyard farmers either had chicken coops built up of bricks or wood but had no proper biosecurity fencing in place. The non‐adherence to structural biosecurity practices has led to an increase in baseline mortality due to predators such as stray dogs, stray cats, a bird calledkurulu goya, mongoose, pole cats, snakes (mostly rat snakes and cobras) and people who steal the chicken.

Some farmers have adopted specific behaviours to protect their chickens.

Other than structural biosecurity measures, another biosecurity measure is adherence to vaccination protocols. It is stated that improper adherence to vaccination schedules can lead to ‘infectious diseases (e.g., Newcastle disease (ND), salmonellosis, Gumboro disease or fowl typhoid)’ (Conan et al.2012, 2). In Sri Lanka, there is no set vaccination protocol followed by the regional veterinary offices. Thus, different areas have different protocols for vaccinating day‐one‐old chicks. According to respondent W12, generally, Marek's, Ranikhet (Newcastle disease), Gumboro and Fowl Pox injections are administered together with deworming. In addition to the above, backyard chicken‐rearing farmers are advised to administer Ranikhet (Newcastle disease) and Fowl Pox injections at least once a year and administer deworming medicine every 2 months (Field Interviews, 2022).

It is hard to find time and the money to go at times. In addition, sometimes we have to travel 20 odd km to get to the office. That is difficult. (Respondent NW1, Field Interviews, 2022).

Likewise, there are backyard chicken‐rearing farmers who are not registered at the government veterinary office, and therefore, they do not get the vaccines for free. Due to the price of vaccines, these farmers tend to overlook the vaccination schedules.

Samanta, Joardar, and Das (2018) point out that ‘indigenous or native or nondescript breeds are preferred for backyard farming due to easy availability, higher adaptability to the local environment [and] resistance to some diseases’ (p. 484). Though this stands true, there were instances where respondents pointed out that their chicken died, especially during the COVID‐19, pandemic without access to proper medication. But when the birds fall sick, the farmers have their own means of dealing with it.

Again, the validity or the effectiveness of such practices remains to be open and requires more in‐depth studies. The primary factor compelling them in this direction is the deficiency in capital and the absence of a well‐structured system linking farmers with veterinary surgeons, livestock development officers and other regulatory bodies. Such a system is crucial in providing practical assistance concerning disease prevention and control. Many of the farmers were unaware of zoonoses. In Sri Lanka, backyard chicken, turkey, quails (Watu Kurullo), cattle, pigs and goats are reared together. Most farms had either chicken and cattle or chicken with goats. Therefore, in the event of a disease outbreak, the ability of it to spread to a large number of different species is very limited.

But, despite these issues, which mainly arise from limited financial capacity, respondents stated that they would like to expand their business if help is granted from the government authorities.

Alders, Bagnol, and Young (2010) point out that ‘[b]ackyard chickens are active in pest control, provide manure which can be used as fertilizer,are required for special festivals, and are essential for many traditional ceremonies[emphasis added]’ (p. 443). This statement stands true in relation to Sri Lanka as well. Native chickens possess a huge symbolic value within Sri Lanka. The chicken is used as an auspicious symbol on top of the oil lamp, which is traditionally lit at the start of ceremonies and functions as a mark of good luck.

The backyard chickens are also used for various black magic, voodoo rituals and cultural activities across Sri Lanka calledBali ThovilorShanthi Karma. Foster (1998), quoting Glick (1967), points out that in many cultures, various practices and ideas in relation to illnesses are inseparable from religious beliefs, and thus, thekukul billaor the chicken as an offering to a particular god is given under two rituals as to redeem abáraand to expel/eliminate illness or evil forces from the human body. ‘Thebárais a vow made by any person to a deity promising him a certain ritual, feast or another recompense in his honour, if the wishes of the person are granted […] Redeeming the bára, is known asbára oppu kirima. Until the redemption of the vow, one is in charge of the deity concerned; if the vow is not discharged, serious misfortunes (dosa) may result’ (Obeysekere1984). Country chickens are sacrificed to deities, such as GoddessKali,Kalu Kambili,KadawaraandDevol, to redeem báras.

In relation to expelling or eliminating illnesses or evil forces, in rural villages in Sri Lanka,bali thovilare conducted for either curing diseases or eradicating evil influences caused due to people's planetary positions. A chicken is used in those kinds of exorcistic ceremonies as a sacrificial animal (kukulu billa) to take over the evil (vas) of the affected person (Obeyesekere2022; Kariyawasam1998).

But with the influence of Buddhism, ‘with its doctrine of ahimsa, applicable to animal sacrifice, was responsible for the development of the ritual from an actual sacrifice to a symbolic one. If this is so, we see in today's ritual a symbolic displacement’ (Obeysekere1984). Chickens, now, are rarely killed in these ritualistic ceremonies, but a few drops of blood (le gotu) are given to the demon as a substitute for the whole bird. Respondent NW4 stated that ‘he doesn't either kill the animals or take blood from them, but nominally sacrifice them to the God and allow them to stay in theDevala(temple) premises’ (Field Interviews, 2022).

Though there is no rational explanation for the above sequence of events, it just shows the mindset of the Sri Lankan villagers who subscribe to such culturally and scientifically contested ideologies and ideals.

If the chicken is not culled or the previous owners reject taking it back, they are mostly donated to the temple or adevalaya. Before the bird is taken in by the temple or thedevalaya, thebandanaya, that is, the evil bind, is ‘cut’ by theKapurala(priest) after conducting a small religious ceremony (pooja), and then the chicken is allowed to roam freely in the temple (devala) premises. Despite residing in what is considered an advanced post‐modernist era, such practices continue to permeate the cultural landscape in Sri Lanka. The animals, who, at the end of the day, have no right to their lives and are used to fulfil the desires of human beings. Especially in moments when language goes on holiday, that is, when language is unable to provide a rational explanation as to why an incident occurred at a particular point in time and place (Wittgenstein1933), voodoo and black magic practices become prominent.

Religious doctrines, ideas, beliefs and value systems in human societies guide and influence the way their members act, even in the economic sphere. Religions dictate certain preferred guidelines of behaviour according to which their followers orient their activities.

In the ideologically laden context of Sri Lanka, Buddhism as a religious doctrine plays a key role in shaping the socio‐economic behaviour of Sri Lankans. This notable presence of Buddhism in the social fabric of Sri Lankan society is one major factor which influences the economic decision‐making of farmers engaged in backyard chicken rearing.

Therefore, backyard farming becomes a very conflictual, discursive, politically charged space. But as stated before, these local belief systems and rearing methods and the paradigm as a whole are contested by the veterinary establishment by stating that these are pre‐modern age‐old constructions that are detrimental to the survival and performance of a farm.

These pervasive religious ideologies are coupled with the notion of considering chicken as part of the family, which was discussed previously (Desta,2021; Alders et al.2018). On one hand, there is a belief that slaughtering chickens may attract negative karma, whereas on the other hand, these birds are regarded as pets, extensions of the family and, in some cases, even as children. These cultural norms and behaviours will affect the productionist paradigm of the poultry sector and will ultimately affect the notion of profit and profitability, which is very important within the neoliberal economic order. Not only does it bring forth paradigms related to production, but it also affects consumption as well.

Five respondents from both provinces also stated that they do not consume meat or eggs from the chicken they own but they give eggs to their children. But other than the pure vegetarians, most respondents consume meat from other chickens and serve chicken to visitors or other occupants of the household. As Alders, Bagnol, and Young (2010) point out, ‘In many countries, social goodwill is created by offering guests a meal containing meat, more of than not, poultry’ (p. 434).

Distribution of backyard chickens and their associated network, feed practices, biosecurity practices, political, economic and cultural significance of backyard chickens and religious ideologies associated with backyard chickens discussed above play an important role in backyard chicken‐rearing systems in Sri Lanka. From a positivist perspective, backyard chicken rearing may be perceived simply as an economic activity, offering employment opportunities and a method to enhance nutritional security. As a result, both state and non‐state actors engage in various interventions with the aim of promoting backyard poultry within the community. But this space has become a contested discursive space where complex political, economic and cultural variables interplay. This leads to the creation of an interesting dichotomy and a divided consciousness among the people who are willing to and those engaged in backyard poultry farming. On the one hand, the respondents want to expand their business and expect government help. Yet, there is resistance to producing chicken meat by farmers, especially Sinhala Buddhist farmers (as in the sample taken), on religious, cultural and personal grounds. Through farmer training programmes, it is possible to address the issues associated with feed and biosecurity practices. But it is questionable whether such programmes could in reality bring forth an ideological revolution to change the religious mindset with regard to chicken rearing of the people concerned. As evidence tends to support that chicken rearing can provide the much‐required nutrition for communities, it is imperative to secure the sustainability of this dynamic sector, considering its political disjunctions and discursivities, and to identify sustainable measures ensuring its ongoing viability. The results of this study will be useful in deciding future research avenues and formulating policy. For example, how religion affects the outlook on the poultry sector is a possible future research avenue which will have wider policy implications. Results can also be used to conduct further research on whether livestock should be promoted in certain areas in the country as opposed to the others, which again can have policy implications. Identifying the enablers and barriers to biosecurity practices can also pave the way for further research and have significant policy implications. The overall goal was to understand the factors that enable or hinder the success of backyard chicken rearing as a sustainable economic activity in the country, and some aspects of this have been achieved through this study.

The study has several limitations. First, the data were not analysed through a gendered lens, which would have broadened the scope of the study. In addition, the study's findings are primarily based on qualitative data, highlighting the need for further quantitative research to provide additional validation and a more comprehensive understanding of the research area.

This research specifically aimed to explore the political, economic and cultural discourse surrounding backyard chicken‐rearing farming systems with the goal to identify the enablers and barriers to making backyard chicken‐rearing a successful economic activity in the country. In order to gain an understanding in depth, it was necessary to take an interview‐based qualitative approach. This is not possible through quantitative methods such as questionnaires. However, to study the prevalence of some practices and behaviours, a questionnaire‐based study is necessary. Moreover, using in‐depth qualitative interviews before conducting questionnaire‐based surveys is more effective in understanding complex issues in a local context. Therefore, a mixed‐methods approach using qualitative and quantitative research tools can be useful. However, mixing methods has several challenges, including the mixing of epistemological and ontological viewpoints and the challenges to researchers in terms of skills and time. It may be the case that a follow‐up study, with a wider aim, could be conducted to identify the prevalence of these views within Sri Lanka and other countries.