The prevalence of pancreatic lesions has increased over the years because of an increase in accessibility to and the quality of cross‐sectional imaging. This commentary describes the common non‐neoplastic and neoplastic pancreatic lesions. The images in this commentary depict classic cross‐sectional images, sonographic findings, and the cytopathologic diagnosis of each lesion. Most common non‐neoplastic lesions include pseudocysts, autoimmune pancreatitis, and chronic pancreatitis. Most common neoplastic lesions include serous cystadenomas, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, mucinous cystic neoplasms, solid pseudopapillary neoplasms, neuroendocrine tumors, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, acinar cell carcinoma, and metastases to the pancreas. The aim of this Cytoimaging Correlation Series is to demonstrate the multidisciplinary involvement in the diagnosis of pancreatic pathology and to highlight main findings in the most common entities found in everyday practice.

This commentary details the close correlation of cytopathology and imaging analysis in achieving the final diagnosis of pancreatic lesions. Knowledge of the imaging features of pancreatic lesions undergoing fine‐needle aspiration is important for the cytopathologist; solid versus cystic lesions, irregular versus round lesions, and unilocular versus septated and complex lesions are all clues for a more accurate cytologic diagnosis.

Pancreatic lesions are rising in prevalence, likely because of increasing access to cross‐sectional imaging. They can be subtyped into neoplastic and non‐neoplastic lesions. Some lesions are characteristic on computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and/or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), whereas others are nonspecific. A diagnosis of pancreatic lesions is typically made by clinical history, cross‐sectional imaging, and fluid and/or tissue sampling by EUS with fine‐needle aspiration or biopsy sent for cytologic examination.1,2As a matter of fact, there may be no system that emphasizes the importance of morphologic and clinical correlation more than the pancreaticobiliary tract.

In the current article, part of theCancer CytopathologyCytoimaging Correlation Series, we present several examples of neoplastic and non‐neoplastic entities, encompassing the most common entities found in everyday practice, with detailed descriptions of their imaging and cytomorphologic findings. This atlas‐style article should be of aid for all those professionals involved in the multidisciplinary approach to pancreatic lesions, hopefully helping to achieve a more accurate and detailed diagnosis.

Pancreatic pseudocysts and walled‐off pancreatic necrosis (WOPN) are types of benign pancreatic fluid collections. Pseudocysts form from either an acute episode of pancreatitis or chronic ductal obstruction, leading to ductal injury and resultant pancreatic fluid extravasation.4WOPN occurs after an acute episode of pancreatitis that results in necrosis of surrounding tissue. The pancreatic fluid collection becomes walled off an average of 4 weeks after initial ductal injury.5Cross‐sectional imaging demonstrates an encapsulated pancreatic collection (Figure1); MRI has higher sensitivity in detecting necrotic debris and in evaluating ductal injury. On EUS, pseudocysts are anechoic lesions with thin walls (Figure2A), whereas WOPN tends to have thick walls with internal debris (Figure2B). In cytology, pancreatic fluid collections usually show scattered macrophages and neutrophils and no epithelial cells are present, whereas WOPN would distinctly demonstrate a necrotic background (Figure3). Amylase levels of the cystic fluid are usually in the thousands, which helps achieve final diagnosis.

Computed tomography image with contrast showing a large, well encapsulated pancreatic fluid collection.

Endoscopic ultrasound of a two types of pancreatic fluid collections: (A) pseudocyst and (B) walled‐off pancreatic necrosis.

Scattered, hemosiderin‐laden macrophages in a dirty background (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×40).

Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) is a chronic, inflammatory disease of the pancreas. There are two types of AIP as classified by international consensus diagnostic criteria6: lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing pancreatitis (type 1 AIP) and idiopathic duct centric pancreatitis (type 2 AIP). Type 1 AIP is typically associated with immunoglobulin subclass 4 (IgG4)‐related diseases, with elevated serum IgG4 in the majority of patients, whereas type 2 AIP is associated with ulcerative colitis.7Classically on CT, there is diffuse enlargement of the pancreatic parenchyma, creating asausage shapewith a hypoenhancing halo or rind of soft tissue. On MRI, precontrast T1 shows decreased signal intensity throughout the pancreas as well as diffusion restriction with increased signal on diffusion‐weighted imaging (Figure4). The pancreas can also be focally enlarged as well, which can easily be mistaken for malignancy. On EUS, the pancreas also looks enlarged, with reduced echogenicity, diffuse lobularity, hyperechoic stranding, and thickened pancreatic borders (Figure5).

Magnetic resonance images showing (A) decreased signal intensity of asausage‐likepancreas on precontrast T1 and (B) hyperintensity on diffusion‐weighted imaging.

Endoscopic ultrasound image showing an enlarged, hypoechoic pancreas with hyperechoic stranding, subtle lobularity, and areas of thickened pancreatic borders.

The diagnosis of AIP can be suggested clinically with history, imaging, and serology for type 1 AIP; and biopsy confirmation is usually not performed. However, it can be helpful in unclear cases (especially in cases for which a tumor must be excluded). Typical cytology shows normal acinar cells in a background of lymphocytes and plasma cells (Figure6). Histopathologic evaluation is needed with immunostaining for IgG4‐positive plasma cells (>40 IgG4‐positive cells/mm2or an IgG4:IgG ratio >0.4).

(A) Dirty background with inflammatory cells, including plasma cells, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and fragments of ductal cells with minimalreactive atypia. (B) The presence of plasma cells may be related to autoimmune causes, and clinical correlation is required.

Chronic pancreatitis (CP) is a fibroinflammatory disease of the pancreas that may result in parenchymal fibrosis, parenchymal and ductal calcifications, exocrine and endocrine insufficiency, and/or chronic pain.8CP is a clinical diagnosis based on clinical history, laboratory tests, and imaging and is assessed on a spectrum as mild, moderate, and severe. On cross‐sectional imaging, parenchymal atrophy can be seen with or without calcifications in the parenchyma and/or ducts. On EUS, features of CP may include a variation of parenchymal changes, such as hyperechoic foci with shadowing, lobularity, honeycombing, cysts, and stranding, as well as ductal changes, such as ductal stones, irregular and/or dilated main duct, dilated side‐branch ducts, and hyperechoic main‐duct margins. The Rosemont criteria9was developed to standardize EUS diagnosis of CP based on the aforementioned features, but this is fairly subjective and may carry a high false‐positive rate.10Histologic evaluation is not necessary to make a diagnosis; however, when CP affects a part of the pancreas more severely—most commonly the head of the pancreas—this may resemble a malignancy on cross‐sectional (Figure7) and EUS (Figure8) images, thus biopsy may be performed. In cytology, ductal cells may show reactive/degenerative changes in a background of blood, mucus, degenerated cells, debris, macrophages, stromal fragments, and calcification (Figure9). In some instances, reactive changes can be severe, and distinction from a well differentiated adenocarcinoma may be an issue. In those cases, correlation with history and imaging is essential in achieving a proper definite diagnosis.

Computed tomography scan showing pancreatic atrophy with ductal dilation and calcifications within the ducts and parenchyma.

Endoscopic ultrasound image of chronic pancreatitis showing parenchymal atrophy with hyperechoic foci and dilated pancreatic duct because of an obstructing intraductal calcification.

Background of blood and degenerated cells in an image showing saponified fat necrosis and inflammation typical of active chronic pancreatitis (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×40).

Serous cystadenomas (SCAs) are benign cystic neoplasms, although there are rare reports of malignant transformation.11,12,13On cross‐sectional and EUS imaging, an SCA can either be microcystic or macrocystic (oligocystic). For microcystic SCAs, there may be a T2‐hypointense central scar, which can have associated calcifications (Figure10A); and, classically on EUS, these lesions are microcystic, resembling a honeycomb (Figure10B). Macrocystic SCAs are multilobulated with at least one cyst >2 cm (Figure11). SCAs do not communicate with the pancreatic duct. Although the most common location is in the head of the pancreas, it can occur in any part of the pancreas.

(A) Magnetic resonance image showing a microcystic lesion with T2 central hypointensity scarring, consistent with a serous cystadenoma, and (B) its corresponding endoscopic ultrasound image of the classic honeycomb appearance.

(A) Magnetic resonance image of a macrocystic (oligocystic) serous cystadeonoma with large, lobulated cysts and (B) its corresponding endoscopic ultrasound image.

If imaging diagnosis of this cystic lesion is not clear, aspiration of the cyst fluid can assist in making a diagnosis. Many times, epithelial cuboidal cells lining the cyst walls are not represented, and all are seen are hemosiderin‐laden macrophages because of the rich vascular nature of this lesion (Figure12). When present, cuboidal cyst lining cells are usually sparse, and there is no evidence of mucin. Immunohistochemistry positivity for inhibin A or GLUT1 may be helpful.

Fine‐needle aspiration of serous cystadenoma demonstrating (A) hemosiderin‐laden macrophages because of the rich vascular nature of this lesion and (B) cuboidal cyst lining cells with no evidence of mucin (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×40 in A and B). On H&E‐stained samples, a panoramic view shows (C) the thin walls lined by cuboidal cells with no mucin and (D) rich vascular stroma (original magnification ×10 in C, ×20 in D).

Magnetic resonance image of a main‐duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm with a segmental dilated main duct.

Endoscopic ultrasound image of a main‐duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm showing segmental dilation of the main duct, tapering smoothly to a normal caliber main duct.

Magnetic resonance image/magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography of numerous side‐branch intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms along the pancreatic body and tail.

Endoscopic ultrasound image showing a side‐branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm with thin internal septations; although not pictured here, this cyst had clear communication with a side branch of the main pancreatic duct.

Magnetic resonance image of a mixed‐type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm demonstrating a dilated main‐duct cyst and additional side‐branch cysts.

Endoscopic ultrasound image of a side‐branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm with a mural nodule.

Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, low grade, showing thick mucus‐containing, neoplastic mucinous cells (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×40).

Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, high grade. Nuclear enlargement, pleomorphism, and irregular and more crowded groups of atypical cells (Diff‐Quik stain, original magnification ×40).

Mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCNs) are macrocystic lesions typically found on the body or tail the pancreas.15They do not communicate with the main pancreatic duct. However, on MRI and EUS, the connection to the main duct is not always obvious; therefore, it can be difficult to differentiate a side‐branch duct IPMN from an MCN. On CT, MCNs may have peripheral calcifications or thin septations, which are better seen on MRI (Figure21). MCNs are anechoic lesions on EUS without connection to the pancreatic duct; they typically have a hyperechoic wall because of the peripheral calcifications, but not always (Figure22). Fine‐needle aspiration of these lesions obtains thick, sticky mucus with a honey‐like consistency. Cytology is variable and often sparse. The cytology is similar to that of IPMN and can range from bland to frankly malignant‐looking cells (Figure23). Indeed, there is overlapping cytology of these two entities, and they are usually diagnosed generically as mucinous cysts on cytology alone.

Magnetic resonance image of a mucinous cystic neoplasm demonstrating thin septations within the cyst and no clear communication of with the pancreatic duct.

Endoscopic ultrasound image of a lobulated anechoic pancreatic lesion without clear communication with the pancreatic duct.

A mucinous cystic neoplasm showing mucinous cyst lining with ovarian‐like stroma. (A) Unfortunately, stroma is rarely sampled in a fine‐needle aspiration procedure. (B) The mucinous epithelial cells are clustered together in a background of extracellular mucin (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×40 in A and B).

Solid‐pseudopapillary neoplasms are rare, low‐grade, malignant tumors that are often mixed solid and cystic. On cross‐sectional imaging, the mass can be seen with or without a capsule. A cystic portion tends to be in the center, surrounded by solid components17(Figure24). On EUS, the lesion would demonstrate mixed cystic and solid features, with heterogeneity that may represent hemorrhagic or necrotic debris (Figure25). In cytology, branching papillary‐like fronds with delicate vascular cores lined by one or more layer(s) of tumor cells (Figure26). Pseudopapillae are capillaries surrounded by tumor cells. In some cases, metachromatic, myxoid material can be found. Tumor cells are usually bland and uniform and typically have cytoplasmic processes and nuclear grooves (Figure27). Intracytoplasmic hyaline globules (positive for periodic acid–Schiff stain) are highly characteristic of this tumor. They also can be found extracellularly (Figure28).

Magnetic resonance image of a solid‐pseudopapillary neoplasm with subtle solid and cystic features.

Endoscopic ultrasound image of a solid‐pseudopapillary neoplasm showing a heterogenous lesion consistent with mixed solid and cystic components.

Branching, papillary‐like fronds with delicate vascular cores are classic of solid‐pseudopapillary neoplasms (Papanicolaou stain, ×10).

Tumor cells are usually bland and uniform, with cytoplasmic processes and nuclear grooves (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×20).

Intracytoplasmic hyaline globules (positive for periodic acid–Schiff stain) are highly characteristic of solid‐pseudopapillary neoplasms. They can also be found extracellularly (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×40).

Computed tomography scan of a hyperenhancing neuroendocrine tumor in the head of the pancreas.

Endoscopic ultrasound image of a hypoechoic lesion with well defined borders in the pancreas; biopsy‐confirmed neuroendocrine tumor.

(A) A neuroendocrine tumor of the pancreas with a dispersed cell population, mild atypia, and plasmacytoid‐looking cells (Diff‐Quik stain, original magnification ×20). (B) Nuclei show the classicsalt‐and‐pepperchromatin (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×40).

Fine‐needle biopsy sample of a neuroendocrine tumor of the pancreas showing the same plasmacytoid cells forming an organoid‐appearing block. Fine‐needle biopsy samples are ideal for immunohistochemistry, and, when rich in cells, grading of these tumors may be quite comparable to the final surgical report (H&E stain, original magnification ×20).

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC) comprise of 90% of all pancreatic cancers.20On CT and postcontrast, T1‐weighted MRI, PDAC is a hypoenhancing, ill‐defined mass causing upstream pancreatic ductal dilation and parenchymal atrophy (Figure33). If the mass is in the head of the pancreas, obstructing the common bile duct as well, MRI demonstrate a classicdouble‐ductsign with dilation of both the pancreatic duct and the common bile duct. On EUS, the mass is hypoechoic with upstream pancreatic atrophy and ductal dilation (Figure34). PDAC in cytology can be well, moderately, or poorly differentiated. In well differentiated PDAC, there are abnormal architectural arrangements of pancreatic atypical ductal cells: too crowded (tight wads: i.e., crowded, disorderly sheets and clusters of cells with some nuclear overlap and loss of polarity; Figures35,36,37,38). Hypochromatic nuclei with parachromatin clearing also can be observed. Nuclear membrane irregularities (folds, clefts, grooves) are important diagnostic features of ductal adenocarcinoma, including well differentiates types. In poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas, atypia is severe and easily recognizable on cytology. Pancreatic adenosquamous carcinoma requires the presence of both atypical glandular cells and a substantial component (>30%) of malignant squamous cells (Figure39).

(A) Magnetic resonance image showing an ill‐defined mass in the head of the pancreas. (B) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography demonstrates the classicdouble‐ductsign with a biopsy‐proven pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma identified in the head of the pancreas.

Endoscopic ultrasound image of an ill‐defined pancreatic mass; fine‐needle biopsy confirmed pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Well differentiated pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma with slight atypical nuclei but already with loss of architectural arrangement (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×20).

(A) Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma can demonstrate a drunken honeycomb pattern and (B) mild pleomorphism with loss of polarization (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×40).

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma can be associated with dense fibrosis. (A) Papanicolaou‐stained smear and (B) a cell block.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma can show highly anaplastic cells with (A) atypical mitosis or (B) signet ring cells (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×40).

Pancreatic adenosquamous carcinoma has the presence of both (A) atypical glandular cells and (B) a substantial component (>30%) of malignant squamous cells (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification ×20 in A, ×60 in B).

Magnetic resonance image of a nonspecific, hypoenhancing, solid mass in the head of the pancreas; biopsy confirmed acinar cell adenocarcinoma.

Endoscopic ultrasound image of a hypoechoic mass in the tail of the pancreas; biopsy confirmed acinar cell carcinoma.

Acinar cell carcinoma demonstrated by tumor cells that form irregular, disorderly sheets; crowded clusters; or characteristic microacinar structures.

(A) Cell block of acinar cell adenocarcinoma with (A) immunoreactivity for trypsin showing (B) an acytoplasmic and granular staining pattern. Immunoreactivity for BCL‐10 (not shown) helps differentiate acinar cell adenocarcinoma from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and solid‐pseudopapillary neoplasm.

Although metastasis to the pancreas is rare, common metastasizing malignancies include renal cell carcinoma, melanomas, colorectal cancer, breast cancer, and sarcomas.22Clinical history best informs a suspicion of metastasis to the pancreas if a lesion is found on the pancreas. Cross‐sectional imaging may note concomitant lesions in the kidney or colon as well as the pancreas; however, metastatic lesions to the pancreas are typically nonspecific and ill‐defined. Multifocal pancreatic lesions are also suggestive of metastasis to the pancreas. EUS findings of metastatic lesions to the pancreas are also nonspecific and variable. Examples of common neoplasms that metastasize to the pancreas include kidney (which can occur as a single solitary mass decades after nephrectomy; Figures44,45,46), breast (Figure47), and colon (Figure48), each with specific morphologic parameters, as described in the examples shown.

Computed tomography scan of two pancreatic lesions in the setting of prior right nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma.

Endoscopic ultrasound image with a heterogenous lesion on the tail of the pancreas; biopsy confirmed metastatic renal cell carcinoma.

Metastatic renal cell carcinomas to the pancreas present as groups of bland‐looking clear cells in a rich, vascularized stroma. (A) Immunohistochemistry plays a pivotal role in these cases, which are positive for carbonic anhydrase IX and PAX‐8. It is important to note that metastatic renal cell carcinoma may show up many years after the initial diagnosis, and a detailed history search is mandatory in these patients (Diff‐Quik stain, original magnification ×40x). (B) A cell block shows positivity for carbonic anhydrase IX.

Another common example of metastatic carcinoma to the pancreas is metastasis from breast cancer. Morphologically very similar to a well or moderately differentiated pancreatic carcinoma, metastatic breast ductal carcinomas are very difficult to diagnose in a fine‐needle aspiration from a pancreatic lesion. Cells may lose coherence, and a more dispersed pattern may be noted. Immunohistochemistry also plays a pivotal role in these cases, along with the clinical history (Diff‐Quik stain, original magnification ×20).

Colonic adenocarcinomas may also metastasize to the pancreas. More columnar‐shaped cells with acinar formation and a necrotic background provide clues to this diagnosis (Diff‐Quik stain, original magnification ×40).

The significance of cytologic and imaging correlation in diagnosing pancreatic lesions cannot be overstated. Although each diagnostic modality provides valuable insights individually, the integration of cytologic analysis with imaging findings enhances diagnostic accuracy and guides clinical decision making, with the fostered potential to obtain an early diagnosis of potential life‐threatening neoplasms and a have positive impact on patient management and prognosis.