Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation is a forward-looking technology for zero-carbon nitrogen fixation, which is crucial for alleviating the energy crisis and achieving carbon neutrality. Based on research into the structural regulation of nitrogen-fixing photocatalysts, this review summarizes the latest progress and challenges in photocatalytic ammonia synthesis from three dimensions: active sites, crystal structures, and composite structures. In terms of active site construction, common types of active sites, including metal sites, non-metal sites, vacancies, and single atoms, are discussed. Their characteristics and methods for improving photocatalytic nitrogen fixation performance are analyzed. Furthermore, starting from the mechanism of nitrogen activation, a general strategy for active sites to promote the electron exchange process and thereby enhance nitrogen activation efficiency is explored. In terms of crystal structure construction, the design of nitrogen-fixing photocatalysts is described from three perspectives: crystal form, crystal facet, and morphology control. In terms of composite structure construction, this review discusses the key role of structures such as semiconductor–metal composites and semiconductor–semiconductor composites in promoting carrier separation. It is hoped that this review can provide new insights for the design and preparation of efficient nitrogen-fixing photocatalysts and inspire practical applications of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation.

This review summarizes the latest progress in photocatalytic ammonia synthesis from active sites, crystal structures, and composite structures.

Artificial nitrogen fixation dates back to the mid-19th century, but the Haber–Bosch process in 1909 ushered in its modern era.1Since NH3, the main product of industrial nitrogen fixation, is also the primary raw material for fertilizers, the Haber–Bosch process has led to a 400% increase in world food production since its introduction, fundamentally transforming food production methods.3However, the Haber–Bosch process requires harsh conditions of high temperature (700 K) and high pressure (100 atm) to catalyze the reaction between N2and hydrogen (H2) to produce NH3, consuming approximately 2% of the world's total energy and emitting about 3% of global CO2annually.3In the Haber–Bosch process, about 72% of H2is supplied by natural gas-based hydrogen production, and the energy consumption of the H2production process accounts for about 75% of the total energy consumption of ammonia synthesis. The high energy consumption of the Haber–Bosch process necessitates the pursuit of greener and more sustainable pathways for artificial nitrogen fixation.

In addition to the thermocatalytic approach represented by the Haber–Bosch process, there are also enzymatic catalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis that can efficiently fix nitrogen. Microorganisms (such as bacteria) can utilize nitrogenase to reduce N2to NH3. Another direction in microbial nitrogen fixation is the modification of nitrogen-fixing genes into eukaryotic organisms,4such as plants, and the use of nitrogen-fixing microorganisms in electrocatalytic devices to continuously reduce N2to NH3. These microbial nitrogen fixation processes help alleviate the demand for NH3but are difficult to apply to modern intensive agricultural production.3Electrocatalytic technology provides an alternative method to transfer electrons to nitrogenase without ATP hydrolysis, and various electrocatalysts have been developed to directly reduce N2to NH3under external electrical energy. Since the primary power generation method of China is still thermal power, utilizing renewable energy instead of electrical energy could significantly reduce energy consumption and CO2emissions, simultaneously contributing to the goal of achieving carbon neutrality by 2060.

Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation technology, directly driven by solar energy, can catalyze the conversion of N2to NH3using H2O instead of H2under mild conditions with no carbon emissions, making it a promising forward-looking technology for artificial nitrogen fixation. In 1977, Schrauzer and Guth used titanium dioxide (TiO2) as a nitrogen fixation catalyst to achieve the reduction of N2to produce trace amounts of ammonia under illumination.5Since then, photocatalytic nitrogen fixation technology has been receiving widespread attention. Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation technology utilizes photogenerated carriers to achieve the oxidation and reduction of reactants. The main process is illustrated inFig. 1a.

Photocatalysts are generally semiconductors with a valence band filled with electrons and a conduction band devoid of electrons, separated by a forbidden band. When incident light with an energy greater than or equal to the band gap (Eg) illuminates the photocatalyst, electrons in the valence band are excited to the conduction band, leaving holes in the valence band. TheEgvalue determines the light absorption range of the catalyst, and its maximum absorption wavelength (λ) can be calculated using the empirical formula:λ= 1240/Eg.

The electrons transported to the catalyst surface undergo reduction reactions (N2accepts electrons to synthesize NH3), while the holes undergo oxidation reactions (H2O provides electrons to synthesize O2). N2molecules are first enriched on the catalyst surface through physical adsorption and then activated by the catalyst, followed by reduction to the product NH3through a continuous hydrogenation process.

To achieve efficient photocatalytic nitrogen fixation, an accurate understanding of the properties of N2is essential. N2is a linear molecule composed of two N atoms linked by a covalent bond (Fig. 1b). According to molecular orbital theory, the 2p orbitals of the two N atoms hybridize to form new bonding orbitals (2σ and π) and antibonding orbitals (2σ* and π*). The six electrons from the 2p orbitals fill the three bonding orbitals, forming a high-strength NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019N triple bond. Thermodynamically, the NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019N triple bond has a bond energy as high as 941 kJ mol−1, with the dissociation energy of the first bond reaching 410 kJ mol−1, severely hindering the dissociation of NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019N; kinetically, the large energy gap (10.82 eV) of the N2molecule obstructs electron transfer; in terms of reactivity, the low proton affinity (ΔH0= 37.6 kJ mol−1), low electron affinity (−1.9 eV), and high ionization energy (15.85 eV) indicate that the protonation and activation of N2are extremely difficult.11Therefore, N2is often used as an inert gas, and the NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019N bond is considered one of the most stable chemical bonds. Due to these inherent inert properties of N2, its utilization poses a significant challenge.

Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation catalysts, as the core of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation technology, are the focus of research in this field. In recent years, several reviews have been published on nitrogen fixation photocatalyst materials12and catalytic mechanisms,13,14but there are fewer reviews on catalyst structures, especially structural modulation related directly to catalytic performance, such as active site structure, crystal structure, and composite structure. Therefore, this review aims to summarize the research progress in structural modulation of nitrogen fixation photocatalysts in recent years, focusing on three dimensions: active sites, crystal structure, and composite structure of nitrogen fixation photocatalysts (Fig. 2), and to propose prospects for future development, hoping to further promote the development of the field of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation.

The design and construction of active sites are crucial for achieving efficient photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. Active sites need not only to effectively adsorb N2but also to rapidly accept electrons and protons for N2reduction. Currently, the performance of nitrogen fixation photocatalysts still lags significantly behind practical production demands. On the one hand, the difficulty in activating N2limits the activity of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. On the other hand, competition from hydrogen evolution reactions constrains the selectivity of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. The activation mechanism of N2is generally accepted as the π-backdonation mechanism proposed by Hanet al.,13which divides N2activation into two processes: process 1 involves the empty d-orbitals of the metal accepting electrons from the σgbonding orbital of N2, and process 2 involves the occupied d-orbitals of the metal donating electrons to theantibonding orbital of N2. It can be seen that N2activation is essentially an electron exchange process between the active site and the N2molecule. Therefore, enhancing the electron exchange between the active site and the N2molecule is an effective way to promote N2activation. On the one hand, the transfer of electrons from N2to the metal can be enhanced by pulling the two lone pairs of electrons at the ends of N2. Wanget al.15anchored B atoms on the surface of metal-free black phosphorus materials based on first-principles theoretical calculations, where adjacent B atoms formed “Lewis acid pairs” generating a “pull–pull effect” on N2molecules. Simulation calculations showed that the B atoms could attract electrons from the N2molecules and transfer them to the B atoms, and the resulting “pull–pull effect” could reduce the activation energy barrier of N2and promote N2activation to a certain extent. Building on this research, Wanget al.16further used bimetallic sites instead of monometallic sites to promote the transfer of electrons from N2to the metal. They screened FeMo/g-C3N4, TiMo/g-C3N4, MoW/g-C3N4, and NiMo/g-C3N4catalysts among 28 catalyst combinations through theoretical calculations. These four catalysts have suitable bandgap structures and visible light absorption capabilities, making them promising candidates for efficient nitrogen fixation photocatalysts. On the other hand, methods such as constructing heterojunctions17and forming localized surface plasmon resonance fields15can be used to promote the transfer of electrons from metal to N2. Huanget al.17loaded Bi metal cocatalysts on the surface of BiOBr to form a Bi/semiconductor interfacial Schottky junction. The introduction of Bi could not only promote interfacial electron transfer in the photocatalyst but also facilitate N2activation due to its strong electron donation. This unidirectional electron transfer from BiOBr to the active site Bi increased the efficiency of photocatalytic ammonia synthesis by 65 times. Bimetallic systems exhibit enhanced nitrogen activation by decoupling the electron acceptance and donation processes. For instance, Zhaoet al.18demonstrated that bimetallic organic frameworks (BMOFs) composed of hard-acid (high ionization potential,In) and soft-acid (lowIn) metal nodes synergistically promote NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019N bond cleavage. The hard-acid metal (e.g., Fe) facilitates electron withdrawal from N2viaσ-bond interaction, while the soft-acid metal (e.g., Sr) donates electrons to the π*-antibonding orbitals of N2. This decoupling strategy reduces the activation energy barrier and enhances electron exchange efficiency, achieving an NH3-evolution rate of 780 μmol g−1h−1under visible light.

In recent years, constructing coordination unsaturated sites through vacancies has become one of the research hotspots in the field of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. Vacancies in photocatalysts can not only promote the adsorption of N2but also facilitate charge separation to a certain extent. Vacancies are mainly classified into oxygen vacancies, nitrogen vacancies, carbon vacancies, and sulfur vacancies based on the missing elements, with oxygen vacancies being widely used in the field of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. Shiraishiet al.19investigated the effect of oxygen vacancies on the photocatalytic nitrogen fixation of TiO2. They proposed that Ti3+groups formed at the oxygen vacancies on the TiO2surface served as active sites that could effectively capture electrons and promote N2activation (Fig. 3a). To better create oxygen vacancies, researchers typically choose materials rich in oxygen elements as photocatalysts. Layered double hydroxides (LDH) are increasingly gaining attention due to their controllable electronic structure and low cost. Zhanget al.20were the first to apply CuCr-LDH nanosheets (CuCr-NS) rich in oxygen vacancies to the field of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. Under full-spectrum irradiation, the photocatalytic ammonia synthesis rate of CuCr-NS was 78.6 μmol g−1h−1, with an apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) of 2.4% at a wavelength of 400 nm. Subsequently, they optimized the oxygen vacancies by incorporating coordination unsaturated Cuδ+species onto ZnAl-LDH nanosheets (Fig. 3b).21DFT theoretical calculations indicated that the oxygen vacancies and Cuδ+species could effectively promote N2adsorption and activation.

Zhanget al.22reported BiOBr nanosheets (BOB-001-OV) with oxygen vacancies that could stretch the NCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019N bond length from 1.078 Å to 1.133 Å. Theoretical calculations showed that the defect states induced by oxygen vacancies could act as electron acceptors to effectively inhibit electron–hole pair recombination and enhance charge transfer from BOB-001-OV to N2molecules. Fluorescence spectroscopy revealed that the average lifetime (τ) of BOB-001-OV was 2.15 ns, approximately twice that of BiOBr without oxygen vacancies, demonstrating that oxygen vacancies could promote the migration of photogenerated carriers. The ammonia synthesis rate of BOB-001-OV under visible light was 104.3 μmol g−1h−1, with an AQE of 0.23% at 420 nm. Simultaneously, the generated O2was stoichiometrically close to 75% of produced NH3, proving that H2O could serve as an electron donor to achieve a complete chemical cycle in photocatalytic nitrogen fixation.

Single-atom catalysts (SACs) have garnered significant attention due to their rapid electron–hole separation and targeted active sites. The atomic-level dispersion of SACs maximizes atomic utilization and can anchor SACs as active sites to enhance nitrogen fixation activity in the field of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. Wanget al.23established a g-C3N4model anchored with single B atoms (B/g-C3N4) and simulated the reduction process of N2on B/g-C3N4through first-principles calculations (Fig. 4a). The calculation results showed that B/g-C3N4could effectively reduce gaseous N2molecules through an enzymatic mechanism at an extremely low initial potential. In addition, anchoring single B atoms significantly enhanced the visible and infrared light absorption of g-C3N4, granting the catalyst strong N2reduction capabilities. To address the issue of insufficient local electron supply. Yinet al.25prepared the Ru-SA/HxMoO3−yphotocatalyst by combining Ru single atoms (Ru-SA) with molybdenum oxide rich in oxygen vacancies and conducted photocatalytic nitrogen fixation studies using N2and H2as reactants (Fig. 4b). Ru-SA facilitated the activation of N2molecules and the migration of H2molecules, while Mo sites containing oxygen vacancies captured local electrons and catalyzed the reduction of N2molecules, ultimately achieving an ammonia synthesis rate of 4 mmol g−1h−1for SA/HxMoO3−y.

Research on the regulation of the crystal structure of photocatalysts for photocatalytic nitrogen fixation primarily focuses on crystal form, crystal facet and morphology control. Semiconductor photocatalysts are mostly crystalline materials, and their orderly crystal structure facilitates electron transfer and reduces the recombination of photogenerated carriers. Crystal form is a fundamental characteristic of crystalline materials, and research into the crystal form of nitrogen fixation photocatalysts can be traced back to the inception of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. In 1977, Schrauzeret al.5found that after calcination at 1000 °C, some TiO2impregnated with iron sulfate could transform from the anatase phase to the rutile phase, achieving the highest photocatalytic nitrogen fixation activity when the loading of Fe2O3reached 0.2%. Active site density is one of the critical factors directly affecting photocatalytic efficiency. Overly ordered crystal structures cannot expose sufficient active sites for N2adsorption, thereby hindering the adsorption and activation of N2molecules on the active sites to some extent. Houet al.24prepared amorphous SmOCl nanosheet materials using graphene oxide as a template. With increasing amorphization of the SmOCl nanosheets, numerous oxygen vacancies formed on the surface of the nanosheets, significantly promoting the adsorption and activation of N2molecules. Additionally, the authors observed enhanced Sm–O covalent bonds, indicating electron migration from bulk to surface for combination with N2. Under illumination, the ammonia synthesis rate of SmOCl nanosheets reached 426 μmol g−1h−1, with an AQE of 0.32% at 420 nm.

By precisely and rationally exposing specific crystal facets, the crystals with target facets can be controlled at the atomic scale. The atomic distribution on the crystal facets also significantly influences the active sites and electronic structure of photocatalysts, prompting an increasing number of researchers to attempt to enhance photocatalytic nitrogen fixation activity by regulating the crystal facets of semiconductors. Atoms arrange differently on different exposed facets, hence facet regulation can significantly impact the enhancement of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation activity. Baiet al.27prepared two types of Bi5O7I nanosheets exposing the (100) and (001) facets through hydrolysis and calcination methods. Further experiments demonstrated that the conduction band potential of Bi5O7I-001 (−1.45 V) was more negative than that of Bi5O7I-100 (−0.85 V), and Bi5O7I-001 exhibited higher photogenerated carrier separation efficiency and photocatalytic ammonia synthesis activity. When using ethanol as a hole scavenger, the photocatalytic ammonia synthesis rate of Bi5O7I-001 reached 111.5 μmol g−1h−1. Liet al.26systematically investigated the influence of the (001) and (010) facets of BiOCl nanosheets on the adsorption and activation of N2(Fig. 5a). Experimental results showed that N2molecules primarily bind through a terminal pathway on (001) facet of BiOCl (Fig. 5b), whereas they primarily bind through a side-on bridging pathway on (010) facet (Fig. 5c). The photocatalytic ammonia synthesis rate of (010) facet of BiOCl was approximately 2.5 times higher than that of (001) facet, reaching 4.62 μmol g−1h−1. Zhanget al.28combined facet regulation with defect regulation by constructing defects on the (040) facet of BiVO4single crystals, which induced V4+/V5+sites. Among them, V4+sites are responsible for the chemical adsorption of N2, while V5+sites serve as bridges for electron transfer, delivering electrons captured by defects to V4+sites for NH3synthesis. In contrast, the (110) facet of BiVO4only contains V5+sites. Therefore, the authors regulated the ratio of (040)/(110) facets by changing the pH during catalyst preparation, achieving a photocatalytic ammonia synthesis rate of 103.4 μmol g−1h−1.

Composite catalysts are comprised of multiple components. Compared to single structures, their composite structures can better overcome the inherent shortcomings of each component. Even more, the interplay between components may create synergistic effects, achieving a “1 + 1 > 2” outcome. Heterostructures are typical composite structures that regulate photoelectric properties by combining two semiconductor materials with different band-gap structures. Ghoshet al.33embedded Bi2MoO6into g-C3N4nanosheets to obtain a g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6heterojunction, which exhibited efficient photogenerated carrier separation and N2reduction capabilities. Liuet al.10used TiO2@C combined with g-C3N4to obtain the TiO2@C/g-C3N4composite catalyst. Compared to bulk g-C3N4, the steady-state photoluminescence spectrum peak intensity of TiO2@C/g-C3N4significantly decreased. Additionally, the transient photocurrent intensity of TiO2@C/g-C3N4was approximately 1.7 times higher than that of bulk g-C3N4, further proving the positive effect of composite structures on promoting carrier separation. When the molar ratio of TiO2@C to g-C3N4was 10 : 1, the photocatalytic ammonia synthesis rate of TiO2@C/g-C3N4reached 250.6 μmol g−1h−1. Xiaet al.34utilized the intrinsic electric field differences between Bi2O3and CoAl-LDH to construct Bi2O3@CoAl-LDHs core–shell heterojunction photocatalysts for nitrogen fixation. Hollow Bi2O3microspheres were first prepared using a solvothermal method and then mixed with the precursor solution of CoAl-LDH for a secondary solvothermal reaction to obtain the core–shell composite Bi2O3@CoAl-LDHs (Fig. 6). This composite structure photocatalyst had a large interface contact area, effectively promoting carrier separation and achieving a photocatalytic ammonia synthesis rate of 48.7 μmol g−1h−1.

Apart from compositing with semiconductor materials, metal compositing is also a common strategy to promote photogenerated electron–hole separation. In particular, noble metal loading can form Schottky barriers with semiconductors. The resulting energy band bending can effectively inhibit the recombination of photogenerated carriers. Ranjitet al.35loaded Ru, Rh, Pd, and Pt onto TiO2for photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. The authors found that the photocatalytic activity of metal-loaded TiO2, in descending order, was: Ru > Rh > Pd > Pt. The highest performance was observed for Ru-loaded TiO2due to its higher Ru–H bond strength. Yeet al.36prepared the Ni2P/Cd0.5Zn0.5S composite photocatalyst by loading transition metal phosphide Ni2P onto Cd0.5Zn0.5S. The authors demonstrated through time-resolved PL spectroscopy, photocurrent, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy that Ni2P/Cd0.5Zn0.5S had higher photogenerated electron–hole separation efficiency compared to Ni2P and Cd0.5Zn0.5S. Maimaitiziet al.37synthesized flower-like N-MoS2microspheres through a one-step solvothermal method and then prepared Pt/N-MoS2photocatalystsviaa photo-ultrasonic reduction method. The special multi-level flower-like structure of Pt/N-MoS2could provide more active sites. N doping could narrow the bandgap of MoS2, enhancing its response to visible light. Pt nanoparticles could act as electron traps, forming Schottky barriers, thereby improving photogenerated carrier separation efficiency. They demonstrated that the nitrogen fixation activity of ultrasonic photocatalysis was higher than that of ultrasonic catalysis and photocatalysis, indicating a synergistic effect between ultrasound and visible light irradiation. Schrauzeret al.5studied the impact of Fe, Cr, Co, and Mo metals on the photocatalytic nitrogen fixation performance of TiO2. They found that Fe metal significantly enhanced the photocatalytic nitrogen fixation activity. Based on this, Zhaoet al.38further investigated the effect of Fe loading on TiO2photocatalytic nitrogen fixation and found that an appropriate concentration of Fe3+could act as a hole trapping site to inhibit the recombination of photogenerated carriers, thereby enhancing photocatalytic activity. Liuet al.39also reported on Fe-loaded SrMoO4photocatalysts for nitrogen fixation reactions. They found that as the Fe loading increased from 0 to 5.1%, the bandgap of SrMoO4decreased from 3.98 eV to 2.93 eV. The bandgap directly affects the light absorption range, so the reduction in band-gap expanded the light absorption range of SrMoO4from the UV region to the visible region. Additionally, Fe loading could induce surface defects, which could serve as N2adsorption sites and inhibit electron–hole pair recombination, thereby effectively enhancing the photocatalytic nitrogen fixation efficiency. Compared to single-metal loading, bimetals may exhibit more effective synergistic effects during photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. Liet al.40loaded Pt-doped Fe nanoclusters onto g-C3N4. This study showed that Pt–Fe nanoclusters could cause upward bending of the semiconductor energy band and form a large Schottky barrier, thereby enhancing the separation of photogenerated carriers and N2reduction. Therefore, the FePt@C3N4photocatalyst exhibited an ammonia synthesis rate of 3.7 μmol g−1h−1under visible light irradiation. In addition to photocatalytic nitrogen fixation performance, structural regulation may also impact other properties of the catalyst. Zhanget al.41demonstrated that introducing oxygen vacancies into Ru/W18O49significantly enhanced the hydrogen spillover effect, which not only improved ammonia synthesis activity but also optimized the hydrogen adsorption/desorption thermodynamics and charge separation efficiency. Specifically, the Schottky junction formed between Ru and W18O49promoted electron trapping at Ru sites, reducing recombination losses. Additionally, the OVs-rich structure improved long-term stability, retaining 87% activity after six cycles, highlighting the dual role of structural defects in enhancing both efficiency and durability.

(1) Rational design of ternary transfer channels for molecules, protons, and electrons. Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation is a typical complex reaction requiring the simultaneous participation of N2molecules, protons, and electrons. The transfer paths, transfer rates, and transfer mechanisms for these three differ. N2molecules primarily diffuse with the aqueous solution, protons primarily transfer along the catalyst surface, and electrons primarily transfer along the catalyst framework. Direct contact between protons and electrons may lead to hydrogen evolution reactions. The design of respective transfer channels for molecules, protons, and electrons must ensure rapid material transfer while maintaining independence between channels, posing significant challenges for the structural design of photocatalysts.

(2) Exploration of new mechanisms for photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. Although the photocatalysts prepared in existing research have achieved high activity and selectivity, there is still a significant gap compared to biological nitrogenase. The rich species diversity in nature encompasses various efficient synergistic mechanisms, such as confinement effects, channel effects, compartmentalization effects, and proximity effects. If we can learn from natural coordination mechanisms and reveal new mechanisms for photocatalytic nitrogen fixation using interdisciplinary approaches such as materials genomics and artificial intelligence, it will bring new developments to this field.

(3) Expansion of photocatalyst applications. Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation reactions utilize photogenerated electrons to reduce N2molecules. To facilitate the analysis of the catalytic process, hole scavengers are often used to consume photogenerated holes. However, photogenerated holes possess strong oxidizing capabilities. If holes can be utilized to catalyze oxidation to produce higher-value chemicals, it will further broaden the application prospects of photocatalytic technology. Additionally, the stability test time for photocatalysts is generally within 24 hours, and the photocatalytic ammonia synthesis rate is generally at the micromolar level, still far from practical application requirements. Developing catalytic materials and optimizing structural parameters will be key factors in expanding the application of photocatalytic nitrogen fixation.