BK Polyoma virus (BKV) can lead to significant renal complications in immunocompromised individuals. While commonly observed in kidney transplant recipients, its occurrence in non‐renal solid organ transplant (NRSOT) recipients remains rare. The mainstay of treatment for BKV nephropathy in these patients involves careful reduction of immunosuppression.

In this report, we present a unique case of end‐stage renal disease due to refractory BKV nephropathy in a pediatric heart transplant patient. The patient was treated with bilateral native nephrectomy to eliminate the viral reservoir with clearance of her BK viremia. This led to a six‐month period of viral clearance, allowing for subsequent living donor kidney transplantation (LDKT).

BKV nephropathy is a rare entity in NRSOT patients. This case highlights the successful management of refractory BKV nephropathy in a pediatric heart transplant recipient through bilateral native nephrectomy, leading to an extended period of viral clearance and subsequent LDKT. Further studies are needed to explore the broader applicability of this approach in NRSOT recipients.

BK polyoma virus (BKV) is a non‐enveloped DNA virus that causes interstitial nephritis in immunocompromised patients. BKV is typically acquired in childhood, where it develops latency in the reno‐urinary tract and remains asymptomatic in most immunocompetent hosts. Studies have estimated more than 80% of the population is seropositive for BKV [1]. BKV was identified in the mid‐1990s as an important cause of renal allograft loss in renal transplantation [2]. Impaired immunologic surveillance due to chronic immunosuppression post‐transplantation can lead to donor‐ or recipient‐derived reactivation of BKV resulting in manifestations such as nephropathy, ureteral stricture, hemorrhagic cystitis, end‐stage renal disease (ESRD) and allograft loss [3]. BK viruria is detected in approximately 50% of kidney transplant recipients. Of those patients, between 15%–30% are positive for BK viremia, and between 1%–10% develop BK virus nephropathy (BKVN) [4,5]. Studies in pediatric kidney transplant recipients have demonstrated similar findings, with BK viremia being detected in 30% of patients with 6% progressing to develop BKVN [6]. The intensity of immunosuppressive regimen is considered the most significant risk factor to development of BKVN [7]. Treatment involves careful reduction in immunosuppression and use of adjunctive therapies such as quinolones, cidofovir, leflunomide, or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). In cases of allograft loss due to BKVN, retransplantation is an option. Although many antiviral options are utilized, there are currently no conclusively effective agents that reduce viral loads [7].

BKVN is rare outside of kidney transplantation but has been observed in the native kidneys of patients who are non‐renal solid organ transplant (NRSOT) recipients. The largest comprehensive review to date, published in 2019, described 21 patients with previous heart, lung, liver, or pancreas transplants who developed biopsy‐proven BKVN in the native kidney [8]. Treatment of BKVN in these patients has followed the same principles as seen in renal transplant patients, involving reduction of immunosuppression and use of adjuvant therapies.

In this report, we present a novel case of treatment of refractory BKVN in a NRSOT recipient with bilateral native nephrectomy, ureterectomy, and subsequent living donor kidney transplantation (LDKT).

An 11‐year‐old female with history of orthotopic heart transplantation (Htx) presented with rising creatinine over a 2‐year period. The patient had a history of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) treated with Htx 10 years prior to presentation. Her serum creatinine perioperatively was 0.2 mg/dL. Induction immunosuppressive agent used was anti‐thymoglobulin. She was maintained on tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil and eventually transitioned from mycophenolate mofetil to sirolimus in 2017 due to GI upset. She remained on triple therapy with tacrolimus, sirolimus, and prednisone from 2017 to 2020.

The patient's Htx post‐operative course was complicated by multiple episodes of acute cellular rejection (ACR) and antibody‐mediated rejection (AMR) with donor‐specific antibodies (DSA) treated with multiple courses of intravenous steroids, IVIG, rituximab, plasmapheresis, and bortezomib. Her renal function remained stable throughout this period.

The patient initially presented to a nephrologist in August 2020 for rising creatinine over a period of 2 years from 0.34 to 1.59 mg/dL at presentation. Her plasma and urine were grossly positive for BKV at 6 170 000 and > 5 000 000 000 copies/mL, respectively. Subsequent biopsy of the patient's right native kidney confirmed class 3 BKVN with extensive tubulointerstitial inflammation with tubulitis, viral cytopathic changes, and moderate interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (Figure1). Given the severity of BKVN and kidney damage, the patient was treated with cidofovir in an attempt to slow the progression of disease. Tacrolimus was discontinued, her prednisone dose was lowered, and she remained on sirolimus.

(a) Hematoxylin and Eosin‐stained sections shows tubulointerstitial inflammation and numerous typical basophilic ground‐glass viral inclusions in tubular epithelial cells and Bowman's capsules parietal epithelium (digital original magnification 10×); (b) trichrome stained sections demonstrate interstitial fibrosis and areas of global glomerulosclerosis (original magnification 10×); (c) immunohistochemical study (SV40) confirms infection of the epithelial cells with BK virus (digital original magnification 10×); (d) electron microscopic analysis shows extensive inclusions with crystalloid arrangement measuring between 35 and 40 nm which is characteristic of polyomavirus particles into the tubular epithelial cells (total magnification 18.500×).

BK plasma DNA titers initially responded to four doses of cidofovir with a nadir of 158, 489 copies/mL. However, they subsequently began rising, leading to the addition of IVIG (to treat both BKVN and rising DSA). She was maintained on cidofovir and IVIG with persistently positive BK viremia. During this time, she developed worsening renal function progressing to ESRD with symptomatic hypocalcemia, anemia, mild fluid overload, and uremia. Hemodialysis was initiated in October 2021. At this time, the patient was referred for transplant evaluation, where she was deemed ineligible for transplant unless there was evidence of BK clearance for a minimum of 3 months. She was continued on IVIG and cidofovir was increased.

After multidisciplinary discussions involving transplant ID, cardiology, nephrology, oncology, and transplant surgery, the decision was made to proceed with bilateral native nephrectomy in an effort to remove the viral reservoir and clear BK virus from the plasma.

After 5 months on hemodialysis, the patient underwent bilateral native nephrectomy, bilateral ureterectomy, appendectomy, partial omentectomy, and peritoneal dialysis (PD) catheter placement. The peritoneum was entered which can later impact the ability to use this cavity for peritoneal dialysis due to scarring but was not an issue in this case. The ureters were transected distally at the level of the bladder entrance. On pathology examination, the kidneys were small and show extensive tubulointerstitial fibrosis with numerous globally sclerotic glomeruli, consistent with end‐stage renal disease. No obvious basophilic ground‐glass viral inclusions were seen on hematoxylin & eosin‐stained slides, but the immunohistochemical study (SV40) was positive in rare epithelial cells (Figure2). Post‐operatively, sirolimus was changed to tacrolimus to facilitate wound healing, and IVIG and cidofovir were discontinued. BK virus was undetectable at first check 2 weeks post‐operatively. The patient transitioned from hemodialysis to peritoneal dialysis 1 month later. Four months post‐operatively, the patient experienced ACR and AMR, which was treated with increased prednisone, increased tacrolimus, and the resumption of IVIG.

(a) and (b) Bilateral kidneys with chronic changes including volume loss and increase in surface roughness; (c) hematoxylin and eosin‐stained sections shows extensive tubulointerstitial inflammation without obvious basophilic ground‐glass viral inclusions (digital original magnification 4×); (d) the trichrome stained sections highlight in blue the interstitial fibrosis and numerous globally glomerulosclerotic glomeruli (digital original magnification 10×); (e) Immunohistochemical study (SV40) is positive only in rare epithelial cells with BK virus (digital original magnification 10×).

BKV remained undetectable from time of nephrectomy, allowing the patient to undergo living donor kidney transplantation (LDKT) from her mother (Cytomegalovirus −/+, Epstein Barr Virus +/+) and PD catheter removal 8 months post‐nephrectomy. She had excellent urine production immediately with a creatinine nadir on post‐operative Day 3 of 0.28 mg/dL.

Her induction immunosuppression regimen included one dose of rituximab (given for known DSA) and anti‐thymocyte globulin. A steroid free maintenance regimen with tacrolimus and mycophenolic acid was used.

BKV was detectable in urine 2 days post‐operatively and remained positive. BKV became intermittently detectable in plasma from 2 weeks to 5 months post‐transplant, when it began steadily increasing to 3.56 log copies/mL by 8 months post‐transplant. Additionally, heart DSA along with kidney class I and class II DSA were positive 1 month post‐transplant (Figure3). Heart biopsy showed AMR via Molecular Microscope Diagnostic Report for Heart. Given these new findings, treatment for AMR of the heart was necessary and after multidisciplinary discussion. It was agreed to proceed with terminal complement inhibitor (eculizumab) as this would likely be safest in the setting of BK viremia.

(a) Heart DSA levels plotted over time (1:64 dilution). (b) Kidney DSA levels plotted over time. (c) BK viral loads plotted over time.

The patient has had fluctuating creatinine levels between 0.4 and 0.9 mg/dL since transplant. A kidney biopsy was performed 14 months after transplant given the patient's persistent BK viremia and elevated GFR. Biopsy revealed areas of active inflammation and tubulitis without chronic damage that is typically seen in T‐Cell‐mediated rejection. BKV staining was negative; however, the specific pattern of inflammation was felt to be most consistent with BKVN, though it is difficult to distinguish. Given these findings, the patient was placed on leflunomide and IVIG to improve the presumed BKVN before chronic damage occurs. The patient has experienced some improvement in her heart AMR with eculizumab and her BK viral load and serum creatinine have improved in the last few months while on single drug immunosuppression with tacrolimus and off Myfortic. Despite new events, the patient has been doing very well since she has not required dialysis post‐LDKT. Since transplant, she has gone back to school and is enjoying a very active life.

BKVN in NRSOT is a rare complication that has been described in a limited number of case reports. Our review of the literature identified 18 previous reports of BKVN in heart transplant patients [8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24]. Unlike routine screening for BK viremia and/or viruria in kidney transplant patients, there is currently no evidence to support the use of routine screening for BK viremia/viruria in NRSOT [25]. Given this lack of screening and rarity of the disorder, the true incidence of BKV in NRSOT is unknown. We recommend considering BKVN in all patients with NRSOT who present with AKI or CKD. Previous studies have cited an incidence of BK viremia in Htx recipients ranging from 0% to 17.8% [25]. Studies have shown that BKVN is more common among heart transplant recipients over other NRSOT recipients [26]. A ‘two‐hit hypothesis’ points to the immunosuppressive burden, as well as cardiac allograft dysfunction on renal perfusion, to explain this trend [27]. Notably, the patient in this report had no prior evidence of renal dysfunction but did undergo multiple rounds of additional immunosuppression due to AMR and ACR.

Treatment of BKVN in the NRSOT patient population has historically followed the same strategies employed in kidney transplant BVKN. There is no specific antiviral therapy for BKV, so the mainstay of treatment involves careful reduction in immunosuppression. This theoretically allows for increased immunologic clearance of the virus, although with an increased risk of rejection. For patients who have progressive BKVN despite immunosuppressive reduction, the use of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, leflunomide, fluoroquinolones, cidofovir, or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) are often trialed, though the efficacy of these therapies has not been established [28,29]. As a last resort for patients with refractory BKVN after renal transplantation, renal allograft nephrectomy followed by retransplantation has shown to be effective with positive outcomes [30]. To our knowledge, this is the only reported case of BKVN in a NRSOT that was treated with bilateral native nephrectomy followed by LDKT.

In this case, the patient had severe BKVN progressing to ESRD despite maximal immunosuppression reduction, cidofovir, and IVIG. Given the refractory nature of her BKVN, the decision was made to remove the patient's native kidneys and ureters to eradicate the viral reservoir. Operatively, the ureters were transected at the level of the bladder entrance to remove as much of the reno‐urinary tract as feasible. Though allograft nephrectomy for BKVN in kidney transplant recipients is well documented after failing medical therapy, this is the first report of bilateral native nephrectomy being utilized as a treatment for BKVN in NRSOT. Clearance of BKV in plasma was demonstrated 2 weeks post‐operatively from bilateral nephrectomy until 2 weeks post‐operatively from LDKT. Thus, the patient demonstrated complete clearance of BK viremia for 6 months (Figure1). BKV in urine was not surveilled after nephrectomy. The patient has now been functioning well off dialysis for 1.5 years.

The question arises as to whether the patient's post‐LDKT BK virus positivity stems from lingering disease in her urinary tract or transmission from the donor's kidney. Donor BK serostatus is not routinely established prior to transplantation, as was true in this case. The clinical significance of this finding was also unclear given the low percentage of BK viruria and viremia that develops into BKVN. Previous research in renal retransplantation has shown that graft survival at 5 years was 90.6% in patients who were retransplanted after BKVN related allograft loss. There was no difference in graft survival between those who lost their first allograft due to BKVN compared to other causes [30]. Though this case involved BKVN in native kidneys rather than allograft, it was reasonable to extrapolate the potential for positive graft survival based on this data.

This case reports highlights a novel approach to managing BKVN in a NRSOT recipient. By performing bilateral native nephrectomy to eliminate the viral reservoir, we achieved a substantial period of viral clearance, facilitating a successful LDKT, eliminating the need for dialysis and significantly improving her quality of life. Further research is warranted to evaluate the long‐term efficacy of this approach and potential applicability in other NRSOT recipients.