Chronic and end‐of‐life pain in children is underreported and undermanaged. Current guidelines for pediatric chronic pain include medical and interventional modalities; however, the inclusion of neurosurgical treatments is uncommon and inconsistent. This systematic review presents the literature, and we provide recommendations for the role of neurosurgical procedures in treating chronic and end‐of‐life pain in children.

A systematic review was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta‐analyses (PRISMA) guidelines using three databases: PubMed, Embase, and Scopus. We included 40 studies presenting neurosurgical procedures for the treatment of chronic and end‐of‐life pain in children.

Thirty‐one (77.5%) manuscripts focused on the treatment of neuropathic pain, five (12.5%) focused on nociceptive pain, and four (10%) treated mixed pain conditions. The most common neurosurgical procedure was intrathecal opioid therapy via pump placement (29.3%), followed by spinal cord stimulation (26.8%). Neuropathic pain syndromes were primarily treated with neurostimulation (58%), demonstrating good efficacy. Ablative procedures (40%) were most effective for nociceptive pain syndromes. Both chordotomy and intrathecal pumps provided subjective pain relief for mixed pain syndromes. The quantification of procedural efficacy, including pain outcomes and grading scales, varied significantly across studies.

Neurosurgical treatments for chronic pediatric pain are safe, although broad efficacy cannot be determined due to sparse literature and inadequately quantified pain responses. Guidelines for escalating chronic and end‐of‐life pain management in pediatric patients should be updated to include neurosurgical treatments and appropriate outcome scales. Focused research on appropriate patients, available neurosurgical therapies, and pediatric outcomes is warranted.

Comprehensive reviews of the neurosurgical treatment of pain in adults stipulate indications and outcomes across procedures and pain syndromes; however, this is entirely lacking for children.5We systematically review the existing literature regarding the neurosurgical treatment of chronic and end‐of‐life pain in pediatric populations and provide recommendations for neurosurgical procedures in practice.

All publications from the initial search were imported into EndNote (Clarivate Analytics, Philadelphia, PA), and duplicates were excluded. The deduplicated articles were screened for relevance by title and abstract by two authors (SA and GB). Articles progressing to full‐text review were screened for final inclusion according to the following predetermined inclusion criteria: (1) published in or translated into the English language, (2) available full text, (3) pediatric population (<25 years of age) with chronic pain, (4) neurosurgical therapy for the primary purpose of pain control, and (5) provided outcomes of neurosurgical procedures. The outcomes of treatment included complication rates and efficacy determined by improvement in pain scales. Articles were screened independently by two reviewers (SA and GB) through Rayyan (https://rayyan.qcri.org/). All disagreements were discussed and resolved by the reviewers.

Data from included studies were extracted independently and cross‐checked for accuracy by authors (SA and GB). Article information including bibliographic data, study design, number of patients, condition, type of pain, procedure, and outcomes—efficacy and complications—were reviewed.

Studies were grouped into three categories based on the type of pain (neuropathic, nociceptive, or mixed). The type of pain was determined in the following tiered system: (1) reported within the study manuscript, (2) pain condition with known etiology, and (3) classified by authors through standard definitions of pain types. Any manuscript needing to be classified by authors was reviewed by a senior author (JSR) for accuracy.

The primary outcome was efficacy of the neurosurgical procedure to treat pain. Efficacy was determined for studies that reported numerical pain scores pre‐ and postoperatively. Treatment was determined effective if there was a ≥50% reduction in the numeric pain score and ineffective if there was a <50% reduction. Studies that did not report a numeric pain score or had missing data were classified as “not quantified.” Subjective data on the effect on pain control were collected, but these data were not used to determine efficacy. Secondary outcomes included both intraoperative and postoperative complications. Descriptive analysis was performed in Excel.

Critical appraisal of all included studies was conducted by assessing the risk of bias using the Risk Of Bias In Non‐Randomized Studies—of Interventions (ROBINS‐I) tool and quality using the Grading of Study Design Quality framework as described in another study.12,13Two reviewers (SA, GB) assessed the risk of bias and quality of each study independently, and disagreements were resolved by a third reviewer (NV).

A total of 3492 articles were identified: 990 from PubMed, 915 from Scopus, and 1587 from Embase. 858 duplicate articles were removed, and 2634 articles were screened by title and abstract. After initial title and abstract screening, 139 full‐text articles were assessed for eligibility and 40 articles were found to be eligible (FigureS1).14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53Study characteristics are reported in Table1. The study periods ranged from 1992 to 2023. The majority of studies were case reports (72.5%) followed by case series (12.5%), retrospective cohorts (10%), prospective cohorts (2.5%), and randomized clinical trials (2.5%). The number of patients in each study ranged from 1 to 88. In total, there were 281 pediatric participants with chronic pain who received neurosurgical treatment. The overall risk of bias in this study was serious, and the overall quality of evidence was low due to the prevalence of case reports and lack of randomized control trials included.

Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CRPS, chronic regional pain syndrome; CRPS‐I, chronic regional pain syndrome type 1; DN4, Douleur Neuropathique 4; DREZ, dorsal root entry zone; NRS, Numeric Rating Scale; PPP, Pediatric Pain Profile; VAS, Visual Analogue Scale; VNS, Verbal Numeric Scale; VRS, Verbal Rating Scale; UK, United Kingdom; USA, United States of America.

Abbreviations: CRPS, chronic regional pain syndrome.

Funnel plot of pain diagnoses reported in the included studies, from most commonly (top) to least commonly (bottom) reported. ACNES, anterior cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome; CRPS, chronic regional pain syndrome; NTOS, neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome. *other includes studies (Aram 2001, Bakr 2022, and Kim 2018) including patients with multiple etiologies of chronic pain these include cancer/metastatic disease, hematologic conditions, severe trauma causing lasting injury, chronic low back pain, spinal cord injury, musculoskeletal conditions, cerebral palsy.

Funnel plot of neurosurgical procedures for pain reported in the included studies, from most commonly (top) to least commonly (bottom) reported. DREZ, dorsal root entry zone; DRG, dorsal root ganglion; MM, midline myelotomy.

Reported pain outcomes across studies were heterogeneous, with both qualitative and quantitative measures used (Table3). The most common methods for reporting pain outcomes were qualitative measures, including pain relief (47.5%) and functional status (47.5%). Six quantitative assessments were used, with the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) being the most frequent (40.0%), followed by the Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) (12.5%), the Karnofsky Performance Scale (5.0%), the Verbal Rating Scale (VRS) (2.5%), the Verbal Numeric Scale (VNS) (2.5%), and Douleur Neuropathique (DN4) (2.5%).

Efficacy of neurosurgical procedures reported in the included studies. The first column (dark blue, left) indicates the type of pain (neuropathic, nociceptive, or mixed) and the number of neurosurgical procedures by study employed. The middle column (light blue, middle) reports the type of procedure. The last column (right) reports the efficacy, with effective indicated in green, not quantified in yellow, and not effective in red. Efficacy was determined using only quantitative measures of pain control, defining effectiveness as a ≥50% reduction in the numeric pain score. DBS = deep brain stimulation; DREZ, dorsal root entry zone; PRF, pulsed radiofrequency; SCS, spinal cord stimulation.

Abbreviations: DREZ, dorsal root entry zone; NRS, Numeric Rating Scale; VAS, Visual Analogue Scale; VNS, Verbal Numeric Scale.

Overall, complications were minimal; see Table1. The most common complication of ablative techniques was sensory complications. Difficulty with the pump or catheter system or medication side effects was the most common complication of intrathecal pumps. Infection was the most common complication of neurostimulation.

Chronic pain is undertreated and underreported in pediatric populations.3Chronic pain reduces quality of life and can affect the developmental trajectory in children.2,3Treatment protocols for chronic pain typically evolve from non‐interventional medication regimens and physical therapy to regional and neuraxial injections and finally to neurosurgical procedures. Studying pain sensation in children can differ from that in adults, and this suggests that chronic pain in children should be addressed with even more vigor.54Neurosurgical pain procedures in children are less widely applied with limited literature and absent guidelines. Contributors to a lack of evidence and application of neurosurgical pain procedures in children include ethical considerations, a lack of FDA‐approved indications, adult hardware, and limited infrastructure in institutions dedicated to treating children. There is also a lack of reliable, standardized assessments of pre‐ and postoperative pain in children. A recent review discussing interventional procedures for chronic pain in children provides a comprehensive overview of regional, and neuraxial techniques yet exclude neurosurgical therapies apart from one case report of SCS.7To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive review of neurosurgical treatments for chronic pain in children.

Pain can be classified into three main categories: neuropathic, nociceptive, and mixed.55The quality and the region of the pain syndrome define the treatment. CRPS, intractable cancer pain, erythromelalgia, and trigeminal neuralgia predominantly exhibit neuropathic characteristics.56Nociceptive pain is more commonly associated with conditions like dystonic pain and spastic pain.5This differentiation aids in tailoring interventions to the specific pain mechanisms underlying each condition, improving treatment outcomes.

Originally, we intended to explore the use of neurosurgical procedures for chronic and end‐of‐life pain in children and create standardized treatment guidelines, similar to those developed in adults. However, the use of heterogeneous non‐standardized pain measures made it difficult to compare the efficacy of neurosurgical procedures across studies. Therefore, we determined efficacy using only quantitative measures of pain control, defining effectiveness as a ≥50% reduction in the numeric pain score. Here, we present a focused review describing the available evidence of the neurosurgical treatment of chronic pain for children, as a first step towards standardized pain guidelines.

Intrathecal pumps were used in 32.3% of papers for neuropathic pain, with variable efficacy.18,19,20,22,23,24,26,27,28,31Two papers reported non‐efficacy.22,31Complications such as device difficulties (eg, pump size, catheter blocking, catheter dislodgement), medication effects (eg, nausea, vomiting, sedation, respiratory depression, gastrointestinal issues), and surgical complications (eg, wound healing, post‐dural puncture headache) were reported.22,31Intrathecal pumps can be used to improve drug delivery and were most utilized for cancer pain.

Nociceptive pain occurs in response to transduction by activated nociceptors and continues via transmission along pain tracts, modulation within the CNS, and is ultimately perceived. Nociceptors, classified by their response profiles, can be activated by mechanical, thermal, and chemical stimuli.

Neurostimulation was used in 40% of manuscripts (2/5) to treat nociceptive pain, one using DBS demonstrated efficacy, while the other using ONS worsened the pain until the device was explanted.34,41More research is needed to determine if neurostimulation is an effective treatment for nociceptive pediatric pain.

Ablative therapy was used in 40% of papers (2/5) to treat nociceptive pain; both demonstrated efficacy.32,38Stereotactic mesencephalotomy was used for refractory head and neck pain secondary to a cervical cord glioblastoma and demonstrated a reduction in VAS score from 10 to 0.32In adults, intractable cancer pain of the head and neck is a primary indication for stereotactic mesencephalotomy; application in children is extremely uncommon. In this case, the patient was able to remain pain‐free and leave the hospital for 5 months following this procedure.32DRG radiofrequency ablation was used for the treatment of spastic pain in 17 children with cerebral palsy with a reduction in average VAS score from 8.39 to 4.17.38Although many papers using rhizotomy were identified for the treatment of hypertonia, demonstrating a significant reduction in nociceptive pain, they were not included in this study because their primary purpose was for muscle tone control.60,61,62Ablative procedures are effective for nociceptive pain control in pediatric patients and should be considered for medically refractory cases.

An intrathecal bupivacaine pump was used in one case series for the treatment of rapidly progressive pain due to arachnoiditis ossificans secondary to chemotherapy.25The patient experienced a metallic taste and loss of appetite, which resolved over time. Intrathecal pumps can be used in nociceptive pain, though side effects may occur.

Mixed pain is the result of overlapping primary pain generators and includes nociceptive and neuropathic characteristics. This chronic pain was the least commonly reported (10% of manuscripts).14,15,21,29Neurostimulation was not reported for the treatment of mixed pain. Two papers reported the use of cordotomy both for intractable cancer pain and reported immediate and significant improvement in their pain.14,15Malignant pain with a life expectancy of <2 years is the primary indication for cordotomy in adults.5One paper used intrathecal pumps in 25 children for various indications including end‐stage malignancy, extensive abdominal surgery, and trauma, noting a substantial reduction in pain and elimination or reduction of the need for supplemental opioids.21Finally, one paper reported the use of midline myelotomy and an intrathecal pump for the treatment of intractable cancer pain.29They reported pain relief from the midline myelotomy for 2 months and then, unfortunately, a complete return of their pain and only a moderate reduction in pain following intrathecal pump insertion (VAS score 9–7).

Mixed pain is complex, and reports of treatment in pediatric patients are extremely rare. Both intrathecal pumps and ablative techniques demonstrate subjective efficacy; however, combining therapeutic modalities did not appear to increase efficacy. A combination of neurostimulation with ablative or intrathecal pumps may provide relief in refractory patients. More research is required to discern optimal treatment strategies.

It is important to acknowledge differing viewpoints within the pediatric chronic pain community regarding the use of interventional procedures. Some experts argue that these should be a last resort after all other conservative measures have been exhausted due to concerns about the potential risks and long‐term impacts on a child. Our findings suggest that neurosurgical interventions may offer significant relief in cases where chronic pain severely impacts the child's quality of life. The decision to proceed with any neurosurgical intervention should take into account the individual needs of the patient and involve interdisciplinary discussions with both the patient and their family. The timing to proceed with neurosurgical intervention varied significantly, ranging from 2 weeks to 5 years (see Table1). Intrathecal pain pumps were typically the quickest intervention, with time to decision in as little as 2 weeks following presentation. By contrast, ablative and neuromodulatory techniques took longer (4 months‐5 years), perhaps due to the perceived invasiveness of these techniques. Several factors contributed to these delays, most notably the desire to exhaust all non‐interventional pain management strategies due to safety concerns and the desire to avoid procedural intervention. Additional delays were caused by patient‐specific factors, such as neutropenia or thrombocytopenia, which required medical stabilization before neurosurgical intervention could proceed. In some cases, lengthy delays were due to limited access to interventional specialists and extended referral times. Neurosurgical intervention should be integrated in discussions of pain management early in the treatment process. Many patients experienced significant pain resolution shortly after intervention, suggesting that earlier and improved access to neurosurgical procedures could lead to faster pain control, improved outcomes, and reduced psychiatric complications associated with prolonged pain.

There are several limitations to this study. Most of the manuscripts identified were case reports, which limits generalizability. The considerable heterogeneity among included studies in terms of design, patient demographics, and outcome measures limited the ability to perform meta‐analyses and necessitated a narrative synthesis. Quality assessment revealed variability in study quality, predominantly case reports, with a lack of high‐quality randomized controlled trials. Short follow‐up periods in many studies may underestimate long‐term treatment effects. Despite efforts to minimize bias, inherent biases may exist in the included studies, potentially influencing findings. Non‐standardized measures or no numerical measures of pain control limit the ability to compare efficacy across studies. While providing valuable insights, future research should address these limitations to better inform clinical practice regarding neurosurgical interventions for pediatric chronic pain management.

Neurosurgical treatments are safe for chronic and end‐of‐life pain syndromes in children. Broad efficacy cannot be determined due to sparse literature and inadequately quantified pain responses. Neuropathic pain appears to be best treated with neurostimulation, nociceptive pain with ablative techniques and possibly neurostimulation techniques, and mixed pain with intrathecal pumps and/or ablative techniques. Guidelines for escalating chronic and end‐of‐life pain management in pediatric patients should be updated to include neurosurgical treatments and appropriate outcome scales. Focused research on appropriate patients, available neurosurgical therapies, and pediatric outcomes is warranted.