Seed dormancy is an adaptation that delays germination to prevent the start of this process during unsuitable conditions. It is crucial in wild species but its loss was selected during crop domestication to ensure a fast and uniform germination. Water uptake, or imbibition, is the first step of germination. In the Fabaceae family, seeds have physical dormancy, in which seed coats are impermeable to water. We used an interspecific cross between an elite lentil line (Lens culinaris) and a wild lentil (L. orientalis) to investigate the genetic basis of imbibition capacity through quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping and by using RNA from embryos and seed coats at different development stages, and phenotypic data of seed coat thickness (SCT) and proportion of imbibed seeds (PIS). Both characteristics were consistent throughout different years and locations, suggesting a hereditary component. QTL results suggest that they are each controlled by relatively few loci. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) within the QTL were considered candidate genes. Two glycosyl‐hydrolase genes (a β‐glucosidase and a β‐galactosidase), which degrade complex polysaccharides in the cell wall, were found among the candidate genes, and one of them had a positive correlation (β‐glucosidase) between gene expression and imbibition capacity, and the other gene (β‐galactosidase) presented a negative correlation between gene expression and SCT.

No correlation between seed coat thickness and imbibition rates, suggesting they are controlled by different loci.

An interspecific population between elite and wild lentil parents was used to identify quantitative trait loci.

Differentially expressed genes between embryos and seed coats of wild and domesticated lentil were identified.

Among the candidate genes identified, two glycosyl‐hydrolases were highlighted.

A β‐glucosidase expression positively correlated with imbibition, while β‐galactosidase negatively correlated with seed coat thickness.

Seed germination and its developmental transitions have to be properly timed with the beginning of favorable growing seasons to allow seedlings to successfully establish (Willis et al.,2014). This process is controlled by seed dormancy, which is the inability of viable seeds to complete germination under favorable conditions (Bradford & Nonogaki,2007). Loss of seed dormancy is one of the key traits in the domestication syndrome and has long been thought to be an essential step in domesticating annual seed crops like cereals and grain legumes (Hammer,1984; Smýkal et al.,2018). Because dormant seeds would be lost to an early farmer, it is assumed that strong selection for non‐dormant seeds occurred to ensure fast and uniform germination after sowing and, therefore, increase yields and easier harvesting (Abbo et al.,2014). As a result, low dormancy has been selected during the domestication of many crop species (Shu et al.,2016). The first step, and a critical one on the path to germination, is water uptake of seeds, called imbibition, which is an indicator of loss of dormancy (Bewley & Black,1994). Furthermore, in legumes, imbibition is also related to cooking time (Cichy et al.,2015,2019).

Seed dormancy encompasses a range of physiological and structural changes that can be divided into dormancy classes. In the Fabaceae family, physical dormancy, in which the seed coat is “hard” and impermeable to water, dominates (Smýkal et al.,2014). However, the genetics behind seed dormancy in grain legumes is not well known despite the efforts made in some domesticated members of the family, such as cowpea (Kongjaimun et al.,2012), rice bean (Isemura et al.,2012), pea (Balarynová et al.,2023; Hradilová et al.,2019; Sedláková et al.,2023; Smýkal et al.,2014; Williams et al.,2024; Zablatzká et al.,2021), soybean (Sedivy et al.,2017), chickpea (Sedláková et al.,2021,2023), and common bean (Laosatit et al.,2022; Soltani et al.,2021). Contributing to seed impermeability are traits such as seed coat thickness (SCT), its texture, and its chemical composition (Hradilová et al.,2017; Janská et al.,2019; Williams et al.,2024; Zablatzká et al.,2021).

Seed dormancy is established during seed development, and environmental factors during seed maturation influence the level of dormancy (Bewley,1997). Further changes in dormancy continue after seeds have been shed from the maternal plant, and these changes persist until imbibition occurs and seeds can germinate (Finch‐Savage & Leubner‐Metzger,2006; Lamont & Pausas,2023).

Lentil (Lens culinarisMedik) is among the founding set of domesticated crops in the Fertile Crescent, alongside wheat, barley, chickpea, peas, flax, and faba beans (Coyne et al.,2020; Guerra‐García et al.,2021,2024; Guerra‐Garcia et al.,2022), and nowadays its use is increasing as a good source of plant‐based protein. The wild lentilLens orientalis(Boiss.), the closest wild relative of the domesticated lentil, occurs in disturbed habitats in Southeastern Turkey, the center of the Fertile Crescent (Abbo et al.,2009; Murphy & Fuller,2017). Among the important traits that distinguish wild from cultivated lentil are the lack of pod dehiscence and the loss of dormancy in the latter, as also occurs in other legume crops. Although dormancy is difficult to infer from paleobotanical remains, seed shape and thickness have been inferred to correlate with domestication status (Abbo et al.,2009; Murphy & Fuller,2017).

Using an interspecific cross between a wild lentil (L. orientalis) and an elite breeding line (L. culinaris), we investigated the genetic mechanisms associated with variation in seed imbibition in this cool‐season grain legume. We measured SCT and the extent of imbibition in the interspecific population, allowing us to look at the relationship between these two traits and to identify quantitative trait loci (QTL) associated with them. Because dormancy is set during seed development, we searched for differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the embryos and seed coats of the parental genotypes at different stages by using RNAseq. Genes found both within the QTL and as DEGs were further explored and their expression was examined in the recombinant inbred lines (RILs).

To study the differences in seed imbibition and SCT in lentil, the interspecific population LR‐68 was used. This population consists of 121 RILs derived from the interspecies cross wild lentilL. orientalis(IG 72643) × cultivated lentilL. culinaris(3339‐3) (https://knowpulse.usask.ca/study/Lentil‐Seed‐Dormancy‐Imbibition‐Analysis). Seeds for this study originated from field trials grown around Saskatoon, SK, Canada, in 2018–2020, named Preston (Pres) 2018, Sutherland (Suth) 2019, and Saskatchewan Pulse Growers field (SPG) 2019. Each site‐year was set up as a randomized complete block with three replications. Plants were grown and maintained using standard methods of the USask lentil breeding program. An additional set was grown at the Palacký University in Olomouc, the Czech Republic (CRep) as described in Hradilová et al. (2017), Janská et al. (2019), Williams et al. (2024), and Zablatzká et al. (2021). In brief, plants were grown in a peat‐sand (90:10) substrate mix (Florcom Profi, BB Com Ltd.) in a greenhouse from January to May 2020. The photoperiod was extended to 14 h using light (Sylvania Grolux 600 W, Hortilux Schreder). All trials included all 121 RILs and the parents.

SCT was estimated using a non‐destructive optical coherence tomography system (Figure1a) previously shown to estimate SCT of lentil seeds successfully (Nguyen et al.,2021). Seeds from the Pres‐2018, Suth‐2019, SPG‐2019, and CRep 2020 site‐years were sampled. The seed coats of 40–60 seeds from each genotype and site‐year (replicates) were measured, and means were calculated. Phenotypic data are available athttps://knowpulse.usask.ca/study/Lentil‐Seed‐Dormancy‐Imbibition‐Analysis.

(a) Images based on optical coherence tomography of seed coats of a cultivated and a wild parent genotype. (b) Distribution of best linear unbiased prediction (BLUP) of seed coat thickness (SCT) from the LR‐68 recombinant inbred lines (RILs), and (c) the same data separated according to the two quantitative trait locus (QTL) markers. (d) Lentil seeds from four different RILs after 48 h on damp germination paper. (e) Distribution of BLUP of the proportion of imbibed seeds (PIS) and (f) distribution of the same data separated based on their allele at the two QTL markers associated with this trait. (g) QTL plots for PIS (upper) and SCT (bottom). Red circles show the QTL regions identified, and the red line indicates the LOD threshold. LG, linkage group.

No correlation between seed coat thickness and imbibition rates, suggesting they are controlled by different loci.

An interspecific population between elite and wild lentil parents was used to identify quantitative trait loci.

Differentially expressed genes between embryos and seed coats of wild and domesticated lentil were identified.

Among the candidate genes identified, two glycosyl‐hydrolases were highlighted.

A β‐glucosidase expression positively correlated with imbibition, while β‐galactosidase negatively correlated with seed coat thickness.

Imbibition was evaluated in terms of the proportion of imbibed seeds (PIS) using seeds from three site‐years: Suth‐2019, SPG‐2019, and one greenhouse‐grown from the Czech Republic (CRep‐2020). Seeds from Suth‐2019 and SPG‐2019 were tested in 2020; therefore, they were 1‐year old. Seeds from Pres‐2018 were excluded due to insufficient biological material for destructive testing and to minimize the effect of seed age as these were a year older than the others when the imbibition experiment was run. Seeds from CRep‐2020 were grown and tested in 2020 when they were around 3 months old. Twenty‐five seeds from each RIL and parents were placed on damp germination paper (Figure1b) on baking sheets and covered with another damp sheet. Each baking sheet was placed inside a plastic bag to maintain humidity. After 24, 48, and 72 h, the number of imbibed (swollen) seeds was recorded. Three replicates from each site‐year were tested and means were calculated on a site‐year basis. For the estimation of PIS, the 48 h time point was selected since it captured the most contrasting behavior between wild and cultivated parental genotypes (Figure1d), and is similar to previous studies in pea (Hradilová et al.,2017) and chickpea (Sedláková et al.,2021).

The Fligner–Killeen test of homogeneity of variances and Shapiro–Wilk normality test were applied to both phenotypic traits using R base (R Core Team,2021). According to the results, analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey tests were performed with R base (R Core Team,2021) to test if there were differences in SCT between different site‐years. In the case of PIS, the non‐parametric Kruskal–Wallis and pairwise Wilcoxon tests were applied. Spearman correlation tests were then used to investigate if PIS and SCT were associated, and if they were consistent across years and locations. Furthermore, a principal component analysis (PCA) was performed in R combining the SCT and PIS data from all the site‐years.

A previously generated genetic map for the LR‐68 population (https://knowpulse.usask.ca/Geneticmap/2691123) was used along with the PIS and SCT phenotypic data to map genetic regions associated with those traits. The genetic map has 616 genetic markers across six LGs. There is a 2–5 reciprocal translocation in the wild parent relative to the cultivated one (Cao et al.,2024), resulting in pseudolinkage of markers associated with these two chromosomes. Since the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were called relative to an annotatedL. culinarisgenome assembly, the marker names reveal their chromosomal location in Lcu.2RBY (Ramsay et al.,2021). Chromosomes Lcu.2RBY.Chr2 and Lcu.2RBY.Chr5 combine to form LG2 (https://knowpulse.usask.ca/study/Lentil‐Seed‐Dormancy‐Imbibition‐Analysis).

Best linear unbiased predictions (BLUPs) across the environments (site‐years) were estimated with the metan R package (Olivoto & Lúcio,2020) and were then used for the QTL analysis to integrate the variation within and across the site‐years. QTL mapping was performed with the qtl2 package (Broman et al.,2019). To establish the logarithm of odds (LOD) threshold, 100,000 permutations were performed for each trait, settingα= 0.01. The find_peaks function was used to identify the LOD peaks and to determine a 95% Bayes credible interval.

To compare the gene expression during seed developmental stages that might determine PIS, RNA from seed coats and embryos at different developmental stages was analyzed. For this experiment, the parents of the LR‐68 population, and selected 58 RILs representing the range of imbibition scores, and the cultivar Eston (L. culinaris) were grown in a glasshouse at Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, in January–April 2020 (TableS1).

The developmental stages were established according to days after pollination (DAP). The four time points sampled were 13, 17, 21, and 28 DAP (TableS1), following the protocol used by Zablatzká et al. (2021) and Balarynová et al. (2023). Three replicates for each treatment were included for the parental genotypes at the different stages. For the RILs, only seed coat tissue at 21 DAP and two replicates were included. This stage was selected based on previous experiments showing that the entirety of seed development is accomplished in about 26 days from pollination (Yu et al.,2023). It also corresponds to a similar analysis done on pea (Klčová et al.,2024) and chickpea (Sedláková et al.,2021,2023). Seed coats and embryos were dissected on ice using a scalpel and tweezers and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissues were ground to a fine powder with liquid nitrogen using a sterile mortar and pestle. Total RNA was isolated using PureLink Plant RNA Reagent (Invitrogen). The Baseline‐ZERO DNase (Epicenter) treatment removed residual DNA, followed by a phenol/chloroform extraction. Yield/quantity and purity were determined by using a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). The integrity of the RNA samples was examined with an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies).

The RNA sequencing for the RILs and parents was performed at the NovoGene facilities in Cambridge, UK, using an Illumina Novaseq platform, pair‐end 150 bp, targeting 20 million pair reads per sample.

Reads were trimmed and adapters were removed using Trimmomatic 0.39 (Bolger et al.,2014) scanning the reads with a 4‐base sliding window, cutting when the average quality <15, and keeping reads with a minimum length = 80. Reads were then aligned to theL. culinarisv2 reference genome (Ramsay et al.,2021) with HISAT 2.2.1 (Kim et al.,2019) and sorted with SAMtools (Danecek et al.,2021). To assemble the read alignments, merge the transcripts, and estimate their abundances, StringTie 2.2.0 (Kovaka et al.,2019) was used.

To identify DEGs, the R package Ballgown (Frazee et al.,2015) was implemented contrasting the cultivated (3339‐3 and Eston) and wild (IG 72643) expression profiles from the same tissue and DAP (e.g., Cult‐SeedCoat‐13DAP vs. Wild‐SeedCoat‐13DAP; TableS2). In the case of the seed coat samples, wild and cultivated genotypes were compared at 13, 17, and 21 DAP, and for the embryos, the differences at 17, 21, and 28 DAP were evaluated. Differences in the seed coat at 28 DAP and embryos at 13 DAP were not tested since insufficient replicates were kept after filtering (see Results). Genes with FPKM (fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped) <2 were filtered out to remove genes with very low expression for each comparison. The threshold for the DEGs discovery was set atq‐value < 0.01 and a fold change >1.6 or <−1.6.

Genes that were differentially expressed and residing within QTL for any of the two phenotypic traits were considered candidate genes. The expression of these genes was then traced in the RNA data of the RILs (seed coat at 21 DAP) and tested for correlation between the gene expression and SCT or PIS. For the correlations, non‐annotated candidate genes were removed and Spearman tests were applied followed by the adjustment ofp‐values with the false discovery rate method because of the multiple tests.

The topGO package (Alexa & Rahnenfuhrer,2022) and the annotation maps database from the GO.db package (Carlson,2019) were used for testing enriched gene ontology (GO) terms in the expression profiles of the LR‐68 parental genotypes and Eston elite cultivar. Theweight01algorithm was applied, which combines theweightandelimGO graph methods, along with the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (p< 0.01). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis was conducted with the KEGGREST package (Tenenbaum & Maintainer,2022) applying a Wilcoxon test (p< 0.01).

A co‐expression network analysis was applied to the RNA data from the LR‐68 parents (3336‐3 and 72643) and the Eston elite line. The co‐expression networks were constructed with the weighted gene co‐expression network analysis (WGCNA) algorithm using the WGCNA R package (Langfelder & Horvath,2008). The analysis was applied to the normalized expression according to the tissue (embryos and seed coat). The pickSoftThreshold function, from the WGCNA package, was implemented, and the minimum module size was set to 30 to pick a soft‐thresholding power for network construction.

After identifying the gene modules whose expression differs between the wild and domesticated genotypes, a GO was performed to identify gene terms enriched in the modules. In this case, the weight01 algorithm and Fisher tests were applied.

The parental genotypes are contrasting in seed traits, namely, SCT and PIS. These were evaluated in the LR‐68 lentil population across different site‐years (Figure1). SCT exhibited a normal distribution (Shapiro–Wilk normality test,p= 0.19) and homogeneity of variances (Fligner–Killeen test,p= 0.98), while PIS did not follow a normal distribution (p< 0.01) nor homogeneity of variances (p< 0.01). Significant differences between the site‐years for SCT were found with an ANOVA (F= 4.01,p< 0.01) and Tukey tests, specifically between Pres‐2018 and the rest of the site‐years (FigureS1). For PIS, the Kruskal–Wallis and Pairwise Wilcoxon tests found significant differences among the three site‐years (p< 0.01; FigureS2).

The PCA from the combined SCT and PIS datasets showed that the first principal component (PC1) primarily reflected SCT and explained 55.8% of the variation; meanwhile, PC2 was mainly related to PIS and explained 31.4% of the variation (FigureS3). Significant and positive correlations were found among the SCT from different site‐years (FigureS4). This was also observed for PIS but the data spread was greater than for SCT (FigureS4). The differences between the site‐years suggest that both traits were influenced by the environment, particularly PIS. Nevertheless, the correlations support a genetic component kept under different environmental conditions. Regarding the relation between PIS and SCT, a weak correlation between their averages was detected (Spearman coefficient = −0.19,p= 0.04), but no correlation was found when the BLUPs, which integrate the variation between and across the evaluated site‐years, were used (Spearman coefficient = −0.11,p= 0.24) (TableS3).

QTL mapping was applied to the two phenotypic traits for each site‐year (FigureS5; TableS4) and to the BLUPs (Figure1g). The QTL regions found with both approaches were consistent (FigureS5; TableS4). The results obtained with the BLUPs were used for downstream analyses because they had shorter Bayes intervals (0.95) and all the QTL identified with the BLUPs were also found with each site‐year phenotypic data (FigureS5; TableS4; Supporting Information2). For SCT, two QTLs were identified (LOD threshold = 3.30), both located on LG2, which includes chromosomes 2 and 5. The first QTL explained 13.7% of the variance, while the second explained 13.2%. Together, the two QTLs encompassed 1143 genes. Two more QTLs were found in chromosome 7 (LG7) associated with PIS (LOD threshold = 3.51), and one of them explained 34.3% of the variance and the other explained 19.4%, and 268 were present genes within their intervals (Figure1g; Supporting Information2). There was a clear phenotypic differentiation between the genotypes carrying the different alleles for the QTL (Figure1c,f).

The RNA reads were aligned against theL. culinarisreference genome Lcu.2RBY (Ramsay et al.,2021). Samples of both embryos and seed coats of the cultivated lentil had a mapping rate of >92% (FigureS6). This percentage decreased for reads from the wild lentil (L. orientalis) samples (>83%), particularly from the embryos (FigureS6).

After filtering and removing the genes with very low expression across the samples, ∼12,000 genes were expressed in the seed coats from the LR‐68 parents and Eston at different stages (FigureS7). This number decreased at later developmental stages. For example, on average ∼11,500 expressed genes were present at 17 DAP and ∼9000 genes at 28 DAP (FigureS7). In embryo samples, there was a clear differentiation between the expression profile of the domesticated and the wild genotypes when all expressed genes were considered (FigureS8). This was not the case in the seed coat samples, and no grouping according to the domesticated and wild lines was observed but rather according to the genotype (FigureS8).

The gene expression of the wild and cultivated genotypes from the same tissue (seed coat or embryo) at the same stage was compared to identify DEGs (TableS2). More DEGs were found in the embryo samples than in seed coat samples (FiguresS9andS10). In the seed coats, the number of DEGs ranged between 35 and 63 for each treatment, and between 249 and 633 for the embryos (FigureS9; TableS2). The gene expression of the DEGs differentiated the wild and domesticated genotypes (FigureS11).

GO analysis was performed to identify groupings of genes among the identified DEGs (Supporting Information3). The enriched terms in the seed coat samples with the lowestpvalues wereoxidoreductase activityat both 13 and 17 DAP andtranslationat 21 DAP. In the embryos weretranslationat 17 DAP,photosynthesisat 21 DAP, andabscisic acid bindingat 28 DAP (FiguresS12–S14; Supporting Information3). Among the GO terms that were found in both embryos and seed coats weremolybdate ion transportandmolybdenum ion binding,glycine cleavage system,translation, andstructural constituent of ribosome(FiguresS12–S14).

The terms photosynthesis, light harvesting, defense response, abscisic acid (ABA)‐activated signaling pathway, and ABA binding were among the enriched terms present only in the embryos. In the seed coat, pigment biosynthesis, catechol oxidase activity, monooxygenase activity, structural component of the cell wall, and extrinsic components of the membrane were among the terms with the highest significance values (FiguresS12–S14).

In the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis,legumainshowed the lowestp‐value in the seed coats at 13 and 21 DAP, while at 17 DAP wasmitochondrial chaperone BCS1. In the embryos at 17 and 28 DAP,O‐palmitoleoyl‐L‐serine hydrolasepathway presented the most significantp‐value, andhistone H2Bpathway at 21 DAP. Theglycine cleavage system H protein,soyasapogenol B glucuronide galactosyltransferase,palmitoleoyl‐L‐serine hydrolase, andhistone(H2B, H3, and H4) pathways were enriched in the embryo samples at different stages (FigureS15). Furthermore,Xyloglucan‐relatedpathways were enriched in the seed coat at 13 DAP and 17 DAP, and thepectinesterasepathway in the embryos at 17 DAP showed a significant number of annotated terms.

A coexpression networks analysis was performed to identify gene modules whose expression was correlated and differed between the wild and cultivated genotypes. In the seed coat, two gene modules stand out (“darkred” and “darkslateblue”) (FigureS16). The “darkred” module was upregulated in the wild genotype (FigureS16), and the GO analysis showedregulation of salicylic acid,transmembrane transport,cellulose synthesis,hydrogen peroxide catabolism(FigureS17),monooxygenase activity(FigureS18), andmembrane(FigureS19) were the enriched terms. Among the significant terms of the “darkslateblue” module, which was down‐regulated in the wild genotype, werecellular response to calcium ion(FigureS17),structural constituent of the cell wall(FigureS18), andArp2/3 protein complex(FigureS19).

Four gene modules differentiated the wild and domesticated genotypes in the embryos (“red,” “magenta,” “lightyellow,” and “tan”; FigureS20). The expression of the “magenta” gene module was higher in the cultivated genotypes, particularly at 17 DAP, and the opposite pattern was observed in the other three modules (FigureS20). The terms with the lowestpvalues weredefense response to fungus,regulation of salicylic acidandhydrolase activityin the red module;positive regulation of transcription,endosperm development,cysteine endopeptidase inhibitor activity, andextracellular regionin the “magenta”;cell wall modification,transmembrane transport,structural constituent of cytoskeleton, and microtubules in the “lighyellow”; and in the tan module, the most significant enriched terms werexylan biosynthetic process,xyloglucan metabolic process,abscisic acid binding,cellulose synthase activity, andmembrane(FiguresS21–S23).

The genes that were identified as DEGs and resided within the QTL were considered candidate genes and were further explored. Forty genes met this condition and after removing non‐annotated genes, 30 candidate genes were kept. Only three were differentially expressed in seed coats, and the rest were differentially expressed in embryos. In terms of the phenotypic traits, 18 candidate genes were associated with SCT and 12 with PIS met this condition (Supporting Information2).

Among the candidate genes identified, there were eight encoding ABA‐responsive proteins, five embryonic abundant proteins, two 17.9 kDa heat shock proteins, and genes associated with pathogen response and/or with plant defense (Table1; Supporting Information2). The genesLcu.2RBY.5g046490(β‐galactosidase),Lcu.2RBY.5g046640(COL gene),Lcu.2RBY.5g051280(B3 domain transcription repressor VAL2),Lcu.2RBY.5g055640(peroxidase), andLcu.2RBY.7g071580(β‐glucosidase) were highly expressed in the cultivated elite lentil lines (Eston and 3339‐3) (Figure2). A candidate gene that showed higher expression in the wild lentil genotype wasLcu.2RBY.5g053770(hydroxymethylglutaryl‐CoA lyase) in both seed coat and embryos at all stages (Figure2and FigureS24).

Relevant candidate genes that were differentially expressed in wild and domesticated lentil and within a quantitative trait locus (QTL) region. The "Exp. fold change" column shows the expression fold change between the wild and cultivated lentil at the tissue and time point indicated in the "tissue‐days after pollination (DAP)" column. If a significant correlation was detected between the expression of the candidate gene in the recombinant inbred lines (RILs) and the seed coat thickness (SCT) or proportion of imbibed seeds (PIS), the Spearman coefficient is shown.

Relative gene expression levels of the relevant candidate in two domesticated lentil genotypes (Eston and 3339‐3) and one wild lentil genotype (IG 72643) in embryos and seed coats sampled at different time points in terms of days after pollination (DAP).

Correlations between the expression of the candidate genes in the seed coat RILs at 21 DAP and the BLUP of the two phenotypic traits (SCT and PIS) were tested. After correcting thep‐value for the multiple tests, eight correlations were significant (p< 0.05) for SCT and two for PIS (FiguresS25andS26; Supporting Information2). Candidate genes whose expression was positively correlated with SCT wereLcu.2RBY.5g051550(cytochrome P450 family 71 protein),Lcu.2RBY.5g053770, a hydroxymethylglutaryl‐CoA lyase;Lcu.2RBY.5g055700, a subtilisin‐like serine endopeptidase family protein; and the 17.9 kDa heat shock protein,Lcu.2RBY.5g056140. The expression of the candidate genesLcu.2RBY.5g046490(β‐galactosidase),Lcu.2RBY.5g055640(peroxidase),Lcu.2RBY.5g050180(embryonic abundant protein), andLcu.2RBY.7g070450(ABA‐responsive protein) was negatively correlated with SCT (Table1; Supporting Information2; FigureS25).

Only two significant correlations were found between expression in the RILs and PIS: a positive one forLcu.2RBY.7g071580(β‐glucosidase) and a negative correlation forLcu.2RBY.7g070530(pathogenesis‐related protein 10b) (Table1; Supporting Information2; FigureS26).

Seed dormancy and imbibition capacity are two of the phenotypic traits modified during domestication and contribute to the phenomenon known as domestication syndrome (Hammer,1984). Nonetheless, not all the phenotypic changes observed between wild and cultivated genotypes are true domestication traits, and Abbo et al. (2014) proposed the concept of “crucial domestication traits” to differentiate the domestication traits that are critical for cultivation and show clear dimorphism between wild and cultivated plants. In grain legumes, pod shattering, seed size, and dormancy are considered domestication traits, but only the latter seems to be crucial in cool‐season legumes, such as lentil (Abbo et al.,2014).

The induction and release of dormancy are controlled by intrinsic factors, such as phytohormones and specific regulators, that are influenced by environmental variables during seed maturation and storage (Née et al.,2017). In legumes, the prevalent type of dormancy is physical, in which the seed coat is impermeable to water, preventing imbibition until it is breached by factors in the soil (Smýkal et al.,2014; Wyse & Dickie,2018).

The rate of water uptake by the dry seeds is controlled by the chemical composition, structural characteristics of the seed coat, and the water availability in the environment (Smýkal et al.,2014). In this study, we evaluated whether imbibition capacity, in terms of PIS, and SCT from an interspecific lentil population (LR‐68) were consistent across different years and locations, and if these two traits were correlated. Our results showed that both traits are consistent throughout years and locations (FigureS4), particularly SCT, suggesting they both are highly heritable. Nevertheless, PIS data had a higher data spreading, indicating that it is more affected by the environment than SCT, which has been previously reported in other species (Kissing Kucek et al.,2020; Penfield & MacGregor,2017). The high heritability of these two traits and the relatively few QTL associated with them indicate that a few loci might be controlling them.

In other legumes, seed coat permeability is highly affected by its thickness. For example, seeds with thickened coats reduce their imbibition capacity in soybean (Jang et al.,2015; Noodén et al.,1985), in common bean (Balasubramanian et al.,2004; Wyatt,1977),Medicago, andTrifolium(Russi et al.,1992). Our results show that this is not the case in lentil as only two significant negative correlations were detected between SCT and PIS from different site years (SCT‐Pres‐2018∼Imb‐CRep‐2020 and SCT‐Pres‐2018∼Imb‐SPG‐2019; FigureS4), and when BLUPs of PIS and SCT were tested, no correlation was found. The PCA applied to the phenotypic data was consistent with the results of the correlations since PC1 mainly explained SCT and PC2 explained PIS. A similar pattern of independence of the two traits was observed in pea, another cool‐season legume (Hradilová et al.,2019; Williams et al.,2024).

More genes were expressed in the seed coat of the wild and cultivated genotypes at the three stages tested compared to the embryo samples (FigureS7). Despite this, a higher number of DEGs were detected in embryos. Furthermore, the number of expressed genes tended to decrease in the embryos at later developmental stages while the number of DEGs increased (FigureS9). Since seed development involves complex changes and wide phenotypic changes that occur during lentil domestication, it is expected that the identified DEGs are involved not only in PIS and SCT but also reflect other processes occurring during seed development. It is also worth noting that developmental stages were established according to DAP, and it is plausible that the development dynamics of the cultivated lentil were modified during the domestication. For example, in pea the seed development in cultivated genotypes is faster than in the wild ones (Balarynová et al.,2023). Furthermore, the communication between embryos and seed coats is crucial in the coordination of the developmental processes (Robert,2019; W. Wang et al.,2022).

An interesting pattern was that upregulated DEGs were more frequent in the wild genotype (FigureS10; TableS2). This suggests that during domestication the suppression of the expression of some genes might have occurred. This has been reported in crops such as tomato (Sauvage et al.,2017), and a reduction in gene expression diversity was found in rice, cotton (Liu et al.,2019), common bean (Bellucci et al.,2014), and pea (Klčová et al.,2024).

The identification of DEGs to pinpoint candidate genes associated with phenotypic traits is a common approach (e.g., Guan et al.,2023; Verma et al.,2021; K. Wang et al.,2024; Yow et al.,2023; Zhao et al.,2022). However, phenotypic changes resulting from domestication may not involve changes in gene expression. In such cases, alterations in the gene product, rather than changes in expression levels, could be responsible for the observed phenotypic variations. For example, in soybean, a SNP caused an amino acid substitution that modified the action of endo‐1,4‐β‐glucanase, affecting coat permeability without altering expression levels in the cultivar compared to the wild genotype (Jang et al.,2015). Nevertheless, it has been suggested that alleles influencing gene expression are among the most common genetic changes during crop evolution (Meyer & Purugganan,2013).

Evidence from some legumes about the genetic mechanisms of physical dormancy suggests that changes in the level of dormancy are controlled by few loci (e.g., Isemura et al.,2012; Kongjaimun et al.,2012; Sedivy et al.,2017; Soltani et al.,2021), which is consistent with the early report of major‐effect loci controlling seed dormancy in lentil by Ladizinsky et al. (1985). In the interspecific populations evaluated (LR‐68), only two QTLs associated with each of the evaluated traits were identified (Figure1; Supporting Information2), supporting relatively few genes with significant contribution to PIS and SCT.

From a physiological perspective, impermeable seeds often have a hard, pectinaceous outer layer (Soltani et al.,2021; Werker et al.,1979), higher lignin content (Kannenberg & Allard,1964), high amount of hydroxylated fatty acids (Shao et al.,2007), and/or the absence of pits in the seed coat (Soltani et al.,2021; Sun & Gong,2024). The cell wall also plays an important role in determining permeability. It is constituted by a network composed mainly of cellulose microfibrils within a hydrated gel‐type matrix of pectin and hemicelluloses (xyloglucan, mixed‐linkage glucan, mannans, and xylans), and the degradation of these complex polysaccharides requires glycosyl‐hydrolases (Fry,2004; Holland et al.,2020). For example, inM. truncatulahomologous glycosyl hydrolase genes have been associated with seed dormancy (Renzi et al.,2020) affects seed coat permeability in soybean by controlling the amount of β‐1,4‐glucans in the seed coat (Jang et al.,2015); in tobacco seeds, an accumulation of β‐1,3 glucanase and the resulting hydrolysis of β‐glucans correlated with the release of seed‐coat imposed dormancy (Leubner‐Metzger,2005) and the expression of β‐1,3 glucanase is also elevated during pea seed germination (Petruzzelli et al.,1999). In our study, several glycosyl‐hydrolases were among DEGs in the enriched GO terms and KEGG pathways (FiguresS13andS15), and in the gene modules from the coexpression networks (FiguresS17andS18).

A candidate gene that might be important in determining PIS isLcu.2RBY.7g071580, which encodes the glycosyl hydrolases β‐glucosidase (Figure1; Supplementary Information2). β‐Glucosidases seem to be involved in both the breakdown of oligosaccharides produced during cell wall turnover and the release of monolignols from their glycosides, which enables lignification to strengthen secondary cell walls (Ketudat Cairns & Esen,2010). β‐Glucosidases have been associated with dormancy in plants. For example, a β‐glucosidase is abundant in non‐dormant dry seeds ofArabidopsis(Chibani et al.,2006), and in germinating barley seeds, a β‐glucosidase is implicated in sugar liberation from β‐glucans derived from cell wall polysaccharides (Leah et al.,1995). Interestingly, in barley, the β‐glucosidase is abundant in the endosperm and is synthesized during the development of the grain and is stored until germination (Simos et al.,1994). In lentil, the domesticated genotypes showed higher expression compared to the wild lentil genotype (Figure2), consistent with the hypothesis that β‐glucosidase is involved in the hydrolytic breakdown of carbohydrates in the cell wall, leading to the release of dormancy imposed by the seed coat. Furthermore, the expression of β‐glucosidase in the RILs was positively correlated with PIS (FigureS26).

Regarding SCT, a β‐galactosidase, encoded by theLcu.2RBY.5g046490gene, was associated with this trait. β‐galactosidases, which are part of the glycosyl hydrolase family, are essential for the production of pectins in the cell wall inArabidopsis. These pectins play a crucial role in providing its seed coat with the proper hydration properties for mucilage formation (Dean et al.,2007). No mucilage production occurs in the seed coat of legumes. Still, this protein is also involved in cell‐to‐cell adhesion (Šola et al.,2019), and in higher plants, β‐galactosidase is the only enzyme capable of hydrolyzing galactosyl residues from the cell wall to release galactose during a variety of biological processes, including cell wall expansion and degradation, affecting the integrity and texture of tissues (Arunraj et al.,2020; Kishore & Kayastha,2012). In species such as barley (Giannakouros et al.,1991), rice (Chantarangsee et al.,2007), and lupin (Buckeridge & Reid,1994), the activity of this enzyme increases during germination. Consistent with this, this candidate gene was highly expressed in embryos of the domesticated genotypes at all stages examined (Figure2).

Glycosyl‐hydrolases, such as β‐glucosidase, β‐1,4‐mannosyl‐glycoprotein, and alpha‐L‐arabinofuranosidase, were also present in the enriched GO terms (FigureS13) and KEGG pathways (FigureS15). Although the degradation of pectins is complex and involves a larger number of enzymes,pectinesteraseKEGG pathway was also enriched (FigureS15), and Soltani et al. (2021) reported a pectin acetylesterase 8 as a major contributor to seed dormancy in common bean. Additional enzymes and terms related to the synthesis of compounds of the cell wall were also enriched and differentially expressed. Among them were xyloglucan:xyloglucosyl transferase TCH4, xyloglucan 6‐xylosyltransferase, and genes related to cellulose synthesis, along with other cell wall‐related pathways (FiguresS13,S15,S17, andS22; Supplementary Information3). Notably, homologous genes were also found upregulated in pea seed coat (Hradilová et al.,2017).

Our results suggest that differential changes in cell wall composition between the wild and domesticated genotypes may be associated with variations in PIS and SCT in lentil, and that these changes might have been the result of the domestication. A limitation of our work is that expression changes associated with the differences in SCT and PIS could occur at different stages that were not sampled.

Lentil seeds are rich in secondary metabolites, including polyphenols, and most of these components are in the seed coat. Seeds with dark seed coats tend to have higher levels of phenolic compounds in comparison with pale seeds (Singh et al.,2017; Xu et al.,2007), and they might affect seed coat properties, including permeability (Penfield & MacGregor,2017). These properties have been observed in wild pea (Balarynová et al.,2023) and chickpea seeds (Sedláková et al.,2021,2023).

Peroxidases oxidize phenolic substrates and are involved in cell wall modulation, lignification and suberization (Henriksen et al.,2001). A peroxidase (Lcu.2RBY.5g055640) found within a QTL associated with SCT was differentially expressed and showed a negative correlation between expression in RILs and SCT (Table1). Other three genes encoding peroxidases(Lcu.2RBY.1g015620,Lcu.2RBY.1g044820, andLcu.2RBY.4g042090) were differentially expressed between wild and cultivated parents.Hydrogen peroxide catabolism(FigureS17) andperoxidase activity(FigureS18) were enriched in the “darkred” co‐expression GO module in the seed coats.

Phenolic compounds are also components of cutin and suberin, along with glycerol and fatty acids (Pollard et al.,2008; Renard et al.,2021). The presence of cutin and/or suberin in seed coats (Chai et al.,2016; Fedi et al.,2017), and in the endosperm (De Giorgi et al.,2015; Panikashvili et al.,2009) is another factor that contributes to regulating seed dormancy and longevity. Their occurrence is still a matter of debate in legumes (Janská et al.,2019) and has been demonstrated so far only in soybean (Ranathunge et al.,2010; Shao et al.,2007). GO terms associated with glycerol, another component of cutin and suberin, were detected in the “darkred” and “darksateblue” gene modules in seed coats. Specifically,glycerol metabolic process(FigureS17),indole‐3‐glycerol‐phosphate synthase activity, and1‐acylglycerol‐3‐phosphate O‐acyltransferase activity(FigureS18) terms were enriched. These changes in the expression patterns of genes associated with the components of cutin and suberin might lead to modifications in seed coat properties, including water permeability.

It is well known that plant hormones, such as ABA and gibberellins (GA), play a crucial role in dormancy and germination. ABA is required for the induction of dormancy during seed maturation and GA for germination (Gazzarrini & Tsai,2015; Graeber et al.,2012). Recently, it was shown that ABA/GA has also been altered during pea domestication (Balarynová et al.,2023). Eleven ABA‐related proteins were overexpressed in the wild embryos (Supplementary Information2), and enriched GO terms related to ABA were also identified (FiguresS12,S13, andS22). The candidate geneLcu.2RBY.5g051280encodes a B3 domain transcription repressor VIVIPAROUS1/ABI3‐LIKE 2 (VAL2) that silences seed dormancy by regulating DOG1 expression inArabidopsis(Chen et al.,2020).DOG1is the major genetic regulator of dormancy inArabidopsisby affecting the expression of ABA and GA metabolic genes (Li et al.,2022; Shu et al.,2016) and regulating properties of the endosperm, which acts as a germination barrier to control coat dormancy (Graeber et al.,2014). This gene might also play a role in determining dormancy in lentil.

Analogous selection during the domestication process resulted in phenotypic convergence in common crop traits, and the loss of dormancy is one of the key traits that are part of the domestication syndrome. Evidence from different crops has shown that the molecular and genetic mechanisms that resulted in the loss of dormancy are not necessarily the same across different species. Furthermore, imbibition capacity is a quantitative and complex trait that is influenced by several genes with different contributions and by the environment.

Imbibition capacity in lentil is not affected by SCT, even though both traits are heritable. By using an interspecific population and a transcriptomic approach, thousands of DEGs were identified in the seed coat and embryos. However, QTL mapping suggested that relatively few genomic regions have a strong contribution to both traits. By combining the results of both approximations, we were able to detect two glycosyl‐hydrolases that may have a high contribution to determining SCT and imbibition capacity in lentil: a β‐galactosidase and a β‐glucosidase, respectively. These enzymes might affect the evaluated phenotypic traits by altering the cell wall properties.

A better understanding of the genetic basis of important domestication traits and crop evolution might be translated into the practical use of wild relatives in breeding programs.