The advantages of animated videos in education are widely recognised, yet their use by educators is restricted by the technical skills and resources needed for their production.

We have used the built‐in animation and voice‐over narration features of Microsoft PowerPoint to create full‐fledged animated videos for students in the Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS) program. H5P was used to add interactive self‐assessment questions to the videos. Three interactive animated videos on oral epithelium and biofilms were posted in the learning management system (LMS) for the first and second year DDS students.

A descriptive study was conducted to demonstrate student interactions and perceptions of interactive animated videos. First and second‐year DDS students were automatically enrolled in the study. Student engagement data, in the form of the number of interactions with the interactive animated videos, were collected from the LMS. They were also invited to participate in a voluntary survey. Although the interactive animated videos were posted as supplementary learning content, most students accessed the videos. Ninety‐four percent of the survey respondents indicated that the videos helped clarify concepts and made learning enjoyable. They also positively valued the interactive self‐assessment questions incorporated into the videos.

PowerPoint can be a simple yet effective way to create animated videos. Although this study has a small number of participants, the findings highlight the potential of interactive animated videos as an effective teaching tool to enhance student engagement and learning experiences.

Animated videos are well‐known for their ability to explain complex concepts engagingly by combining audio messages with transforming graphics [1]. The success of animated videos in education can be explained by Mayer’s cognitive theory of multimedia learning, which suggests that learning is more effective when the information is presented to both the auditory and visual systems of the learner [2]. According to Dewey’s pragmatic view of learning, learning is a social activity resulting from human interactions [3,4]. Studies have found that the on‐screen appearance of avatars, cartoon characters and simulated real‐world settings in animated videos serves an important social function to engage students [1,5]. Interactive animated videos enable viewers to interact with the video content, creating an additional layer of engagement [6].

Interactive animated videos enable viewers to interact with the video content, creating an additional layer of engagement [6].

Faculty‐developed animated instructional videos have been shown to improve knowledge acquisition, engagement and motivation [1,7]. However, several downsides, such as high production costs and technical challenges, have been identified as factors negatively affecting faculty access and interest in this pedagogical tool [1,8,9]. Commercial medical education videos by Osmosis are perceived as beneficial by medical students and preferred over traditional learning [8]. However, educators cannot edit these videos to meet their specific teaching needs. Although YouTube can be a source of free animated videos, a study seeking faculty usage of YouTube in teaching reported that many instructors did not use YouTube videos as the credibility of some videos is difficult to ascertain [10]. Moreover, YouTube videos do not have embedded interactive components to help students self‐assess their learnings.

(A) Steps of creating a full‐fledged interactive animated video using Microsoft PowerPoint and H5P. (B) PowerPoint slides before adding animations. (C) The built‐in animation tools (shown with a blue rectangle) were used to incorporate animations in different objects in the slides. Animation Pane (shown with a red rectangle) displays the list of animations used in this slide, including their sequence and length.

Many educators are unaware of the application of this simple, low‐cost tool to create full‐fledged, animated videos.

Selection of topics: The topics were selected upon discussion between authors (N.S. and A.C.). The selected topics included complex, dynamic cellular processes that are difficult for students to comprehend from static images.

Identifying learning outcomes: The learning outcomes were listed for each topic.

Creating PowerPoint slides: PowerPoint slides were made. Images, shapes and arrows were used to explain dynamic processes. Minimal text was added where necessary.

Adding animations: Using the built‐in ‘Animations’ tool, the entry, timing of existence and motion path of different objects were carefully set to illustrate the dynamic nature of the cellular processes. The delay and pause timing between different animations were adjusted upon testing (Figure1B).

Recording audio narration: The audio narration was added to the PowerPoint slides using the built‐in ‘Record’ tool.

Export PowerPoint slides as video: The animated PowerPoint slides with audio narration were exported as MP4 video files.

Developing questions: A set of self‐assessment questions was developed, matching the learning outcomes of the videos.

Adding interactive components to the video: H5P [11] was used to add interactive elements to the videos, including additional information and self‐assessment questions (Figure1).

Three interactive animated videos were developed: (i) maturation of keratinized oral epithelium, (ii) maturation of nonkeratinized oral epithelium and (iii) formation of biofilm (Figure2). Videos of keratinized and nonkeratinized oral epithelium were posted in the learning management system (LMS) for the DDS‐I students. The formation of biofilm video was prepared for the DDS‐II students. The videos were posted as supplementary learning content. The final videos were 3–4 min long and required 5–6 h to produce. Each video contained 2–4 interactive self‐assessment questions in the form of multiple choice questions (single and multiple correct answers), true/false and matching word activities.

Three interactive animated videos were made for the students in the Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS) program. This diagram shows the screenshots and learning outcomes of the videos.

DDS‐I (n=32) and DDS‐II (n=51) students were automatically enrolled in the study, as all students had equal access to the videos through the LMS. This study was approved by the University of Alberta Research Ethics Board (ID: Pro00143325).

Student engagement data, in the form of the number of interactions with the interactive animated videos over time, were collected from the LMS. An invitation to participate in an anonymous voluntary survey was posted on the LMS. The survey questionnaire was adapted from the Instructional Materials Motivation Survey (IMMS) instrument [14]. To ensure positive sampling, the opening question of the survey was set to ask participants if they had experienced the interactive PowerPoint animation in the course. Only participants who answered ‘yes’ were allowed to proceed through the remaining questionnaire and submit the survey.

Descriptive statistics (e.g., percentages) were applied using Microsoft Excel to summarise and present the data from the survey and LMS interactions. The written comments were independently reviewed by multiple authors to gain insight into the students’ perceptions and suggestions for improvements.

The DDS‐I and DDS‐II classes have 32 and 51 students, respectively. Sixty‐six percent (n=21) and 63% (n=20) of the DDS‐I students watched the videos explaining keratinization and nonkeratinization in oral epithelium, respectively. Eighty‐eight percent (n= 45) of DDS‐II students watched the ‘formation of biofilm’ video (Figure3A). To assess student engagement over time, the number of occurrences of interactions with the interactive animated videos was plotted over the course timeline. In the DDS‐I course, the interactive animated videos were posted to supplement the September 23, 2024, lecture; the highest interactions were observed around the scheduled lecture date and closer to the summative assessment of this topic (Figure3B). In the DDS‐II course, the interactive animated video was posted on August 28, 2024; student interactions with the video were observed throughout the course and before the noncumulative exams (Figure3C).

(A) Percentage of students who watched the interactive animated videos posted in their LMS. Two interactive animations, ‘Maturation of keratinized oral epithelium’ and ‘Maturation of nonkeratinized oral epithelium,’ were posted in the LMS for the first year DDS (DDS‐I) students. ‘Formation of biofilm’ was posted for the second year DDS (DDS‐II) students. (B, C) Student engagement with the interactive animated videos. LMS data were collected for first year (B) and second year (C) DDS students. The number of occurrences of interactions with the animated videos was plotted over the course timeline. (D) Percent distribution of students' responses in the survey. The survey questionnaires were adapted from the IMMS instrument [14]. 16 students (n= 16) responded to the anonymous online survey.

Sixteen students (12 DDS‐I and 4 DDS‐II), which is 19.3% of the eligible participants, responded to the voluntary anonymous survey posted on the LMS. Seventy‐five percent (n=12) of survey participants reported being between the ages of 21 and 30, 19% (n=3) were 20 years old or younger, and 6% (n=1) were between 31 and 40. Fifty‐six percent (n=9) reported watching the interactive animated videos once, whereas 44% (n=7) watched the videos 2–5 times.

Of the survey respondents, 94% (n=15) agreed or strongly agreed that the interactive animated videos helped clarify complex concepts and made learning enjoyable. Seventy‐five percent (n=12) of participants indicated that watching the videos helped improve their scores on the exam. Eighty‐eight percent (n=14) agreed that the videos kept them engaged (Figure3D). In the written comments, students expressed their enjoyment of the videos for their simplicity and ability to summarise concepts and appreciated the ability to self‐assess learning (Table1).

‘They are good to help simplify. I also appreciate the quiz questions because they help test my knowledge’.

‘Overall the videos helped show things from a different perspective that was helpful for learning’.

‘I went through the the interactive questions even before listening to the lectures and then after listening to the lectures and I must say it really helped solidify my concepts. I would like to see more it’ (sic).

Seventy‐five percent (n=12) of participants indicated that watching the videos helped improve their scores on the exam.

The benefits of animated videos are well‐known [1], but their widespread application is often limited by the technical expertise and resources required to create them [8,9]. PowerPoint, along with H5P [11], can be an alternative, easy, yet effective way to create interactive animated videos for educational purposes. Liu and Elms [1] created animated videos using Adobe’s Character Animator and Photoshop, combining hand drawings, computer‐generated objects and photographs with voice acting. These resource‐intensive videos had positive impacts on students’ engagement and satisfaction. Developing interactive animated videos with PowerPoint and H5P [11] is relatively more straightforward and less resource‐consuming and appears to have positive impacts on students’ learning experiences. Interaction data from the LMS also showed several student interactions with the videos before and during the exam periods, indicating that students valued these materials as potentially beneficial for reviewing and reinforcing knowledge.

More second‐year students interacted with the videos than the first‐year students. This discrepancy may be due to the addition of foreign‐trained advanced placement students in the second‐year class, which added diversity in age, culture and experiences. As found by Liu and Elms [1], such diversity can affect interest and interactions with learning materials. Limitations of this work include a small sample size and the use of LMS analytics for student engagement. The total time of interaction with the video is not captured by the LMS, and student‐specific interactions were not evaluated or correlated with actual performance. Despite this, these results suggest that interactive animated videos have the potential to improve students’ learning experiences.

These results suggest that interactive animated videos have the potential to improve students’ learning experiences.

Future studies are needed to further analyse the effectiveness of this teaching tool on other aspects of student engagement and satisfaction and to identify possible correlations between students’ engagement with the videos and their academic performances on related assessment questions. A detailed qualitative study may also explore students’ reasons for not watching the interactive animation videos. Creating an interactive animated video requires significant time, regardless of the technology used. With the advancement of artificial intelligence (AI), many AI‐assisted tools are now available to create animations, stories and voices [15]. Careful and ethical use of such AI tools can help educators develop effective and engaging pedagogical tools in the future.