The dorsal and ventral hippocampus have distinct processing properties, but it remains unclear if interneuron subtypes differ in connectivity along the dorsoventral axis.
Oriens lacunosum‐moleculare (OLM) interneurons, identified by theChrna2gene, are known to regulate memory processes differently along this axis.
OLMɑ2 cells bidirectionally modulate risk‐taking behavior, while ventral hippocampal medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)‐projecting neurons regulate approach and avoidance behaviors.
Using rabies virus‐mediated monosynaptic retrograde tracing, we show that OLMɑ2 cells receive differential innervation across the dorsal, intermediate, and ventral hippocampus.
We find that CA1 and CA3 inputs differ between hippocampal poles, suggesting that OLMɑ2 cells may have distinct feedback and feed‐forward inhibitory roles in the hippocampal microcircuit.
Intermediate OLMɑ2 cells uniquely receive substantial input from the subiculum and dorsal/medial raphe nuclei, as well as widespread CA2 inputs potentially linked to social memory.
The medial septum and diagonal band of Broca provide cholinergic, GABAergic, and glutamatergic inputs across the axis, likely influencing disinhibition and oscillatory activity during various behavioral states.
Excitatory input to intermediate‐ventral OLMɑ2 cells partly arises from CA1 projection neurons targeting the mPFC.
This suggests a gate‐switching function that favors CA3 input to projection neurons by two different mechanisms related to feedback and feed‐forward inhibition.
In conclusion, OLMɑ2 cells exhibit distinct presynaptic input profiles along the dorsoventral axis, with major differences in the proportions of intrahippocampal inputs, highlighting their diverse roles in hippocampal microcircuits.
The hippocampus is essential for memory formation and navigation, and is also important for emotional regulation and decision‐making (Bryant and Barker2020; Cohen and Eichenbaum1993).
The dorsal and ventral pole of the hippocampus receives information from common as well as distinct parts of the brain, thus processing different types of information (Cenquizca and Swanson2007).
The dorsal parts predominantly process spatial information, while the ventral parts process emotional information from limbic areas (Fanselow and Dong2010; Strange et al.2014).
Inhibitory interneurons have an important role in the control of input and distribution of excitatory signaling in the hippocampus to coordinate neuronal activity (Klausberger et al.2003).
Distinct segments of the hippocampus are involved in encoding and retrieval processes through the regulation of information flow within the hippocampal microcircuit.
It has been proposed that memory encoding is facilitated when afferent input from the entorhinal cortex (EC) dominates in CA1, while retrieval is favored when input from CA3 predominates—a dynamic described by the SPEAR model (Hasselmo et al.2002).
This shift is thought to occur rhythmically across the theta cycle and to be tightly regulated (Manns et al.2007).
Acetylcholine has been implicated as a key modulator of this transition, acting through local inhibitory circuits in CA1 to gate inputs from EC and CA3 (Hasselmo et al.2002; Palacios‐Filardo et al.2021).
While the SPEAR model provides a compelling theoretical framework, it is important to recognize that CA3 also plays an important role in rapid encoding of experience in vivo (McHugh and Tonegawa2009; Nakazawa et al.2002; Nakazawa et al.2003).
According to anatomical data, approximately 95% of excitatory boutons onto CA1 pyramidal neurons arise from CA3 (in stratum radiatum and stratum oriens), whereas ~5% originate from EC in stratum lacunosum‐moleculare underscoring the major excitatory influence from CA3 (Megías et al.2001; Cutsuridis et al.2018).
Further, encoding processes mediated by CA3 and EC may support distinct learning modalities: rapid, one‐trial contextual learning via CA3 and incremental spatial learning via EC (Nakashiba et al.2008).
Moreover, rapid, single‐trial encoding in the hippocampus depends on the conjunction of CA3 and EC inputs—rather than EC input alone—driving dendritic bursting and plasticity (Bittner, Milstein, Grienberger, Romani, and Magee2017,2017; Grienberger et al.2017; Milstein et al.2021).
Nicotinic receptors are ligand‐gated ion channels formed by a pentameric arrangement of alpha and beta subunits where different expressions of subunits provide different receptor properties (Albuquerque et al.2009).
TheChrna2gene expression is restricted to the stratum oriens in the hippocampus in both rats and mice (Ishii et al.2005) and is specifically expressed in a subset of CA1 hippocampal interneurons, the oriens lacunosum‐moleculare (OLM) cells (Leão et al.2012).
Traditionally, OLM cells have been identified through their expression of somatostatin (Sst).
However, in‐depth single‐cell transcriptomic cluster analysis has unveiled at least 11 distinct subpopulations ofSst‐expressing interneurons (Harris et al.2018).
Within these clusters, various classes of interneurons were identified, including back projecting, hippocampo‐septal, oriens‐bistratified, and OLM cells.
Among these clusters, OLM cells were classified into aSstand Prepronociceptin (Pnoc) co‐expressing group (further divided into three subclusters).
This highlights the utility of new marker genes such asChrna2to study the functions and connectivity of specific interneuron populations in detail.
Functional studies, using a mouse line expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the Chrna2 promoter, have demonstrated thatChrna2expressing OLM (OLMɑ2) cells control the EC‐CA3 pathway (Leão et al.2012).
More specifically, cholinergic and optogenetic activation of OLMɑ2 cells enhances the CA3 output to CA1 pyramidal neurons by disinhibition of interneurons in the stratum radiatum and inhibits the pyramidal distal dendrite; hence, the input from the EC (Leão et al.2012).
Thus, OLMɑ2 cell activity may enhance a retrieval configuration of the memory process.
OLMɑ2 interneurons exhibit a dorsoventral gradient in distribution, with a progressively higher density observed in ventral hippocampal regions (Mikulovic et al.2015,2018).
Additionally, OLMɑ2 cells exhibit different electrophysiological properties at different regions of the hippocampus, depending on the expression of hyperpolarization activated cyclic nucleotide‐gated potassium channel 2 (Hcn2) (Hilscher et al.2019; Sekulić and Skinner2017).
OLMɑ2 cells are also differently responsive to nicotine in different hippocampal regions (Siwani et al.2018).
Furthermore, OLMɑ2 cells are activated by acetylcholine from the medial septum depending on both nicotinergic and muscarinic receptors, where the latter controls rhythmic activity (Haam et al.2018; Leão et al.2012; Mikulovic et al.2018).
Optogenetic stimulation of OLMɑ2 cells in the intermediate hippocampus induces memory impairment in a novel object recognition (NOR) task, in contrast to optogenetic inhibition resulting in improved discrimination and increased exploration time of a novel object (Siwani et al.2018).
Intriguingly, optogenetic inhibition of dorsal OLMɑ2 cells has the same effect as activation of intermediate OLMɑ2 cells and resulted in reduced latency to enter an aversively conditioned compartment (Siwani et al.2018).
In the ventral hippocampus, light activation or inhibition of OLMɑ2 cells either diminishes or increases avoidance of predator scent, respectively, directly related to the induction of low theta activity (6–8 Hz) (Mikulovic et al.2018).
Interestingly, the ablation of OLMɑ2 cells in the intermediate‐ventral hippocampus did not impair memory recognition in the NOR task but did impair object location memory (Haam et al.2018).
This suggests that OLMɑ2 cells could have a role in active modulation of memory in relation to space.
In line with this idea, the dorsal CA1 was shown to be more involved with reward location, whereas the intermediate CA1 processed reward prediction during spatial navigation (Jarzebowski et al.2022).
Fine tuning of the endogenous excitatory and inhibitory balance may have a role in this process.
In summary, OLMɑ2 cells display distinct response profiles based on whether they are activated or inhibited in the dorsoventral regions.
Moreover, these neurons demonstrate varying membrane properties, sensitivity to nicotine, and the ability to induce theta oscillations when exposed to cholinergic agonists.
However, there is currently no knowledge regarding potential variations in afferent input to OLMɑ2 cells along the dorsoventral axis or whether OLM cells may be divided into functional subpopulations at distinct anatomical locations.
To investigate potential divergent functional properties of OLMɑ2 cells, we traced their afferent inputs at the dorsal, intermediate, and ventral hippocampus.
We demonstrate that OLMɑ2 cells are differently innervated, with the largest difference in major CA3 afferent input, particularly in the ventral hippocampus, profiling OLM cells as both feedback and feed‐forward inhibitory interneurons.
All animals were housed according to the standards of the Swedish Board of Agriculture's Regulations and General Advice of Laboratory Animals (L150, SJVFS 2019:9).
Experiments were approved by the Uppsala Ethical Committee (permit nr.
5.8.18‐11551/2019, 5.2.18‐08766/2024 (breeding) and 5.8.18‐8463/2018, 5.8.18‐07526/2023 (experiments)) and were consistent with the Swedish Legislation on animal experimentation (Animal Welfare act) and the European Union Directive on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes (2010/62/EU).
Efforts were made to minimize the suffering and discomfort of the animals, as well as the number of animals used by continuous critical evaluation of treatment regimens, staff training, and protocol development.
Adult male and female mice (8–16 weeks old) of the C57BL/6J background strain, bred in‐house and expressing Cre recombinase under the Chrna2 gene promoter, were used for all experiments Tg(Chrna2‐cre)1Kldr; (Leão et al.2012).
Genotyping was performed according to previously described protocols (Leão et al.2012).
Wildtype littermates or C57BL/6J mice were used for control experiments.
In single experiments, the following strains were crossed with the Chrna2‐cre strain: Tg(Slc32a1‐EGFP)EN128Gsat/Mmucd, GENSAT, MMRRC, Stock no. 010586‐UCD, STOCK Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1.1(CAG‐EGFP)Fsh/Mmjax, MMRRC stock no. 32037 (Sousa et al.2009) and B6.Cg‐Gt(ROSA)26Sortm14(CAG‐tdTomato)Hze/J, stock no. 007914 (Madisen et al.2010).
However, the first two strains and their specific transgenes were not used or considered in the final data analysis and are therefore not detailed in the results section.
The mice were group‐housed in standard ventilated cages (L150, SJVFS 2019:9), on a 12‐day/night cycle (lights on at 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
), in a temperature‐and humidity‐controlled environment.
Food and water were provided ad libitum.
The tracing viruses were surgically injected into the brain regions of interest (Table1).
The mice were anesthetized using Isoflurane inhalation (4% induction, 2% maintenance) and secured onto a stereotaxic apparatus.
Multimodal analgesia was provided locally (subcutaneously) (Bupivacaine 2 mg/kg) and systemically (intraperitoneal or subcutaneously) (Carprofen 5 mg/kg and Buprenorphine 0.1 mg/kg).
Craniotomies were performed relative to bregma (mm) using standard stereotaxic coordinates (Table1, below; Paxinos and Franklin2004).
Viruses were then injected into the area of interest using a 10 μL gas‐tight glass syringe with a stainless steel needle (NanoFil, WPI).
The injection was carried out at a rate of 100 nL/min using a microinjector (UMP3/Micro4, WPI or Legato, Agnthos).
Body temperature was maintained throughout the procedure and until full mobility was regained.
During the recovery period, the mice were closely monitored postoperatively, with particular attention to the humane endpoint scoring system to assess discomfort and pain.
Additional analgesia was administered as needed.
The stereotaxic coordinates for the injection target sites are measured in millimeters (mm) relative to bregma and specified in the mediolateral (ML), anteroposterior (AP), and dorsoventral (DV) directions.
For monosynaptic retrograde tracing, a helper virus of type adeno‐associated virus (AAV) encoding for a mutated version (E66T) of the avian leukosis‐sarcoma virus (ALSV) receptor (TVA), green fluorescent protein (GFP), and optimized RV G‐protein (oG) (Table2) was injected (500 nL) at each target site.
Rabies virus (RV) pseudotyped with the envelope glycoprotein of ALSV (EnvA) and encoding the red fluorescent protein mCherry (Table2) was injected (500–800 nL) at the same location on Day 7 (batch BRVenvA‐1o) or Day 14 (batch BRVenvA‐1n) post‐injection.
For monosynaptic tracing combined with retrograde labeling of hippocampal projection neurons, retrograde AAV (400 nL) was injected into the infralimbic cortex (IL) to express enhanced GFP tagged with a nuclear localization signal (NLS) under the human synapsin promoter (hSyn) (Table2).
Simultaneously, the helper virus was injected into the hippocampus.
After an 8‐day recovery period, RV(EnvA)‐mCherry (600 nL) was injected into the hippocampus.
The RVs in either protocol were allowed to be expressed 7 days before the end of the experiment.
The RV material was originally provided by Edward Callaway and distributed through Addgene plasmid #32630, #32631, #32632, #32633, #32634 (Osakada et al.2011).
List of viruses used in the experiments, with batch numbers indicating the specific production batch from each source.
The titers are expressed as genome copies per milliliter (gc/mL).
The brain tissue was prepared for histological examination.
First, the mice were deeply anesthetized with an overdose of Medetomidine and Ketamine and perfused transcardially with phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS) (Sigma Aldrich) followed by PBS containing 4% formaldehyde (FA) (Histolab).
The brain was dissected and postfixed in PBS with 4% FA overnight (12–15 h) and thereafter stored in PBS until further processing.
For immunohistochemistry and total quantification, 80 μm coronal sections, spanning the entire brain, were prepared using a vibratome device (Leica VT 1000S) (80 μm).
Markings for lateral identification were added prior to sectioning.
To prepare the tissue for in situ hybridization, the brain was first cryoprotected by incubating it in PBS with 20% sucrose for 24 h. It was then mounted in cryo‐embedding medium (OCT, Histolab), frozen on dry ice, and stored at −80°C until further processing.
For immunohistochemistry, sections were first washed in PBS for 3 × 5 min.
They were then incubated for 3 h at room temperature (~20°C) in a blocking solution containing PBS, 0.3% Triton‐X (PBST, Sigma Aldrich), and 3% normal serum (matched to the secondary antibody).
Primary antibodies were diluted in the blocking solution (Table3) and incubated with the sections at +4°C for 48–72 h. The secondary antibodies were prepared in PBST (Table3), and the nuclear staining DAPI (4′,6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole, Sigma Aldrich) was added at a concentration of 200 ng/mL together with the secondary antibodies.
Sections were washed in PBS for 3 × 5 min before incubating with the secondary antibodies and DAPI for 3 h at room temperature.
After a final PBS wash (3 × 5 min), sections were mounted with Anti‐Fade fluorescence mounting medium (Abcam, UK) and covered with a cover slip (Menzel‐Gläser, Germany).
List of antibodies used in the experiment, with reference numbers corresponding to the manufacturer's ordering information.
Brains were sectioned into 18 μm sections on a cryostat (Leica Cryocut 1800).
Every fourth section was collected onto Superfrost slides (ThermoFisher Scientific), forming four sequential series (A–D) for examination of comparable anatomical regions.
The sections were kept at −21°C until sectioning was finished in order to prevent RNA degradation.
After sectioning, the tissue was stored at −80°C until fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) using the RNAscope Fluorescent Multiplex Kit (ACD, USA, Cat# 323110) was performed.
To ensure tissue quality, RNAscope was performed within 3 months after sectioning according to company recommendations.
First, sections were taken from −80°C and immediately fixed in 4% FA in 1× PBS (ThermoFisher Scientific) for 15 min at room temperature.
After fixation, slides were washed for 2 min in 1× autoclaved PBS and sections were dehydrated by placing them from low concentration to pure concentration ethanol in a stepwise increase: 3 min in 50%, 3 min in 70%, 2× 5 min in 100% (Solveco, Sweden).
Thereafter, the slides were dried for 5 min at room temperature, a hydrophobic barrier was drawn around the chosen sections using an ImmEdge pen (Vector Laboratories, USA) and sections were incubated with protease III (ACD, USA, Cat# 322337 for fixed frozen tissue) or protease IV (ACD, USA, Cat# 322336 for fresh frozen tissue) at room temperature for 40 min.
The sections were then washed for 3 × 5 min in 1× autoclaved PBS (ThermoFisher Scientific) and incubated with target probes for 2 h at 40°C in a hybridization oven (HybEZ II Oven, ACD, USA).
C2 and C3 probes were diluted 1:50 in either probe diluent (ACD, USA, Cat# 300041) or C1 probe (for details regarding probes see Table4).
After probe hybridization, sections were washed 2 × 2 min in wash buffer (ACD, USA, Cat# 310091) and amplification was performed: AMP1‐FL for 30 min, AMP2‐FL for 30 min, and AMP3‐FL for 15 min.
To develop a color signal, HRP‐C1, HRP‐C2, or HRP‐C3 (depending on the probes used) was incubated for 15 min, followed by a 20–30 min incubation of the chosen fluorophore: Tyramide Signal Amplification (TSA)Vivid 520 (ACD, USA, Cat# 7534) or TSA Vivid 650 (ACD, USA, Cat# 7536).
Fluorophores were diluted 1:5000 in TSA Buffer (ACD, USA, Cat# 322809).
Thereafter, HRP was blocked with HRP blocker for 15 min, and the color development steps were repeated for the second probe.
Between each amplification and color development step, the tissue was washed 2 × 2 min in wash buffer.
Amplification and color development was performed at 40°C in a hybridization oven (HybEZ II Oven, ACD, USA), apart from the washing steps, which were performed at room temperature.
Lastly, sections were stained with DAPI for 1 min, mounted with Anti‐Fade fluorescence mounting medium (Abcam, UK) and covered with coverslips (Menzel‐Gläser, Germany).
Alternatively, immunohistochemistry was performed according to a previously described protocol as the final step.
The slides were stored at 4°C until imaging.
List of probes used in the experiment with reference numbers corresponding to the manufacturer's ordering information, specific channel, and dilution.
Experiments resulting in very weak expression or the presence of starter neurons in the subiculum led to exclusion.
Two mice per injection site with the highest density of starter neurons were selected for comprehensive anatomical mapping and quantification of all labeled cells in the brain and brainstem.
Another mouse per site was used for in situ hybridization analysis, and the remaining individuals were used for specific identification of projection neurons and immunohistochemical analyses.
All individuals (n= 13) were included in the anatomical mapping of traced presynaptic areas to identify any aberrant patterns (TableS1).
The dataset included both male and female subjects.
All fluorescently labeled sections were imaged using wide‐field fluorescence microscopy (Axio Imager.Z2 equipped with Axiocam 512) at a resolution of 4280 × 2832 pixels.
Imaging was primarily conducted using a 10× objective lens (NA 0.45) or a 5× objective lens (NA 0.16) for overviews.
The excitation light was filtered at 385 nm (DAPI), 475 nm (GFP), 567 nm (mCherry), and 630 nm (Alexa 647).
Images were acquired using Zen Blue 3.1 software with an automatic imaging module and tile‐stitching functionality to capture entire sections.
Z‐stacking (15 μm depth) was applied in regions of dense labeling to ensure comprehensive depth resolution.
Confocal microscopy was performed using a Carl Zeiss LSM 700 system equipped with Zen Black 2.3 software.
Imaging was conducted with a 40× air objective lens (NA 0.95) for high‐resolution imaging and a 20× air objective lens (NA 0.8) for wider fields of view.
Fluorescent signals from GFP/Alexa 488, mCherry/tdTomato, and Alexa Fluor 647 were captured using 488, 555, and 633 nm laser lines, respectively.
Images were acquired at a resolution of 2048 × 2048 pixels with a 16‐bit depth.
The pinhole size was set to 1 Airy unit for optimal axial resolution.
Z‐stacks were collected at 1 μm intervals to cover a total depth of 15 μm.
Image processing, including maximum intensity projection and brightness adjustments, was conducted using ImageJ or Zen Blue 3.3 imaging software to enhance visualization.
Cells exhibiting neuronal morphology (i.e., axons or dendrites) were manually counted.
Signals detected in all four channels were identified as autofluorescent particles and excluded from the analysis, as they did not exhibit neuronal morphology.
The bregma position along the anteroposterior axis was determined by referencing the Mouse Brain Atlas (Paxinos and Franklin2004) or the Allen Brain Reference Atlas (Lein et al.2007).
The CA2 field was identified by the structural change of the pyramidal layer at the border zones between CA1 and CA3, and the extent of the field was determined using immunohistochemistry targeting the CA2 molecular marker purkinje cell protein 4 (PCP4) (Hitti and Siegelbaum2014).
Our estimation of CA2 location, based on PCP4 immunopositive neurons (Figure6), was consistent with the in situ hybridization image data in the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas for probes targetingPcp4and Adhesion Molecule With Ig Like Domain 2 (Amigo2) mRNA experiment 79912613, image 29, PCP4; experiment 71250310, image 31 and 32, Amigo2 (Lein et al.2007).
Dorsoventral and mediolateral coordinates were obtained by measuring the distance to the midline or section edges using Zen Blue 3.3 imaging software.
Cell positions were recorded relative to a 500 μm2grid, and their layer locations were categorized relative to the pyramidal layer using nuclear DAPI staining.
The dorsal hippocampus was generally defined as the anterior third, the intermediate hippocampus as the middle third, and the temporal hippocampus as the posterior third.
Anatomical mapping of CA2 afferent neurons to OLMɑ2 cells at the different areas along the dorsoventral axis.
(A) Schematic illustration of the hippocampus, highlighting the entire CA2 field in magenta.
Black dots indicate the location of OLMɑ2 starter cells at the different traced areas.
Colored dots indicate the extreme points along the dorsoventral axis and the lines indicate the dorsoventral extent of CA2 afferents on the ipsi‐ (ips.)
and contralateral (con.)
side to the different starting locations, the dorsal region is illustrated in green, intermediate in yellow and ventral in red.
(B, E, D) The Purkinje cell protein 4 (PCP4) (gray) visualizes the location and the extent of the CA2 field, further highlighted with a white curved line.
(C–C″) Presynaptic neurons expressing mCherry (magenta) at the dorsal CA2, projecting to the dorsal OLMɑ2 cells.
(F) Presynaptic neurons in the ventral CA2, projecting to the ventral OLMɑ2 cells.
(D–D‴) Presynaptic neurons from dorsal to ventral CA2, projecting to the intermediate OLMɑ2 cells, and their extreme points in each hemisphere.
Bregma coordinates for the anteroposterior (AP) and dorsoventral (vertical scale) are annotated in millimeters (mm).
Scale bar: 500 μm.
3D representations were modified from the original rendering in 3D Brain Explorer (Oh et al.2014).
Raw neuron counts in each anatomical region (CA1, CA2, CA3, CA3c, SUB, MS) were pooled between individuals (injected in the same starter region) and normalized by dividing by the total number of starter neurons for each source, ensuring fair comparison across starter regions.
A Chi‐squared test was first used to assess overall differences in neuron distribution between the three starter regions.
A significance threshold ofp< 0.05 identified regions for further post hoc analysis.
For significant regions, pairwise comparisons between starter regions were performed usingZ‐tests for proportions.
Bonferroni correction was applied to control for multiple comparisons in the pairwisepvalues.
Significance was determined using an adjustedpvalue threshold of 0.05.
The Chi‐squared tests were based on 210 observations from the starter neurons (dorsal = 70, intermediate = 128, ventral = 12).
This provided adequate power to detect medium to large effects, though subtle differences may have gone undetected.
To further detect subtle differences in input proportions to the medial septum and diagonal band of Broca (MS/DBB), Bayesian pairwise proportion tests were used.
For each starter region, the input proportion targeting each hippocampal region was modeled with a Beta posterior distribution assuming a uniform prior (Beta(1,1)).
We generated 100,000 posterior samples per region and calculated the probability that the input proportion from one region exceeded that of another.
All statistical analyses were performed in Python 3.12.3 using pandas, scipy, sklearn, and statsmodels.
Graphs were generated using Matplotlib, Seaborn, and GraphPad Prism 10.4.2.
We examined the afferent inputs to OLMɑ2 cells using RV‐mediated monosynaptic tracing.
Chrna2‐cre mice were first injected with AAV in the dorsal, intermediate, or ventral hippocampus to Cre‐dependently express the RV entry receptor TVA(E66T), GFP, and RV‐oG for presynaptic spread.
After 7 days of recovery and virus expression, a second injection with G‐protein deficient EnvA pseudotyped RV expressing mCherry was performed at the same coordinates (Figures1AandS1).
We used a modified version of the TVA receptor, the TVA(E66T) carrying a point mutation, optimized for close to zero Cre‐independent transduction of EnvA‐pseudotyped RV, developed for monosynaptic retrograde tracing of local circuits (Miyamichi et al.2013).
Successful transfections according to our criteria were obtained in ~20% of injected animals (see methods section).
We found starter neurons confined to the CA1 stratum oriens, along the proximodistal axis, and traced presynaptic neurons in the dorsal (n= 4), intermediate (n= 5), ventral (n= 3), and the combined intermediate‐ventral (n= 1) hippocampus that were included for analysis (TableS1).
The expected GFP expression, which was found in Cre expressing hippocampal neurons (Figures1B–DandS2A–C) was absent in Cre‐negative animals injected using identical protocols (FigureS2D–I).
Co‐expression of GFP from the AAV transduction and mCherry from the RV transduction was detected in OLMɑ2 cells at each targeted location.
We found starter neurons in the dorsal (Figure1B), intermediate (Figure1C), and ventral CA1 of the hippocampus (Figure1D), within 0.5 mm from the aimed dorsoventral target sites, without overlap (TableS2).
We used post hoc immunohistochemistry to validate Cre‐dependent GFP expression in neurons of the stratum oriens (FigureS2C).
We compared the fluorescent signal from the viral expression of GFP with the immuno‐enhanced signal using another fluorophore (alexa 647) and could verify a high detection accuracy, ensuring that starter neurons outside the expected CA1 stratum oriens would be detected if present (FigureS2A–C).
There was a strong positive correlation between the number of starter neurons and the number of traced neurons (r= 0.86,p= 0.008), indicating that higher numbers of starter neurons are associated with more traced neurons (FigureS3A).
Retrograde monosynaptic rabies tracing of OLMɑ2 cells using the Chrna2‐cre mouse strain.
(A) Brief injection protocol and injection coordinates at the dorsal, intermediate or ventral hippocampus of Chrna2‐cre mice, indicating the injection sites and dorsoventral depth.
Adeno‐associated virus (AAV), AAV8‐Syn‐flex‐TVA.E66T‐P2A‐GFP‐P2A‐oG‐WPRE3 was injected 7 days prior to the rabies virus (RV), RV(EnvA)‐mCherry for Cre specific expression of the RV entry receptor TVA(E66T) in the OLMɑ2 cells (See FigureS1and methods section for a detailed description of the monosynaptic rabies tracing methodology).
The mice were perfused on Day 15 (or Day 22, see method section) after the first injection and the tissue collected for further histologic analysis.
(B–D′) Images of coronal sections, 80 μm, exemplifying the viral expression in OLMɑ2 and presynaptic neurons expressing mCherry (magenta) at each injection site in the dorsal (B), intermediate (C) and ventral (D) hippocampus.
The hippocampal subfields, the CA1, CA3, dentate gyrus (DG) and subiculum (SUB), as well as the layers of the CA1, the stratum oriens (SO), stratum pyramidale (SP), stratum radiatum (SR) and the stratum lacunosum‐moleculare (SLM) are annotated as reference.
(B″–D‴) Confocal images showing examples of mCherry and GFP co‐expressing “starter neurons” indicated with white arrows.
Scale bars B–D: 500 μm, B′–D′: 200 μm, B″–D″: 50 μm.
Traced presynaptic neurons expressing mCherry were identified across all hippocampal fields (CA1‐3, subiculum), with their proportions varying depending on injection site along the dorsoventral axis (Figure2).
To assess these differences, we calculated the number of traced neurons in each field as a fraction of the total traced neurons for each individual.
We then compared these fractions between animals injected in the dorsal, intermediate, or ventral hippocampus.
In the CA1 field, the proportion of traced neurons was highest in the dorsal hippocampus (80%), compared to the intermediate (50%) and ventral regions (39%; Figure2D).
In contrast, the CA2 field exhibited higher proportions of traced neurons in the intermediate (14%) and ventral (12%) hippocampus relative to the dorsal region (4%) (Figure2H).
For CA3, the ventral hippocampus showed the highest proportion of traced neurons (40%), surpassing the intermediate (12%) and dorsal regions (9%) (Figure2L).
Lastly, in the subiculum, the intermediate hippocampus exhibited the highest proportion of traced neurons (18%), followed by the ventral (4%) and dorsal regions (2%) (Figure2P).
Anatomical mapping and quantification of intrahippocampal presynaptic inputs to OLMɑ2 cells.
(A–O) Coronal sections, 80 μm, each visualizing presynaptic neurons from viral expression of mCherry (magenta) along the dorsoventral axis, showing field CA1 (A–C), CA2 (E–G), CA3 (I–K), and the subiculum (SUB) (M–O).
Anteroposterior (AP) coordinate is annotated in millimeters (mm) from Bregma.
Scale bar: 500 μm.
(D, H, L, P) Input fractions (number of neurons in specified field to the total number of traced neurons, showing mean and standard deviation) for each represented field, the CA1 (D), CA2 (H), CA3 (L), and SUB (P).
(Q–S) Fractional proportions of mean input to the dorsal (Q), intermediate (R), and ventral (S) OLMɑ2 interneurons.
The “Other” category denotes extrahippocampal connections.
A comparison within the dorsal, intermediate, and ventral regions showed that the majority of traced afferent inputs to dorsal OLMɑ2 cells originated from the CA1 field, with smaller contributions from the CA2, CA3, and subiculum (Figure2Q).
In contrast, ventral OLMɑ2 cells received input from neurons in the CA1 and CA3 fields in comparable proportions (Figure2S).
Intermediate OLMɑ2 cells exhibited a similar proportion of inputs from CA1 as from the combined contributions of the subiculum, CA2, and CA3 fields (Figure2R).
The proportion of afferent inputs from the CA2 field was comparable for intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells (12% and 14%, respectively), whereas dorsal OLMɑ2 cells received a smaller fraction (4%; Figure2H).
For statistical comparison across regions, neuron counts were pooled by injection site and normalized to starter neuron totals.
The Chi‐squared test indicated significant differences in neuron distribution across starter regions for CA1, CA2, CA3, and SUB (allp< 0.05), but not for contralateral CA3 or medial septum.
Post hocZ‐tests revealed that the CA3 of the ventral hippocampus had markedly enriched neuron counts compared with both dorsal and intermediate hippocampus (p= 1.3 × 10−8and 1.0 × 10−5, respectively), whereas dorsal and intermediate regions did not differ.
In CA1 and CA2, dorsal regions differed significantly compared to intermediate or ventral (CA1:p= 1.4 × 10−5and 4.8 × 10−12; CA2:p= 0.0135 and 0.0283), with no significant intermediate‐ventral differences.
Finally, in subiculum, the intermediate region exceeded both dorsal and ventral (p= 1.7 × 10−4and 0.0020), whereas dorsal and ventral regions were comparable.
These patterns, particularly the strong ventral bias in CA3 and dorsal differences in CA1, dominate thepvalues heatmap, provided for overview (FigureS4A).
This starter neuron–normalized statistics corroborate differences in the subregion proportional trends described in the previous section.
Building on our initial observations, we examined additional injected individuals to confirm whether the ventral CA3 bias is a consistent feature.
We compared CA3/CA1 ratios in sections with the highest proportions of starter neurons along the anteroposterior axis (FigureS4B).
Dorsal and intermediate regions showed mean ratios between 0.03–0.36 and 0.05–0.19, respectively, whereas ventral regions (< DV –3 mm) ranged from 1.36 to 2.80.
Regression analysis of the CA3/CA1 ratio versus dorsoventral position revealed a negative linear relationship with slopes between −0.50 and −1.36 andR2values from 0.81 to 1.00, indicating a strong inverse correlation between ratio and depth across comparisons (FigureS4C).
In addition, we also performed logistic regression to model the transition in CA3/CA1 ratio as a function of the dorsoventral coordinate.
The inflection point, occurring at dorsoventral = −2.9, suggests the start of increased influence of CA3 input, with the sigmoid curve's steep slope (k= −20.9) indicating a sharp change in the CA3/CA1 ratio across this region (FigureS4D).
The fitted logistic parameters (L= 1.84,b= 0.131) highlight a well‐defined shift in the CA3/CA1 ratio along the dorsoventral axis, supporting the idea that CA3 to OLMα2 connectivity differs clearly between the dorsal and ventral hippocampus.
OLMa2 cells are distributed along the proximodistal (anteroposterior) axis, spanning from dorsal to ventral CA1 (Figure3A–A′,E–E′,I–I′andS5), and may exhibit region‐dependent connectivity based on their location.
To explore this, we assessed field‐specific inputs relative to starter neurons at each injection site along the hippocampal longitudinal axis.
We quantified the fractional contribution of traced neurons in the hippocampus relative to the position of starter neurons in individuals subjected to detailed full quantification.
Regional organization of inputs to OLMɑ2 cells along the hippocampal longitudinal axis.
Schematic representations of sagittal (A) and horizontal (E, I) hippocampal sections show the typical location of OLMα2 cells along the proximodistal (Pr.‐Di.)
axis in the dorsal (A′), intermediate (E′), and ventral (I′) CA1 (also corresponding to the anteroposterior (AP) axis of CA1).
Hippocampal fields, including CA2, CA3, dentate gyrus (DG), and subiculum (SUB) are annotated for reference.
Quantification of input neuron distribution on coronal sections across hippocampal fields (B, C, F, G, J, K).
Input neuron distribution along the anterior–posterior (AP) axis, expressed as percentage of hippocampal normalized inputs by bregma coordinate (mm).
Each graph represents an individual (ID) mouse injected in the dorsal (B, C), intermediate (F, G) or ventral (J, K) hippocampus.
Starter neuron (S) and CA1 fractions are downscaled if annotated (e.g., ½) to enhance visualization of input peaks in other fields.
Starter neuron proportions are shown relative to total starter counts.
Conceptual illustration summarizing the spatial relationship between peak input neuron locations (gray arrows) and starter neuron average fractions represented by color scale in the dorsal (D), intermediate (H), and ventral (L) hippocampus.
For reference, in coronal sections, regions anterior to −2.4 mm bregma correspond to the dorsal half of hippocampus (i.e., above −3 mm on the dorsoventral axis).
Scale and arrows denote anterior (A) posterior (P), lateral (L) and dorsal (D) orientation.
3D brain schematics were adapted from the 3D Brain Explorer (Oh et al.2014).
In the dorsal hippocampus, most starter neurons were located within 1 mm anterior or posterior to the injection site (Figure3B–C).
In one individual, the distribution of starter neurons was skewed posteriorly relative to the injection site (Figure3B).
Notably, this bias corresponded with a peak of CA1 input located approximately 1 mm anterior to the starter neuron peak, a relationship also observed for the second examined individual, demonstrated as an anterior shift of the starter and CA1 fractional peaks (Figure3C).
CA2 and CA3 fields exhibited a comparable distribution pattern, predominantly localized to the anterior hippocampus (Figure3B–D).
In the intermediate hippocampus, most starter neurons were distributed within ±0.5 mm from the injection site (AP −3.2 mm) (Figure3F–G).
The input distribution in this region was similar to that of the dorsal hippocampus, with CA2/CA3‐derived input originating from the anterior hippocampus (toward the septal pole, see Figure15A) and CA1 input peaking at locations aligned with or slightly anterior to the peak of starter neurons.
The peak and main distribution of SUB input were located toward the posterior hippocampus in both individuals, at the location corresponding to the dorsal half of the hippocampus.
Multiscale schematic illustrations of OLMɑ2 cell presynaptic connectivity.
(A) Schematic representation of the unfolded hippocampal archicortex, illustrating the spatial relationships between starter neurons and peak input fields.
The positions are shown relative to proximal (P), middle (M), and distal (D) subdivisions of CA1 and CA3 regions.
Stippled lines indicate fewer connections.
Schematic inspired by Ishizuka et al.1990.
(B) Presynaptic input to OLMɑ2 cells originates from the hippocampal fields CA1, CA2, CA3, and the Subiculum (SUB), with varying proportions along the dorsoventral axis, represented by differences in connection line thickness.
As a result, OLMɑ2 cells possess a dual role as both feedforward (FF) and feedback (FB) inhibitory interneurons related to CA1 pyramidal neurons.
The SUB back‐projects (BP) to the CA1 and projects to the nucleus accumbens (NAc) that further triggers dopamine (and glutamate) release from the ventral tegmental area, in all hippocampal fields (Edelmann and Lessmann2018).
Intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells receive input from CA1 pyramidal neurons that project to the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and CA1/SUB NAc projecting neurons.
(C) Simplified organization of inputs to the OLMɑ2 cells (gray) and proposed functions suggested by the current literature.
OLMa2 cells facilitate the Schaffer collateral (SC) pathway and the retrieval configuration of the hippocampal circuit while inhibiting the temporoammonic (TA) projections from the entorhinal cortex (EC).
Prolonged CA3 and CA2 FF activation elicits a fast onset but transient responses in OLM‐cells whereas CA1 FB projections gradually increase activity and are associated with long‐term potentiation (LTP) (Croce et al.2010).
Ventral CA1 mPFC‐projecting neurons increase activity upon anxiogenic exposure (ANX) and projections to the NAc decrease firing upon entering a reward zone (REW), whereas neurons targeting both areas increase firing inside the reward zone (Ciocchi et al.2015).
Superficial mPFC‐projecting neurons preferentially promote exploration, whereas the deep mPFC‐projecting neurons promote avoidance (Sánchez‐Bellot et al.2022).
OLMa2 cells receive inputs from both deep and superficial mPFC‐projecting pyramidal neurons in the intermediate‐ventral CA1.
The topographically organized ventral SUB pyramidal neurons projecting to the mPFC are located close to the proximal regions and NAc towards the distal areas (Lodge et al.2023; Wee and MacAskill2020).
Filled lines represent connections to OLM‐cells.
Dashed lines represent hypothetical connections.
(D) Schematic illustration of the local CA1 microcircuitry of OLMɑ2 cells.
OLMɑ2 cells receive recurrent excitation from pyramidal neurons (PN) and provide feedback inhibition on their distal dendrites located in the stratum lacunosum‐moleculare (SLM).
OLMɑ2 cells inhibits Schaffer collateral associated cells (SCa) (Leão et al.2012).
The CA1 PC projects to the entorhinal cortex (EC).
We identified a PN population that projects to the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), which likely exhibits a feedback inhibitory configuration.
Medial septum (MS) provides glutamatergic (Glu), cholinergic (ACh) and GABAergic input.
Local inhibition was shown to arise primarily from cells in the stratum oriens (SO) and to a lesser extent from cells in the stratum pyramidale (SP), and the stratum radiatum (SR), in similar proportions along the dorsoventral axis.
Interneurons expressing vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) were specifically identified in the SP and SR of the intermediate hippocampus.
In the ventral hippocampus, the distribution of starter neurons varied between individuals along the proximodistal axis (Figure3J,K).
In one individual, starter neurons were located more posterior, in the distal CA1 (−2.9 to −3.3 mm) (Figure3J), while in the other, they were found more anterior in the proximal CA1 (2.7–2.9 mm) (Figure3K).
Interestingly, in both cases, CA1 input peaked in more anterior (proximal CA1) regions.
CA3 input showed a similar trend, although the more proximal CA1 starter position was associated with more anterior CA3 input corresponding to the dorsal half of the hippocampus.
CA2 inputs were associated with a more anterior (and dorsal) location for the injection site in the proximal CA1.
In summary, individual variation in starter neuron position revealed input distribution patterns shifted toward outside of the main input field (Figure3D,H,I), suggesting an additional role for OLMα2 cells to integrate information from more distant hippocampal segments relative to their location.
Due to the curvature of the hippocampal structure, a three‐dimensional framework is essential for accurately characterizing its organization.
Thus, we next investigated the spatial distribution of traced presynaptic neurons along the dorsoventral hippocampus axis relative to the starter regions.
Starter neurons exhibited little variation regarding dorsoventral spread (Figure4A–F, TableS2).
Across starter regions, the majority of inputs originated at the same dorsoventral level, with a small but consistent population observed contralaterally (Figure4).
Targeting the dorsal OLMɑ2 cells, traced afferent neurons were found toward the ventral pole, reaching −3 mm (Figure4B).
The intermediate OLMɑ2 cells received traced afferent input from the dorsal and ventral pole respectively, spanning between −1 and −4 mm ipsilateral and −1.5 to −3.5 mm (Figure4C,D).
The ventral OLMɑ2 cells received traced afferent input from the intermediate hippocampus, reaching −2.5 mm ipsilateral and spanning between −3 and 4.5 mm contralaterally (Figure4E,F).
Spatial distribution of presynaptic neurons traced from OLMɑ2 cells along the dorsoventral hippocampus axis.
Schematic illustrations (A–C) of heatmaps (D–F), representing the afferent input to the OLMɑ2 cells in the right hemisphere in the dorsal (d) (A), intermediate (i) (B) or ventral (v) (C) hippocampus (HC).
The black dots indicate the coordinate location of the traced starter cells (see also TableS2).
The central scale bar in panel 1 (A–C), indicates the dorsoventral position in millimeters (mm) from Bregma.
Each heatmap pixel represents 0.5 mm2of the dorsoventral (DV) and mediolateral (ML) coordinates along the anteroposterior axis.
The pixels with a black frame indicate the starter cell location coordinates.
The pixel color indicates the average fraction of presynaptic neurons in the hippocampus (mean ofn= 2 per location).
3D representations were modified from the original rendering in 3D Brain Explorer (Oh et al.2014).
We then further investigated the field specificity of the intrahippocampal long‐range inputs toward each starter region.
We found that in the CA1 fields, afferent input targeting the dorsal OLMɑ2 cells originated bilaterally close to the septal midline and ipsilaterally toward the intermediate regions in the posterior hippocampus, in close proximity to starter neurons (Figure5B,C).
Intermediate OLMɑ2 cells received input from both dorsal and ventral regions ipsilaterally, with input from the pyramidal layer above −1.5 to −3 mm, and below −4 mm in the stratum oriens, outside the starter neuron range (Figure5D,E).
Ventral OLMɑ2 cells received input mainly from the starter neuron region (Figure5F,G).
Anatomical mapping of CA1 afferent neurons to OLMɑ2 cells at the different fields along the dorsoventral axis.
(A) Schematic illustration of the hippocampus, highlighting the entire CA1 field in magenta.
Black dots indicate the location of OLMɑ2 starter cells at the different traced areas.
Colored dots indicate the extreme points for each injection site, along the dorsoventral axis, and the lines indicate the dorsoventral extent of CA1 afferent neurons to the different starting locations, the dorsal region is illustrated in green, intermediate in yellow and ventral in red.
Presynaptic neurons in the dorsal (B) and (E) ventral most CA1, projecting to dorsal OLMɑ2 cells.
Presynaptic neurons in the dorsal (C) and (F) ventral most CA1, projecting to intermediate OLMɑ2 cells.
Presynaptic neurons in the dorsal most (D) and (G) ventral CA1 projecting to ventral OLMɑ2 cells.
Bregma coordinates for the anteroposterior (AP) and dorsoventral (vertical scale) are annotated in millimeters (mm).
Scale bar: 500 μm.
3D representations were modified from the original rendering in 3D Brain Explorer (Oh et al.2014).
We found inputs from the CA2 field along the entire dorsoventral axis (Figure6).
PCP4 immunolabeling was particularly useful to define the extent of CA2 in the most anterodorsal and anteroventral portions of the CA2.
The dorsal OLMɑ2 cells received CA2 input bilaterally, close to the septal midline (Figure6B,C) and toward the intermediate regions on the ipsilateral side (Figure6B″,C″).
The intermediate OLMɑ2 cells receive inputs from the ipsilateral side spanning from the septal midline toward the ventral regions at −3 mm.
The extent of the ventral CA2 field has not been clearly described in the literature and is also poorly annotated in many anatomical atlases for the mouse brain.
In any case, we found neurons providing traced presynaptic input to ventral OLMɑ2 cells continuous in the CA3, CA2, and CA1 fields.
We estimated them to have a lateral location in the hippocampus in the mixed zone of CA3 and CA2 of the anteroventral hippocampus in coronal view (Figure6E,F).
In the intermediate hippocampus, we quantified co‐expression of PCP4 and mCherry, which overlapped in 6.6% of the examined neurons (n= 1113 mCherry cells,n= 2 mice).
When we investigated the CA3 field, we found that inputs originated bilaterally from all traced regions (Figure7).
The dorsal and intermediate OLMɑ2 cells received input from overlapping regions spanning from the septal midline toward the ventral regions at −3 mm (Figure7B,C,E,F).
The ventral OLMɑ2 cells received CA3 input, spanning from −2.5 to −4.5 mm (Figure7D–G).
Contralateral CA3 inputs were sparse but reflected the dorsoventral position of the injection site and were consistently occurring across injected individuals (TableS1).
Anatomical mapping of CA3 afferents to OLMɑ2 cells at the different traced areas along the dorsoventral axis.
(A) Schematic illustration of the hippocampus, highlighting the entire CA3 field in magenta.
Black dots indicate the location of OLMɑ2 starter cells at the different traced areas.
Colored dots indicate the extreme points along the dorsoventral axis, and the lines indicate the dorsoventral extent of CA3 afferents to the different starting locations, the dorsal region is illustrated in green, intermediate in yellow and ventral in red.
Presynaptic neurons expressing mCherry (magenta) at the dorsal CA2, projecting to the dorsal OLMɑ2 cells.
Presynaptic neurons in the dorsal (B) and (E) ventral most CA3 projecting to dorsal OLMɑ2 cells.
Presynaptic neurons in the dorsal (C) and (F) ventral most CA3 projecting to intermediate OLMɑ2 cells.
Presynaptic neurons in the dorsal most (D) and (G) ventral CA3 projecting to ventral OLMɑ2 cells.
(H–J) Examples of presynaptic neurons projecting from the contralateral side, that generally mirrored the dorsoventral location of ipsilateral CA3 neurons.
Bregma coordinates for the anteroposterior (AP) and dorsoventral (vertical scale) are annotated in millimeters (mm).
Scale bar: 500 μm.
3D representations were modified from the original rendering in 3D Brain Explorer (Oh et al.2014).
In summary, dorsal OLMɑ2 cells receive contralateral input from all CA fields, generally close to starter neurons in the dorsal CA1 and CA2, and from intermediate CA3.
Intermediate OLMɑ2 cells receive dorsal CA2 and CA3 input and ventral input from all CA fields.
Ventral OLMɑ2 cells receive intermediate CA2 and CA3 input.
We found traced neurons in the (MS/DBB), which provided long‐range afferent inputs to the dorsal, intermediate, and ventral hippocampus in similar proportions (2.7%–4% of the total number of neurons, Figure8G).
The majority of traced neurons in the MS/DBB were organized in an anteroposterior sequence corresponding with the dorsoventral location of the starter neurons (FigureS6A).
The majority of the inputs originated from the ipsilateral side, close to the midline (FigureS6C).
Less than half of the total number of traced presynaptic neurons in the MS/DBB were immunopositive for Choline acetyltransferase (ChAT; 25%–46%,n= 6, Figures8A,HandS6D–F).
The medial septum input distribution on starter neuron normalized input counts lacked power to reveal regional differences using Chi‐squared tests, so we applied Bayesian pairwise proportion analyses to address this question.
MS/DBB input to ventral OLMα2 cells had the highest probability of exceeding inputs to both dorsal (p= 0.97) and intermediate (p= 0.97) regions, whereas the dorsal vs. intermediate comparison remained equivocal (p= 0.56) (FigureS7A,B).
When we applied the same analysis to the ChAT‐defined subpopulation, MS/DBB inputs to ventral regions again showed the greatest likelihood of being larger than those to dHC and iHC (p= 0.94), with no clear bias between dorsal and intermediate (p= 0.54) (FigureS7C,D).
The Bayesian framework provides probabilistic evidence supporting differences in input distributions between hippocampal regions, which may be masked without accounting for starter neuron normalization.
However, the number of starter neurons varied across regions, with fewer traced neurons in the MS/DBB connected to the ventral‐ compared to the dorsal and intermediate starter regions.
This reduced statistical resolution and influenced the outcomes of the Bayesian comparisons.
Medial septum afferent input to OLMɑ2 cells along the dorsoventral axis.
Monosynaptic retrogradely traced neurons, expressing mCherry in the medial septum‐diagonal band of Broca (MS/DBB).
(A) Choline acetyltransferase (ChAT; green) expressing neurons visualized using immunohistochemistry in 80 μm sections.
(B) mCherry (magenta) withVesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter(Viaat; green) and (C) mCherry (magenta) withVesicular glutamate transporter 2(Vglut2; green) mRNA expressing neurons visualized using in situ hybridization with RNAscope in 18 μm sections.
Neurons with overlapping labeling in enlargements (white frame) are indicated with white arrows (A′–C″).
(E–F′) Confocal images showing examples of the hybridization signal.
(D) Schematic overview of the different traced areas along the dorsoventral axis from the MS/DBB.
The 3D representations were modified from the original rendering in 3D Brain Explorer (Oh et al.2014).
(G) Input fraction to the MS/DBB of the total number of mCherry cells.
(H) The proportion of ChAT‐immunopositive mCherry expressing neurons in MS/DBB for each traced area.
(I) The proportion of a subset of mCherry neurons, co‐expressing Viaat and mCherry mRNA.
(J) The proportion of a subset of mCherry neurons, co‐expressing Vglut2 and mCherry mRNA.
(K–M) Summary of mean input proportions to the different starter regions.
Uncategorized neurons are denoted as “other.” Scale bars A–C: 500 μm, A′–C′: 100 μm, E–F″: 20 μm.
3D representations were modified from the original rendering in 3D Brain Explorer (Oh et al.2014).
We used FISH (with a signal amplification system) to identify co‐localized mRNA expression of the inhibitory molecular markerSolute carrier family 32 member 1(Slc32a1, also known asVesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter,Viaat), withmCherrymRNA expressing neurons in the MS/DBB.
When investigating selected sections (8–12 sections per marker combination for each animal) from the peak expressing anteroposterior coordinate (FigureS6A), we found 52% co‐expression for dorsal OLMɑ2 cells and 32%–33% co‐expression for intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells (27–44 mCherry neurons per region,n= 3 mice, Figure8B,E,I).
In addition, we performed immunohistochemistry together with FISH to visualize ChAT together withViaatandmCherry.
Examples of ChAT positive,Viaatnegative or ChAT negative,Viaatpositive mCherry expressing neurons (FigureS7G–H‴) were found from all regions of starter neurons.
We also examined the excitatory molecular markerSolute carrier family 17 member 6(Slc17A6, also known asVesicular glutamate transporter 2, Vglut2) and found that it was co‐labeled withmCherrymRNA positive neurons to a lesser extent (3%–11% of the cells, 28–30mCherrycells per region,n= 3, Figure8C,F,J).
As a subset of themCherrypositive neurons were not examined for co‐expression withViaatandVglut2, thus a remaining portion was left unidentified (Figure8K–M, gray area).
Overall, cholinergic (ChAT) and estimated GABAergic (Viaat) afferent inputs exhibited similar and larger proportions compared to the more sparsely labeled excitatory afferent input (Vglut2).
Next, we examined patterns of innervation along the dorsoventral hippocampus axis, and found divergent patterns emerging from the more sparsely labeled extra‐hippocampal input regions.
This was most apparent for intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells, which received inputs from both shared and separate sources.
We found EC projections to both intermediate (n= 5) and ventral (n= 3) OLMɑ2 cells, but not to the dorsal (n= 3) OLMɑ2 cells (Figure9).
The input fraction in relation to the total number of traced presynaptic neurons was, on average, 0.23% (n= 2, avg.
12 neurons, starter neuron ratio 0.36) to the intermediate and 2.6% (n= 2, avg.
68 neurons, starter neuron ratio 11) to the ventral OLMɑ2 cells (Figure9A).
The majority of neurons connected to intermediate OLMɑ2 cells were located in the medial EC (MEC), whereas neurons connected to ventral OLMɑ2 cells were preferentially located in the lateral EC (LEC) (Figure9B).
Whereas intermediate OLMɑ2 cells received inputs from Layer 2 or 4/5 in the dorsoposterior EC (−4.4 to −5.02 mm AP from bregma), ventral OLMɑ2 cells instead received inputs from Layer 2 in the anteroventral EC (−3.8 to −4.2 mm AP from bregma).
To investigate if the EC population provides any inhibition to OLMα2 cells, we examined a subset of both intermediate and ventral populations using FISH and probes targetingViaatand viralmCherrymRNA.
Indeed, we found 13%ViaatandmCherryco‐expressing neurons in the MEC but not in the LEC connected to the ventral OLMɑ2 cells (24 mCherry neurons in seven sections; Figure9G).
None of the neurons in EC connected to the intermediate OLMɑ2 cells were found to co‐expressViaatandmCherry(Figure9H).
Presynaptic input to intermediate and ventral OLMa2 cells from the entorhinal cortex (EC).
(A) Table showing input fractions to the EC out of the total number of mCherry cells.
(B) Pie chart diagram showing average proportions of anatomical location in the lateral (LEC) or medial (MEC) EC to intermediate (iOLMa2) or ventral (vOLMa2) cells.
(C–F) Overview images of coronal sections showing anatomical fields at traced regions from iOLMa2 cells.
The parasubiculum (PaS) and the subiculum (SUB) are annotated as reference.
Anatomical subdivisions are mapped according to Allen Mouse Brain Atlas,mouse.brain‐map.organdatlas.brain‐map.org.
Bregma coordinates for the anteroposterior (AP) axis are annotated in millimeters (mm).
(D′) Enlarged image (black frame in D) of mCherry neurons in the perirhinal cortex (PRh), layer (L) 2/3, dense projections are visible in L5.
(E′) Enlarged image (black frame in E) of mCherry neurons in the LEC.
(F′) Enlarged image (black frame in F) of mCherry neurons in the MEC L3 and LEC L1.
(G–H′) Images of coronal sections processed for fluorescent in situ hybridization targeting presynaptic EC neurons expressing viral mCherry mRNA (magenta) andVesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter(Viaat) mRNA (green).
(G) Presynaptic neurons in the MEC and LEC traced from vOLMa2 cells, enlarged image (white frame) (G′) show examples ofViaatpositive (red arrow) andViaatnegative (white arrow) mCherry cells in L2 and L5/6.
(H) Presynaptic neurons in the LEC traced from iOLMa2 cells, enlarged image (white frame) (H′) show examples ofViaatnegative mCherry cells in L2.
Scale bars: D′–F′: 500 μm, G, H: 1000 μm, G′–H′: 250 μm, G′ (enlargement): 20 μm.
We also found sparse labeling of traced presynaptic neurons in the brainstem, hypothalamus, thalamus, and amygdala targeting intermediate and ventral, but not dorsal OLMɑ2 cells (Figure10, TableS3).
We found presynaptic neurons projecting to intermediate OLMɑ2 cells in the dorsal (DR) and medial raphe (MnR) of the brainstem (Figure10A,B), zona incerta (ZI) and nucleus reuniens (Re) of the thalamus, median (MPO)‐ and lateral preoptic area (LPO), nucleus arcuate (Arc), ventral tuberomammillary nucleus (VTM) of the hypothalamus and the basolateral amygdala (BLA).
In contrast, we found presynaptic neurons projecting to both the intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells in the anteromedial thalamic nucleus (AM; Figure10C), anteroventral thalamic nucleus (AV; Figure10C), lateral hypothalamic area (LH; Figure10E) and the central amygdala (CeA; Figure10G).
Ventral OLMɑ2 cells were specifically innervated by neurons in the medial mammillary nucleus, medial (MM), lateral part (ML) and the supramammillary nucleus (SuM) (Figure10D), medial and lateral part and the basolateral amygdala, posterior part (BLP; Figure10H).
Anatomical mapping of the presynaptic input to OLMɑ2 cells from sparsely labeled areas.
Overview schematic and example images of sections with monosynaptic retrogradely labeled neurons expressing mCherry (magenta; white arrows).
Anatomical positions of the neurons are represented as dots (magenta) in the section overview.
(A) Presynaptic input to the intermediate OLMɑ2 cells from the ventral part of the dorsal raphe nucleus (DR), ventral (DRV) and ventrolateral part (DRVL).
The periaqueductal gray (PAG), dorsal raphe nucleus, dorsal part (DRD), medial longitudinal fasciculus (mlf), superior cerebellar peduncle (Scp), anterior tegmental nucleus (ATg) and median raphe nucleus (MnR) are annotated for anatomical reference.
(B) Presynaptic input to the intermediate OLMɑ2 cells from the MnR.
The dorsal raphe nucleus, interfascicular part (DRI) and ventral tegmental nucleus (VTg) and the same structures found in A, are annotated for anatomical reference.
(C) Presynaptic input to the intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells from the anteromedial thalamic nucleus (AM) and anteroventral thalamic nucleus (AV).
The anterodorsal thalamic nucleus (AD), fimbria of the hippocampus (fi), 3rd ventricle (3 V), reticular thalamic nucleus (Rt), internal capsule (ic), reuniens thalamic nucleus (Re) are annotated for anatomical reference.
(D) Presynaptic input to the intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells from the supra mammillary nucleus (SuM).
Neurons were also found in medial mammillary nucleus (MM) and lateral mammillary nucleus (ML).
The ventral tegmental area (VTA) is annotated for anatomical reference.
(E) Presynaptic input to the intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells from the border between ventral tuberomammillary nucleus (VTM) and terete hypothalamic nucleus (Te).
Presynaptic neurons were also found in the posterior hypothalamic area (PH), lateral hypothalamic area (LH) and arcuate hypothalamic nucleus, medial posterior part (ArcMP).
The mediolateral zone of the mammillary nucleus (ML), arcuate hypothalamic nucleus, lateroposterior part (ArcLP), arcuate hypothalamic nucleus and medial posterior part (ArcMP) are annotated for anatomical reference.
(F) Presynaptic input to the dorsal OLMɑ2 cells from the primary visual cortex (V1) layer (L) 2/3.
(G) Presynaptic input to the intermediate OLMɑ2 cells from the basolateral amygdala (BLA) and central amygdaloid nucleus (Ce) to the intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells.
The bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BSTIA), lateral amygdaloid nucleus (La) and basomedial amygdaloid nucleus, posterior part (BMP) is annotated as anatomical reference.
(H) Presynaptic input to the ventral OLMɑ2 cells from the basolateral amygdaloid nucleus, posterior part (BLP) and the posterolateral cortical amygdaloid nucleus.
The anteroposterior (AP) axis is indicated for each section in relation to Bregma in millimeters (mm).
Scale bar: 500 μm.
(I) Schematic illustration of the anatomical position of main input regions to OLMɑ2 cells.
(J) Schematic summary of input regions to OLMɑ2 cells according to their position in the dorsoventral axis.
The dotted arrow (V1) indicates that the area was found in one individual.
3D representations were modified from the original rendering in 3D Brain Explorer (Oh et al.2014).
We enhanced the mCherry signal with immunohistochemistry to visualize axon projections and investigated if any of the traced pyramidal neurons target any of the known major output areas of the ventral hippocampus, the mPFC, nucleus accumbens (NAc), BLA, and LH.
We found dense axonal projections from neurons targeting OLMɑ2 cells in the intermediate and ventral hippocampus in the ventral regions of the mPFC as well as the NAc core area (Figures11CandS8).
We only found sparse projections in the BLA and LH that could belong to the few neurons identified in these regions (FigureS8).
To identify the source of the projections in the mPFC, we used retro‐AAV targeting the IL area combined with monosynaptic retrograde tracing in the hippocampus.
As expected, GFP‐expressing hippocampal projection neurons targeting the mPFC were distributed along the proximodistal and dorsoventral axis, mainly in the CA1 and the subiculum.
We found starter neurons in the stratum oriens of the intermediate (DV ~ 2 mm) and the intermediate‐ventral (DV ~ 3 mm) hippocampus (FigureS6A).
Viral rAAV‐GFP and RV‐mCherry co‐expressing neurons were observed in close proximity to the starter neuron region (n= 2 mice; Figure11E,F).
We quantified the proportions of IL projecting pyramidal cells in the CA1 and found mCherry and GFP co‐expression in 3%–8% of the examined neurons (n= 2, 292–993 neurons), where both the deep and superficial layers were represented (Figure11G).
We focused our quantification of pyramidal neurons to the CA1 above −3.5 mm along the dorsoventral axis, for reliable identification of starter neurons in the stratum oriens.
We also injected rAAV‐GFP into the IL area of Chrna2‐cre mice crossed to a reporter strain expressing tdTomato to visualize OLMɑ2 cells together with mPFC projection neurons (FigureS9C–H).
Tracing of hippocampal projection neurons targeting both the medial prefrontal cortex and OLMɑ2 cells.
(A) Schematic illustration of the experimental procedure.
Retrograde (r) adeno associated virus (AAV) expressing GFP by the human synapsin (hSyn) promoter was injected into the infralimbic (IL) area of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC).
At the same time, AAV “helper virus,” encoding for the rabies virus (RV) entry receptor TVA (E66T), optimized G‐protein (oG), and GFP was injected in the intermediate (i) or the intermediate‐ventral (i/v) CA1.
Following 8 days of AAV expression, a second injection of G‐protein deficient RV, encoding for mCherry was performed at the same coordinates in the hippocampus as the helper virus.
(B) Schematic illustration of the rAAV‐GFP (green) retrograde axonal transport from the IL area to the hippocampal (HC) area and the mPFC‐projecting hippocampal pyramidal neurons expressing mCherry (magenta) from the presynaptic spread of RV originating from OLMɑ2 cells.
(C) Axonal projections from monosynaptically traced mCherry expressing neurons (magenta) in the mPFC and the infralimbic area (IL), dorsal peduncular cortex (DP) and dorsal tenia tecta (DTT) and nucleus accumbens core (NAcC).
Visualized by immunohistochemistry using anti‐mCherry/Alexa647.
(D) Image of the rAAV injection site in the IL‐area showing GFP expression (green).
The secondary motor cortex (M2), cingulate cortex area 1 (Cg1), prelimbic cortex (PrL), are annotated for reference.
(E) rAAV‐GFP hippocampal projection neurons targeting the mPFC at the RV‐mCherry injection site in the CA1.
(F) Confocal image (merged stack) of GFP and mCherry co‐expressing pyramidal neurons (white arrows).
(F′–F″) Merged and individual channel images showing the signal overlap in an optical section.
(G) Quantification of GFP and mCherry co‐expressing CA1 pyramidal neurons at different starting positions.
Bregma coordinates for the anteroposterior (AP) and dorsoventral (vertical scale) are annotated in millimeters (mm).
Scale bars: C–E: 500 μm, F: 200 μm, F′: 50 μm.
3D representations were modified from the original rendering in 3D Brain Explorer (Oh et al.2014).
Neurons traced from the mPFC could occasionally be observed in the stratum oriens below −4 mm along the dorsoventral axis (FigureS9E).
Although we found some examples of RV‐mCherry and EGFP co‐expression in the subiculum, we omitted those from the quantification since the subiculum exhibits an unlayered structure with intermingled pyramidal‐ and Chrna2‐cre expressing neurons (Figure9F,H).
Cre‐induced GFP expression could therefore falsely label mCherry cells from subiculum projection neurons.
However, co‐expression of mPFC‐GFP and Chrna2‐cre neurons expressing tdTomato was not found in the ventral CA1 or subiculum.
Hence, the observed rAAV‐GFP and RV‐mCherry expressing subiculum neurons could potentially be OLMɑ2 targeting projection neurons, which would need verification using complementary methods in future studies.
To identify the principal sources of local inhibition onto OLMα2 cells, we examined selected sections along the anteroposterior axis, related to the primary location and average distribution of starter and traced neurons (Figures3andS3B).
Starter neurons were confirmed to reside in the stratum oriens prior to performing FISH with probes targetingViaatand viralmCherrymRNA (Figure12A–C).
Neurons co‐expressing both transcripts were observed in the dorsal (Figure12A–A‴), intermediate (Figure12B–B‴), and ventral (Figure12C–C‴) regions of the hippocampus.
In general, the vast majority of intrahippocampal traced presynaptic inputs originated from glutamatergic cells in the CA stratum pyramidale, judging from the co‐expression ofSolute carrier family 17 member 7(Slc17a7; also known asVesicular glutamate transporter 1,Vglut1) and viralmCherrymRNA (Figure12D–H).
Both deep and superficial neurons in relation to the width of the dense nucleated area in the pyramidal layer were identified.
The abundant expression ofVglut1precluded reliable identification of cells void of expression, whereasViaatpositive or negative cells could be readily distinguished.
Analysis of inhibitory neurons in the CA stratum pyramidale using fluorescent in situ hybridization with RNAscope.
Images of 18 μm coronal sections from the CA fields, where examples of inhibitory neurons in stratum pyramidale (SP) could be identified.
Presynaptic neurons expressing viralmCherrymRNA (green) visualized using TSA Vivid 520 nm andVesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter (Viaat)mRNA (magenta) visualized using TSA Vivid 650 nm traced from dorsal (A), intermediate (B) and ventral (C) OLMɑ2 cells.
Examples ofmCherryandViaatco‐expressing neurons in the SP are indicated with a white arrow (A′, C′), Image examples of co‐expressing neurons in the stratum radiatum (SR) and in the stratum oriens (SO) on the border to the subiculum (SUB) and are also indicated (B′) and in separate channel view (B″–B‴).
(D) Confocal image showing an example of aViaatpositive,mCherrynegative neuron embedded in the CA1 SP (red arrow).
(E) Representative example ofVglut1expression in the pyramidal layer of the dorsal hippocampus.ViaatandmCherryco‐expressing neurons in the CA1 SP (F–F″), the ipsilateral CA3 SP (G–G′) and contralateral (con) CA3 SP (H–H″).
Scale bars A–C: 500 μm; A′–C′: 200 μm, A″–C″: 100 μm, D, F, G, H: 50 μm, E: 1000 μm.
Next, we examined the laminar distribution and the proportional contribution of inhibitory inputs relative to the total traced afferent input.
In selected cryo‐sections, we examined the ipsilateral CA1 stratum pyramidale, finding thatViaatwas co‐expressed in 0.89% (ofn= 561 cells) of the dorsal, 0.24% (ofn= 425 cells) of the intermediate, and 0.63% (n= 795 mCherry cells) of the ventral cells (Figure13A).
These proportions were used as estimates for comparison with the remaining CA1 layer proportions obtained from the total quantification.
Neurons in the stratum oriens that expressed only mCherry were thus not classified as starter neurons and ranged from 4.7% to 6.7% in the dorsal and intermediate CA1, increasing to 17% in the ventral CA1 (Figure13B).
The proportions of neurons from the stratum radiatum ranged from 0.47% to 0.64% in the dorsal and intermediate to 1.4% in the ventral CA1 (Figure13C).
We excluded the estimated number of inhibitory neurons in the stratum pyramidale as well as stratum oriens and stratum radiatum neurons from the total number of neurons in the CA1 field.
The remaining proportions of presumptive pyramidal neurons ranged from 90% to 94% in the dorsal and intermediate CA1, respectively, to 55% in the ventral CA1 (Figure13D).
When we compared the proportions of the inhibitory input from all laminae, we found that neurons in the stratum oriens layer provided the majority of local inhibitory input to OLMɑ2 cells in all regions (4.7%–16.6%; Figure13E–G).
Based on the estimated laminar proportions combined with total counts, the fractional mean value indicated that the MS/DBB is the second largest provider of inhibitory inputs to the dorsal (1.7%) and intermediate (1.3%) regions, whereas neurons in the stratum radiatum (1.4%) provided more afferents than the MS/DBB in total.
In relation to the number of starter neurons, on average, 80 CA1 pyramidal neurons provided input to a single hypothetical OLMɑ2 cell in the dorsal CA1, compared to 36–45 neurons in the intermediate CA1.
The ratio ranged from 3 to 22 neurons from the stratum oriens and 0.55–2.0 neurons from the stratum radiatum.
When we compared the contribution of excitation from the main sources, the contribution of the CA1 field gradually decreased toward the ventral pole.
Dorsal OLMɑ2 cells received a dominating proportion of inputs from the CA1 layer (Figure13H), whereas intermediate OLMɑ2 cells received excitatory inputs from the CA1 layer proportionally equal to the combined CA2, CA3, and subiculum input (Figure13I).
Ventral OLMɑ2 cells instead received the majority of excitatory inputs from the CA3 layer, with some contribution from the CA1 (Figure13J).
In the ipsilateral CA3 pyramidal layer,Viaatwas co‐expressed in 13% (n= 8 cells) of the cells in the dorsal, 3.0% (n= 66 cells) in the intermediate, and 0.41% (n= 736 cells) in the ventral.
The proportion in the contralateral dorsal CA1 pyramidal layer was 12% (n= 26 cells).
We did not find any neurons in the contralateral CA3 that expressedViaat(n= 9 dorsal, 8 intermediate and 58 ventral cells).
Relative anatomical proportions of excitatory and inhibitory presynaptic input to OLMa2 cells.
(A) Estimated fraction of inhibitoryViaatexpressing presynaptic neurons in the CA1 SP in selected sections.
(B) Inhibitory input fraction from the CA1 stratum oriens (SO), excluding the number of starter cells.
(C) Inhibitory input fraction from the CA1 stratum radiatum (SR).
(D) Input fraction of presynaptic input from the CA1 stratum pyramidale (SP) to OLMɑ2 interneurons at the dorsal (d), intermediate (i) and ventral (v) hippocampus (HC), excluding the estimated fraction of inhibitory neurons.
(E–G) Comparing the fractions of presynaptic inhibitory neurons onto OLMɑ2 interneurons along the dorsoventral axis and from the medial septum‐diagonal band of Broca (MS/DBB).
(H–J) Comparing the ratio of presynaptic input in relation to the number of identified starter cells, excluding the estimated proportions of inhibitory neurons.
To classify some of the traced presynaptic inhibitory inputs to OLMɑ2 cells, we examined co‐labeling with vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), Slc17a8 (vGlut3) and neuropeptide Y (NPY; Harris et al.2018).
Traced neurons from the intermediate CA1 in the pyramidal layer and stratum radiatum were immunopositive for VIP, specifically in close proximity to starter neurons (on average 0.98%; 14 of 1422 examined mCherry cells,n= 2 mice, Figure14).
We found the co‐labeled neurons along the proximodistal CA1 axis from −2.7 to 3.6 mm AP and −2.2 to 2.7 mm DV from bregma.
A few mCherry and neuropeptide Y (Npy) mRNA co‐expressing cells were found in the stratum oriens of the dorsal hippocampus using in situ hybridization (not shown).
We did not find mCherry co‐labeled presynaptic neurons with vGlut3.
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) expressing interneurons connect to intermediate OLMɑ2 interneurons.
(A, B) Overview images of traced neurons in the proximal and distal intermediate CA1.
(C, D) Images of traced presynaptic neurons co‐expressing viral mCherry (magenta) and VIP‐immunopositive (green) neurons in the stratum pyramidale (C) and border between stratum radiatum (SR) and stratum lacunosum‐moleculare (D) in both proximal and distal CA1.
Boxes in (C, D) denote the enlargements shown in C″, D″ (mCherry) and C‴, D‴ (anti‐VIP visualized using Alexa 647).
Scale bars A–B: 500 μm, C–D: 100 μm, C′–D″: 50 μm.
In this study, we mapped afferent inputs to OLMɑ2 cells along the hippocampal dorsoventral axis.
We hypothesized that the diverse behavioral phenotypes observed along the dorsoventral axis are mediated by specific input patterns to OLMɑ2 cells (Haam et al.2018; Mikulovic et al.2018; Siwani et al.2018).
We found that OLMɑ2 cells receive distinct patterns of excitatory and inhibitory input depending on their dorsoventral location, highlighting their different roles in hippocampal circuits.
We targeted OLMɑ2 cells using TVA(E66T), a modified receptor for monosynaptic retrograde tracing of local circuits.
This TVA variant reduces starter neuron numbers and long‐range projections (Miyamichi et al.2013), though its reduced EnvA binding efficiency likely contributed to our reduced success rate (Rong et al.1998).
Given reports of nonspecific labeling in RV monosynaptic tracing strategies, we prioritized reducing Cre‐independent leakage to ensure precise targeting of OLMɑ2 cells in CA1.
Our tracing results adhered to established guidelines to minimize sampling biases, demonstrating robust MS/DBB inputs and sparse labeling of other long‐range afferents, reflecting circuit interaction strengths (Beier et al.2017; Tran‐Van‐Minh et al.2023; Velica and Kullander2024).
This approach may have come at the expense of detecting scarce long‐range projections and an underrepresentation of long‐range inputs.
Due to inherent variability in the distribution of labeled neurons from individual injections, each animal cannot be treated as a simple replicate.
Observed differences reflect both biological and experimental variability.
Statistical comparisons were therefore approached cautiously, emphasizing robust effect patterns over individual‐level statistical uniformity.
The dominant contribution of CA1‐derived inputs to dorsal OLMɑ2 cells (80%) aligns with the established role of dorsal CA1 in spatial memory.
These cells primarily act as feedback inhibitory neurons, integrating excitatory drive from CA1 pyramidal collaterals.
The greater contributions to feed‐forward inhibition from CA2 and CA3 in intermediate and ventral regions highlight regional differences in OLMɑ2 cell function and suggest a transition from predominantly feedback to feed‐forward inhibition along the dorsoventral axis.
The distribution of input from CA2 pyramidal neurons further highlights the functional diversity of OLMɑ2 cells.
Neurons in the dorsal CA2 primarily innervate dorsal and intermediate OLMɑ2 cells but not ventral OLMɑ2 cells below −4 mm in the dorsoventral axis, which is consistent with previous anatomical observations (Ishizuka et al.1990, see schematic in Figure15A).
Notably, intermediate OLMɑ2 cells receive input from CA2 neurons spanning the dorsoventral axis, suggesting a role in integrating diverse social and contextual information.
In contrast, ventral OLMɑ2 cells are selectively targeted by neurons in the ventral CA2, which aligns with CA2's established roles in social memory and modulation of hippocampal output through feed‐forward inhibition (Chevaleyre and Siegelbaum2010; Hitti and Siegelbaum2014).
Combined with emerging evidence linking ventral CA2 input to aggression and social modulation, we find it possible that OLMɑ2 cells contribute to the processing of complex social behaviors (Boehringer et al.2017; Boyle et al.2025; Pagani et al.2014).
Our study revealed extensive input to OLMɑ2 cells from CA3, particularly in the ventral hippocampus, where CA3 contributions rival those of CA1 (Figure15B).
Historically, OLM cells were classified as feedback inhibitory neurons with negligible CA3 input (Blasco‐Ibáñez and Freund1995).
However, subsequent work and our findings suggest that OLM cells also receive significant feed‐forward excitatory input from CA3 (Croce et al.2010; Zemankovics et al.2013).
This input propagates gamma oscillations and activates CA1 interneurons prior to local pyramidal neurons, enabling CA3 to actively modulate CA1 oscillatory activity (Zemankovics et al.2013).
The role of the ventral CA3 is particularly noteworthy.
Ventral CA3 pyramidal neurons, in contrast to their dorsal counterparts with well‐defined place fields, exhibit firing patterns linked to environmental properties and reward‐related contexts (Royer et al.2010).
This aligns with our finding of overlapping inputs from ventral CA3 to dorsal, intermediate, and ventral OLMɑ2 cells, suggesting a role for ventral CA3, together with CA2, in dorsoventral integration.
Furthermore, the importance of the ventral CA3 in decision‐making and behavioral flexibility is underscored by studies demonstrating its influence on approach‐avoidance behavior and timing precision in conflict tasks (Çavdaroğlu et al.2021; Schumacher et al.2018).
The subiculum provides significant input to OLMɑ2 cells, particularly in the intermediate hippocampus, where it constitutes approximately one‐fifth of total traced neurons.
Back‐projecting subicular neurons were shown to directly link CA1 to visuospatial cortical areas, important for object place learning (Sun et al.2019).
Input patterns to the subiculum are highly segregated, with the dorsal subiculum projecting to visuospatial regions and the ventral subiculum connecting to limbic structures (Bienkowski et al.2018).
In contrast, the output pattern exhibits a crossover with the opposite projection pattern, where, for example, the dorsal subiculum projects to limbic areas (Bienkowski et al.2018).
This crossover likely influences OLMɑ2‐mediated dorsoventral integration by enabling spatial and emotional information to converge on intermediate regions.
Such integration may be of importance for linking value‐related information to objects or individuals.
Our findings extend previous work demonstrating the role of OLMɑ2 cells in CA1 oscillatory dynamics.
Ventral OLMɑ2 cells, for example, are implicated in theta 2 (6–8 Hz) oscillations and gamma modulation in both the dorsal and ventral hippocampus (Mikulovic et al.2018).
Lateral inhibition along the dorsoventral axis has been proposed as a key mechanism underlying theta traveling waves (Lubenov and Siapas2009; Patel et al.2012).
Previous studies have shown that longitudinal, dorsoventrally oriented collateral axons of CA1 pyramidal cells mainly give rise to excitation to their target sites (Yang et al.2014).
We demonstrate that OLMα2 interneurons indeed receive CA1 pyramidal cell input distant from the starter neurons.
Given their role in theta modulation, OLMα2 cells may contribute to theta traveling waves by regulating the timing of pyramidal cell excitability along the dorsoventral axis.
We hypothesize that if input from CA3 precedes local excitation in CA1 across distances comparable to those of local connections (Zemankovics et al.2013), OLMα2 cells would be positioned to modulate distal dendritic inhibition in CA1 neurons along the longitudinal axis.
This lateral inhibition would contribute to establish a temporal window for excitatory integration, ultimately shaping the local excitatory wavefront.
Such pre‐inhibition may facilitate the formation of spatial phase gradients by delaying local excitation, thereby influencing both the direction and coherence of wave propagation related to distal dendritic input.
By differentially modulating excitability along the axis, OLMα2 cells could help align local circuit activity with theta traveling waves, enabling the integration of spatial input from dorsal CA3 with contextual or emotional input from ventral CA1 and CA3.
These dynamics may be critical for the integration of spatial and value‐related information along the dorsoventral axis of CA3, where theta oscillations exhibit coherence between dorsal and ventral segments (Royer et al.2010).
This coherence may facilitate information flow between poles by linking CA3 activity to CA1 output via OLMɑ2 cells during theta states.
According to current hypotheses, theta traveling waves may help organize spatial representations through the temporal coordination of topographically structured neuronal activity (Lubenov and Siapas2009).
CA3 input to OLMα2 cells arises mainly from the ipsilateral side; however, a sparse but consistent contralateral connection exists at the corresponding dorsoventral level of the starter neurons, in agreement with established patterns of innervation within the stratum oriens (Ishizuka et al.1990; Shinohara et al.2012).
Sharp‐wave ripples (SWR) are generated within the CA2‐CA3 network, and lead to depolarization of basal dendrites of the CA1 pyramidal neurons (Buzsáki2015).
The generation of SWR is dependent on both the excitatory and inhibitory network, and it was suggested that interneuron to interneuron interaction may be responsible for the coordination of multiple local ripple events generated over the dorsoventral axis (Stark et al.2014).
Whether ripple events are synchronized across hemispheres has been debated.
Recent findings, however, show that ripple events are reliably time‐locked between hemispheres.
Notably, pyramidal neurons show local phase coupling, while interneurons maintain coupling to ripples in the contralateral hemisphere (Scheffer‐Teixeira and Tort2025).
The functional roles of ipsilateral and contralateral CA3 inputs to OLMa2 cells remain to be determined, but these projections may contribute to the coordination of hippocampal cell assemblies across hemispheres.
It has previously been demonstrated that OLMɑ2 cells are modulated by cholinergic MS afferents (Haam et al.2018; Leão et al.2012), and in accordance, we found that OLMɑ2 cells receive cholinergic MS input along the full dorsoventral axis.
MS cholinergic neurons modulate, but are not required for, hippocampal theta rhythmogenesis (Lee et al.1994; Vandecasteele et al.2014; Yoder and Pang2005).
In contrast, tonically active MS GABAergic neurons lead hippocampal theta oscillations (Hangya et al.2009; Simon et al.2006).
GABAergic afferent inputs to the hippocampus from the medial septum have been described, with interneurons as their main target (Freund and Antal1988).
However, it has been unclear to which extent OLM cells are targeted by this innervation (Gulyás et al.1990).
We show that OLMɑ2 cells are indeed innervated by inhibitory afferents, to a similar or greater degree compared with cholinergic neurons.
Two types of MS GABAergic cells, the Teevra and Komal cells, fire at different phases of hippocampal theta and contribute differently to rhythmic disinhibition of hippocampal interneurons (Borhegyi et al.2004; Henderson et al.2004; Joshi et al.2017; Viney et al.2018).
OLM cells fire at the trough of theta (Klausberger et al.2003), leading to the hypothesis that MS theta peak‐preferring Teevra cells would be counter‐coupled to OLM cells (Borhegyi et al.2004).
Even if Teevra cells mainly innervate interneurons in the CA3 (Joshi et al.2017), a detailed mapping of axon terminals from individual MS GABAergic neurons demonstrates numerous “en passant” terminal varicosities throughout the CA1 layer, including the stratum oriens (Unal et al.2018), making this population a suitable candidate for innervating OLMɑ2 cells.
In line with this idea, subsequent studies further showed that MS GABAergic neurons are indeed connected to CA1 SST interneurons, which are a part of a disinhibitory feedback loop that contributes to coordinate theta‐gamma oscillations even in the absence of sensory input (Király et al.2023).
Thus, MS theta synchronization of CA3 and OLMɑ2 cells may be important for CA3‐CA1 propagation during memory retrieval.
The MS theta modulation of OLMɑ2 cells likely influences the effect of local inhibition in a frequency‐dependent manner.
MS cholinergic neurons synthesize and release GABA, pointing to a likely co‐transmission of acetylcholine and GABA (Takács et al.2018).
A preprint publication, using single‐cell RNA sequencing to characterize the MS population, reported that theglutamic acid decarboxylase 65 kilodalton isoform(Gad65) to a greater extent andViaat, to a lesser extent, is expressed by all the major categories of the MS neurons, includingChAT,Viaat, andVglut2neurons (Kuhn et al.2024).
Thus, it is quite possible that a subset of our traced presynaptic neurons expressingViaatin the MS/DBB could be cholinergic neurons.
Indeed, when we examined ChAT andViaatin our traced cells, we found both co‐labeled and segregated populations.
When examining ChAT immunopositive neurons among all the traced neurons in the MS/DBB, only 52% were associated with the dorsal, and 32%–33% to the intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells.
We also identified a small population of MSVglut2positive neurons projecting to OLMɑ2 cells along the dorsoventral axis, corroborating and expanding on previous data showing connections to the dorsal hippocampus (Fuhrmann et al.2015).
Since ChAT is reliably detected by immunohistochemistry, and theVglut2population is a minor population also in our sample (< 10%), we assume that the majority of ChAT immunonegative MS traced presynaptic neurons targeting OLMɑ2 cells were GABAergic neurons.
Our findings of distinct EC input patterns exclusively to intermediate and ventral OLMɑ2 cells expand on previous studies demonstrating regional specialization along the dorsoventral hippocampal axis (Fanselow and Dong2010).
The preferential innervation of intermediate OLMɑ2 cells by the MEC aligns with the well‐established role of MEC in spatial processing (Witter et al.2017).
Conversely, the input to ventral OLMɑ2 cells from the LEC is consistent with the LEC's association with nonspatial and affective information, including contextual and episodic memory (Knierim et al.2014).
Further, our finding of Viaat and mCherry co‐expression in neurons in Layer 2 of the MEC projecting to ventral OLMɑ2 cells suggests the presence of inhibitory input.
Long‐range inhibitory inputs from the EC were previously shown to project to the CA1 field, where LEC inhibit stratum radiatum and lacunosum‐moleculare interneurons more strongly than MEC inhibitory projections (Melzer et al.2012, Basu et al.2016).
Our data indicate that interneurons in the stratum radiatum provide the second major source of inhibition onto ventral OLMɑ2 cells.
This further suggests that ventral OLMα2 cells may be favored by LEC‐driven disinhibition, thereby enhancing the temporal control of CA3 and EC input gating.
In particular, excitatory input from EC Layer 2 contributes to the precise timing of dendritic activation, which may be shaped by OLMα2‐mediated inhibition (Kitamura et al.2014).
At the systems level, the dynamic balance between MEC and LEC inputs refines contextual memory, modulates fear responses, and enhances novelty detection, potentially through a disinhibitory gating mechanism (Basu et al.2016).
More studies are needed to explore how these inputs modulate OLMɑ2‐mediated feedback or feed‐forward inhibition and their broader implications for spatial navigation, memory retrieval, and emotional behavior.
Intermediate and ventral OLMα2 cells, but not dorsal ones, receive sparse innervation from subcortical regions, suggesting distinct input patterns along the dorsoventral axis of the hippocampus.
The observed sparsity may reflect the circuit interaction strength, as the spread of RV particles is known to correlate with the density of synaptic connections (Beier et al.2017).
Sparse labeling has also been noted in other monosynaptic tracing studies, where the limited number of labeled inputs often correlates with the functional specialization of specific cell types (Callaway and Luo2015; Miyamichi et al.2010).
Extensive axonal collateralization patterns from single neurons in subcortical structures may also explain sparse labeling (Ren et al.2018,2019).
Presynaptic neurons projecting to intermediate OLMα2 cells were identified in the dorsal and medial raphe nuclei, regions known for their serotonergic modulation of hippocampal activity, potentially contributing to the regulation of theta rhythms and behavioral states (Böhm et al.2015; Chittajallu et al.2013; Crooks et al.2012; Ren et al.2019).
Additional inputs to intermediate OLMα2 cells were found in the zona incerta and nucleus reuniens of the thalamus, both implicated in state‐dependent modulation of hippocampal circuits, including fear (Halassa and Kastner2017; Ito et al.2018; Totty et al.2023), as well as in the medial and lateral preoptic areas, the ventral tuberomammillary nucleus, and the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, regions involved in arousal and energy balance regulation (Graebner et al.2015).
Inputs from the basolateral amygdala to intermediate OLMα2 cells may suggest a possible role in integrating emotional and contextual signals into hippocampal processing, consistent with the amygdala's broader role in memory and fear‐related behaviors (Phelps and LeDoux2005).
Interestingly, intermediate and ventral OLMα2 cells shared inputs from the anteromedial thalamic nucleus, the lateral hypothalamic area, and the central amygdala, regions associated with spatial memory, arousal, and stress responses (Tye et al.2011; Jankowski et al.2013; Tovote et al.2015; Bonnavion et al.2016).
Ventral OLMα2 cells exhibited unique inputs from the medial and lateral mammillary nuclei, the supramammillary nucleus, and the posterior basolateral amygdala, regions linked to spatial navigation, trajectory planning, hippocampal oscillations, and context‐dependent memory (Pan and McNaughton2004; Ito et al.2018; Yavas et al.2019).
These distinct connectivity patterns suggest that ventral OLMα2 cells may be specialized for processing inputs related to broader spatial or motivational contexts, potentially aligning with the ventral hippocampus's role to balance information of conflicting nature to regulate cortical output (Bryant and Barker2020).
OLM cells receive recurrent excitatory feedback from pyramidal neurons, which together with GABAergic cells, creates a balanced excitatory/inhibitory network (Leão et al.2012; Lovett‐Barron et al.2012; Tukker et al.2007).
We corroborated the dominance of excitatory inputs from pyramidal neurons, as indicated byVglut1andmCherryco‐expression in locally traced neurons.
Moreover, we revealed CA1 pyramidal neurons in the intermediate and ventral hippocampus with local projections to OLMɑ2 cells, which also target the infralimbic and dorsal tenia tecta regions of the mPFC and the NAc core.
mPFC projections are preferentially active in anxiogenic contexts, whereas NAc core projections decrease their activity before reward zone entry, reflecting complementary roles in behavioral regulation (Ciocchi et al.2015; Floresco2015).
The integration of these inputs by OLMɑ2 cells may facilitate approach behaviors toward conflicting or aversive cues, a function that aligns with the role of OLMɑ2 cells in hippocampal circuits for anxiety recall (Mikulovic et al.2018; Siwani et al.2018).
When considered within the broader context of large‐scale network dynamics, the medial septum and other long‐range subcortical inputs can be seen as converging modulators of theta oscillations via OLMα2 cells.
The medial septum potentially influences theta oscillations in OLMα2 cells through cholinergic, GABAergic, and glutamatergic inputs, further modulating theta amplitude, rhythm, and maintenance (Lee et al.1994; Simon et al.2006; Korvasová et al.2021).
The raphe nuclei, anterior thalamus, and mammillary bodies, each established modulators of theta rhythms, may co‐modulate both OLMα2 interneurons and downstream regions such as the mPFC and NAc core, given their interconnections with these areas (see overview of network schematics in FigureS10).
The wiring pattern of OLMɑ2 cells adds on to existing models to further understand how hippocampal mPFC and NAc projection neurons may be integrated to support context‐dependent decision‐making and goal‐directed navigation (Ito et al.2018; Lodge et al.2023; Wee and MacAskill2020).
However, further studies are required to clarify these relationships and their functional significance.
The excitatory drive of OLMɑ2 activity is complemented by local inhibitory inputs from various hippocampal layers, with the majority originating from neurons in the stratum oriens.
This layer harbors diverse interneuron subtypes, including bistratified, trilaminar, and oriens‐oriens cells, which likely inhibit OLMɑ2 cells (Booker and Vida2018; Gulyás et al.2003).
Previous electrophysiological studies did indeed identify local bistratified or trilaminar interneurons in the stratum oriens of the CA1 that induced inhibitory postsynaptic currents in OLMɑ2 cells (Leão et al.2012).
Recent studies have identified distinct OLM‐cell subtypes, including those expressingneuron‐derived neurotrophic factor (Ndnf) andNK2 homeobox (Nkx2‐1).
These subtypes may uniquely inhibit OLMɑ2 cells through their axonal projections, adding further complexity to the regulation of OLMɑ2 activity (Chamberland et al.2024).
It is also possible that OLMɑ2 interneurons inhibit themselves through projecting axon collaterals.
Interestingly, we found inhibitory interneurons in the stratum oriens that exhibited long‐range projections across the dorsoventral axis spanning up to 2 mm, consistent with prior findings in Sst‐Cre mice using retro‐AAV (Andrianova et al.2023).
This adds an additional dimension regarding the disinhibitory role for the distribution of oscillatory activity over the dorsoventral axis (Stark et al.2014).
Further, some of the inhibitory inputs from oriens neurons expressed VIP and NPY, which adds specificity to our understanding of interneuron subtypes involved in shaping OLMɑ2 activity.
VIP‐positive interneurons, for instance, are known to provide dendrite‐targeting inhibition and contribute to disinhibition via the suppression of other interneurons (Kullander and Topolnik2021; Pi et al.2013).
These findings expand on prior work suggesting that VIP and NPY interneurons participate in layer‐specific modulation of hippocampal output in both dorsal and ventral hippocampus (Li et al.2024; Tamboli et al.2024; Tyan et al.2014).
The scarcity of inhibitory inputs suggests that other interneuron subtypes may play minor roles in direct inhibition of OLMɑ2 cells, possibly reflecting their preferential targeting of other CA1 interneuron types or pyramidal neurons (Pelkey et al.2017).
This raises questions about how specific inhibitory microcircuits dynamically shape OLMɑ2 activity under different behavioral or physiological states, as illustrated in the circuit schematics (Figure15C,D).
The increasing contribution of stratum radiatum inhibitory neurons in ventral regions demonstrates a gradient of local inhibitory control across the dorsoventral axis.
Also, dorsoventral differences in the source of excitatory inputs to OLMɑ2 cells further reveal region‐specific integration patterns.
Dorsal OLMɑ2 cells receive predominantly local CA1 inputs, while ventral cells display a higher reliance on CA3 inputs, reflecting a shift in network dynamics along the hippocampal axis.
This aligns with dorsoventral gradients of functional specialization, where the dorsal hippocampus is more engaged in spatial memory and the ventral hippocampus in affective and contextual processing (Fanselow and Dong2010; Strange et al.2014).
In summary, our findings highlight the diverse inputs of OLMɑ2 cells within and beyond hippocampal circuits.
These cells emerge as integrative hubs—though not exclusive ones—bridging excitatory and inhibitory inputs along the dorsoventral axis and from different hippocampal fields.
Our results suggest that OLMɑ2 cell circuits are more connected in the intermediate and ventral hippocampus, where they influence oscillatory activity in concert with other hippocampal and prefrontal networks.
While we report distinct input patterns to OLMɑ2 cells, additional studies are needed to determine how these patterns influence hippocampal function and behavior.
Future studies should investigate the contributions of OLMɑ2 neurons to social behavior, decision‐making, memory consolidation, emotional regulation, and cognitive flexibility, including how their connectivity supports long‐range functional integration within the brain.
We gratefully acknowledge the animal caretakers at the Uppsala University Animal Facility and the Uppsala University Behavioral Facility (UUBF) and BioVis platform (Jeremy Adler), both at the Disciplinary Domain of Medicine and Pharmacy, for their essential support.
Furthermore, we acknowledge Edward Callaway for providing the source material for the rabies virus and the Viral Core Facility (VCF, Charité, Berlin) for the production of the helper and pseudotyped rabies viruses.
We acknowledge Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Janelia Research Campus for granting us access to the adenovirus‐associated (AAV) helper plasmid rAAV2‐retro and the Viral Vector Facility (VVF) of the Neuroscience Center Zurich (Zentrum für Neurowissenschaften Zürich, ZNZ) for the rAAV2‐retro virus production.
We thank the Swedish Foundation for International Cooperation in Research and Higher Education (STINT;www.stint.se), the Swedish Research Council (2018–02750, 2022‐01245;www.vr.se) the Swedish Brain Foundation (FO2020‐0228, FO2022‐0018;http://hjarnfonden.se), and the Olle Engkvist Byggmästare Foundation (220‐0254;https://engkviststiftelserna.se).
Thulin, A. , Henriksson K., Nogueira I., and Kullander K.. 2025.
“Differentiated Presynaptic Input to OLMɑ2 Cells Along the Hippocampal Dorsoventral Axis: Implications for Hippocampal Microcircuit Function.” Hippocampus 35, no. 5: e70026.
10.1002/hipo.70026.
Funding:This work was supported by Hjrnfonden; Vetenskapsrdet; Swedish Foundation for International Cooperation in Research and Higher Education; Olle Engkvists Stiftelse.
Angelica Thulin, Email: angelica.thulin@igp.uu.se.
Katharina Henriksson, Email: katharina.henriksson@igp.uu.se.