Anomie is defined as a psychological state in which a person feels socially disconnected and lacks a sense of belonging, leading them to disregard the impact of their actions on others.
Considering the alarming issue of the nurse shortage worldwide, this study aims to examine the role of anomie on nurses’ turnover intention, as well as the mediating role of job satisfaction in this relationship.
This is a cross‐sectional study.
The STROBE statement was followed as the reporting method.
Data were collected from 302 nurses working in primary and specialized healthcare in Gran Canaria (Spain).
Statistical analyses were performed with PLS‐SEM.
The data supported the proposed relationship between anomie and turnover intention.
Although no direct effect was observed, the total effect was significant due to a significant indirect effect mediated by job satisfaction.
As an individual factor, nurses’ anomie influences their turnover intention, a well‐established proxy for actual turnover.
Turnover exacerbates the ongoing global nurse shortage, with detrimental consequences for both healthcare organizations and patient care.
Theoretically, this study expands existing knowledge on the determinants of nurses’ turnover intention and enhances understanding of the anomie–turnover intention relationship.
From a managerial perspective, it provides practical recommendations on preventing and managing anomic feelings among nursing staff.
This study provides the first empirical evidence of anomie as an antecedent of turnover intention, both in general and within the nursing profession.
Since the link between feeling anomic and quitting was empirically supported, it is advised that decision‐makers in healthcare centers not only address anomic feelings among nurses but also prevent them through organizational efforts.
Nurses represent approximately 50% of the global healthcare workforce and are central to all healthcare systems.
They are responsible for health promotion, disease prevention, and care delivery (WHO2022).
As such, due to the aging population, the increase in life expectancy, and advances in both the extent and complexity of healthcare services, the demand for nurses worldwide is rapidly growing (de Vries et al.2023; Yasin et al.2020).
Despite this importance, the nurse shortage is an alarming issue (Benitez et al.2020; Yu et al.2024).
Left unresolved, such scarcity could have detrimental effects for healthcare organizations in terms of increasing costs (e.g., those stemming from recruiting, selection, and training), nursing outcomes (e.g., high workloads and lower morale), and patient outcomes (e.g., quality of care and higher medical errors) (Tamata and Mohammadnezhad2023).
To prevent these negative consequences, it is necessary to understand why such a shortage happens.
Among the explaining factors, nurse turnover is one of the most prominent (Xu et al.2023).
To understand turnover, researchers usually examine turnover intention, which refers to the process of thinking, planning, and making decisions about quitting a job (Benitez et al.2020).
Although it does not always lead to actual leaving, according to Takase (2010), this cognitive stage is the core of the turnover process and has been reported as a good, useful predictor of actual turnover behavior (Xu et al.2023; Zhang et al.2021).
According to extant research, the determinants of nurse turnover intention include individual (e.g., sociodemographic characteristics, job satisfaction, and burnout), organizational (e.g., job demands and management style), and external factors (e.g., career advancement opportunities and pay) (Roth et al.2024; Wu et al.2024).
Among the individual factors, psychological anomie has been overlooked in the nursing context.
Following Srole's (1956) definition, anomie is a state of mind in which a person is disconnected from the social system, self‐regulating their behavior, and disregarding others.
Anomic individuals perceive that there is an imbalance between the goals individuals seek and the means society provides to achieve them (Côté and Denis2024; Zoghbi‐Manrique‐de‐Lara and Guerra‐Báez2018).
Such imbalance arises with the perception that leaders do not consider the needs of their community members, and that society is disorganized and unpredictable (Syre et al.2025; Zoghbi‐Manrique‐de‐Lara and Sánchez‐Medina2015).
Anomic individuals also find it difficult to relate to their social environment, since their social cohesion has weakened.
They cannot count on anyone for support (Zoghbi‐Manrique‐de‐Lara and Sánchez‐Medina2015).
As such, they consider themselves the most important thing in the present moment, act on impulse, and do not consider the consequences of their actions on others (Sánchez‐Medina et al.2024).
In workplace contexts, anomic people feel futile, powerless, and distrustful, which ultimately affects their organizational engagement and attachment (Côté and Denis2024; Liu et al.2025).
These lead to undesirable organizational outcomes, and anomic individuals define such conduct as acceptable “given the way the world is nowadays” (Zoghbi‐Manrique‐de‐Lara and Sánchez‐Medina2015).
Despite this importance, research on anomie conducted in organizational settings is still scarce.
Some of the existing exceptions have examined the influence of anomie on absenteeism (Zoghbi‐Manrique‐de‐Lara and Sánchez‐Medina2015), workplace deviance, both organizational (Liu et al.2025) and interpersonal (Zoghbi‐Manrique‐de‐Lara and Guerra‐Báez2018), or intention to commit accounting fraud (Sánchez‐Medina et al.2024).
Given that the nurse shortage, which leads to poor working conditions such as work overload or a larger number on shifts (Benitez et al.2020), could trigger anomic feelings that might lead nurses to consider quitting their jobs (Côté and Denis2024), the aim of this study is to examine the effects of anomie on nurses’ turnover intention.
Previous literature has extensively identified job satisfaction as another important determinant of nurses’ turnover intention (e.g., Yasin et al.2020; Zhang et al.2021).
At the same time, job satisfaction has been associated with anomie, since anomic individuals are characterized by lower job satisfaction (Jahanshahi and Dehghani2019; Sirgy and Lee2016).
For these reasons, we propose that job satisfaction may act as an underlying mechanism that mediates the relationship between nurses’ anomie and their turnover intention, which could expand existing knowledge on how this relationship works.
These conclusions might provide healthcare centers with new ways to adjust nurses’ experienced anomie and combat turnover.
Anomie is positively associated with turnover intention.
Anomie is negatively associated with job satisfaction.
Job satisfaction is negatively associated with turnover intention.
Job satisfaction mediates the relationship between anomie and turnover intention.
This study aimed to investigate the role of nurses’ anomie on their turnover intention.
To do so, both direct and indirect associations were hypothesized, and nurses’ job satisfaction was proposed as the mediating variable in the indirect relationship.
The proposed research model is shown in Figure1.
This study used a cross‐sectional survey design.
Data collection took place on Gran Canaria (Canary Islands, Spain) during the first quarter of 2024.
As part of the SCS (Servicio Canario de la Salud, translated as Canary Health Service), the health system on Gran Canaria is organized in two levels: primary healthcare and specialized care, both in‐ and out‐of‐hospital.
Study participants were nurses working at the two university hospitals and 38 primary healthcare centers that serve the island, which has a population of around 875,000 inhabitants.
No exclusion criteria were applied.
Regarding the data collection process, first, the director of nursing of the SCS was contacted to present the research aim.
When they agreed to collaborate, they were asked to encourage nurses to participate in the survey.
Then, six research assistants visited the participating hospitals and primary healthcare centers and administered the questionnaire, assisting participants when necessary.
To avoid any bias, these research assistants were unfamiliar with the research aim.
To determine the minimum sample size, the inverse square root method was followed, as suggested by Kock and Hadaya (2018). Considering a minimum expected path coefficient of 0.2, a significance level of 0.05, and a power level of 0.8, a sample size of 155 was estimated.
The final research sample included 302 respondents, which meets this requirement.
Its most notable characteristics are that it was mostly composed of women (78.1%) and that only 27.8% of the participants had less than 10 years of working experience.
All scales used to measure the study variables were Likert‐type scales, except participants’ gender and years of working experience.
In each scale, respondents were asked to rate from 1 to 5 the extent to which they agreed with several statements.
A score of 1 indicated a total disagreement, whereas a score of 5 indicated a total agreement.
Anomie was measured using Srole's (1956) scale, which includes 5 items such as: “These days a person doesn't really know whom he/she can count on,” “In spite of what some people say‚ the lot situation of the average man is getting worse‚ not better,” and “Nowadays‚ a person has to live pretty much for today and let tomorrow take care of itself.” The Cronbach's alpha value for this scale was 0.843.
For job satisfaction, the scale by Vandenabeele (2009) was used.
This scale consists of 6 items.
Some of them are: “In general, I am satisfied with my job,” “My current job fulfills the expectations I had before I started it,” and “I would like to get another job because I am not satisfied (reversed).” The Cronbach's alpha value for this scale was 0.857.
Lastly, turnover intention was assessed using the Abrams et al. (1998) scale, which includes 4 items.
Example items are: “In the next few years I intend to leave this company [SCS]” and “I'd like to work in this company [SCS] until I reach retirement age (reversed).” The Cronbach's alpha value of this scale was 0.923.
PLS‐SEM was used to test the proposed research hypotheses.
The reasons for choosing this technique were those provided by Hair et al. (2019): PLS‐SEM performs well with both large and smaller sample sizes, and it does not assume any particular data distribution.
Following previous applications of PLS‐SEM analysis in the nursing context (e.g., Durmuş et al.2024; Hung et al.2019), an original alpha level of 0.05 was considered.
According to Hair et al. (2017), the PLS‐SEM analysis comprises two stages.
The first stage consists of assessing the measurement model.
To do so, its reliability and validity are examined.
The second stage consists of evaluating the structural model.
This implies checking model predictiveness, both in‐sample and out‐of‐sample, as well as model fit, path coefficients, and significance levels.
Prior to data analysis, CMV was controlled by applying both procedural and statistical remedies (Kock and Lynn2012; Podsakoff et al.2003).
Procedural remedies included using previously validated scales, clear and precise writing (i.e., avoiding complex wording/syntax and double‐barreled questions), and separating variables in different questions in the questionnaire.
Also, to avoid social desirability bias, participants were ensured full anonymity (Podsakoff et al.2003).
Statistically, a full collinearity test was performed (Kock2015).
All VIF values were lower than the 3.3 threshold (range: 1.084–1.397).
As such, it can be concluded that CMV was not an issue in this research.
Ethical approval for this study was obtained from Comité de Ética de la Investigación/Comité de Ética de la Investigación con Medicamentos (CEI/CEIm) de Las Palmas, translated as Research Ethics Committee/Research Ethics Committee for Medicines of Las Palmas (approval number: 2023‐201‐1).
Respondents’ explicit consent was requested before completing the questionnaire.
The first question asked whether the participant consented to participate in the study.
Only when their answer was affirmative did the questionnaire continue, and all responses to that question were recorded.
The ethics committee approved this procedure.
Table1reports the results of both the reliability and validity assessment of the measurement model.
Regarding reliability, Table1shows that outer loadings were above 0.708 for all indicators, except two (ANOM5 and JSAT2).
However, these items were kept not only because they were very close to the 0.708 threshold, but also because they helped ensure the content validity of both the anomie and the job satisfaction constructs (Hair et al.2017).
This output allows us to confirm that the model has adequate indicator reliability.
Table1also reports the values of the Cronbach's alpha, rho_a, and rho_c for the three constructs, which are used to assess internal consistency reliability (i.e., at the construct level).
Values were all higher than 0.7 (Dijkstra and Henseler2015; Nunnally and Bernstein1994).
For the above reasons, the measurement model's reliability, at both the indicator and construct levels, was confirmed.
Regarding validity, first, convergent validity was assessed by observing the AVE values for all constructs (see Table1).
Since none of them exceeded the 0.5 threshold (Hair et al.2017), convergent validity was observed.
Then, to evaluate discriminant validity, the Fornell and Larcker criterion and the HTMT ratio criterion were used.
The results of such calculations are reported in Table2, and they show that both criteria were met.
Therefore, the model's discriminant validity was confirmed as well.
Fornell and Larcker's criterion: discriminant validity is confirmed when the square root of the AVE for each construct (values on the diagonal) is higher than the correlations with the other constructs (values below the diagonal) in all cases (Fornell and Larcker1981).
HTMT criterion: discriminant validity is confirmed when all values are lower than 0.85 (Henseler et al. 2015).
Altogether, the measurement model was confirmed to be reliable and valid.
Lastly, the overall fit of the saturated model was assessed using SRMR and bootstrap‐based fit tests, namely, the squared Euclidean distance (d_ULS) and the geodesic distance (d_G).
Table3reports the results of these calculations.
Since all discrepancy values were equal to or lower than both the 95% (HI95) and the 99% (HI99) quantile of their corresponding reference distribution, it is concluded that the measurement model showed a good fit (Benitez et al.2020).
To validate the structural model, first, the VIF values of the three constructs were calculated.
They were all below the ideal value of 3, thus confirming that the structural model had no collinearity issues (Hair et al.2017).
Then, the model's predictive power was examined.
First, the in‐sample predictiveness was checked by observing theR2values of the constructs.
These wereR2= 0.192 for job satisfaction andR2= 0.485 for turnover intention.
Out‐of‐sample predictiveness was assessed using the PLSpredictprocedure by Shmueli et al. (2016). PLSpredictis an implementation of k‐fold validation in the PLS‐SEM context (for a detailed explanation on the procedure, please refer to Shmueli et al.2019).
For both dependent variables (job satisfaction and turnover intention) and their corresponding indicators, results of the PLSpredictcalculations are summarized in Table4.
It can be observed thatQ2predictvalues were higher than 0 in all indicators for both constructs.
Table4also shows that, for all indicators of turnover intention, RMSE and MAE values were lower in the PLS‐SEM model than in the linear model.
This indicates high predictive capacity.
However, for job satisfaction, RMSE and MAE values were lower in the PLS‐SEM model in four out of six items, which is indicative of a moderate predictive out‐of‐sample power (Shmueli et al.2019).
To conclude the assessment of the structural model, path coefficients (β) and their corresponding significance levels were examined.
Results are reported in both Table5and Figure2.
On the one hand, it was found that the hypothesized direct relationship between nurses’ anomie and their intention to leave was positive, as expected, but it was not significant (β = 0.060,p= 0.123).
Therefore, H1 could not be supported.
On the other hand, anomie showed a significant, negative association with job satisfaction (β = −0.439,p≤ 0.001), which allowed H2 to be supported.
Also, the expected negative relationship between job satisfaction and turnover intention was empirically supported by the data (β = −0.651,p≤ 0.001), thus supporting H3.
Regarding H4, which established that job satisfaction could mediate the relationship between anomie and turnover, Table5shows that the indirect effect was significant (β = 0.285,p≤ 0.001).
Since the direct effect of anomie on turnover intention was not significant, it can be concluded that job satisfaction totally mediated the anomie–turnover intention relationship (Cepeda Carrión et al.2017).
Lastly, it should be highlighted that the total effect was also significant (β = 0.345,p≤ 0.001).
Therefore, H4 was supported.
Regarding both control variables (nurses’ gender and years of working experience), none of them exerted any effect on the dependent variable, i.e., turnover intention (gender: β = −0.066,p= 0.261; years of working experience: β = −0.062,p= 0.079).
Lastly, the overall fit of the estimated model was assessed using SRMR, d_ULS, and d_G.
As can be observed in Table3, all discrepancy values were equal to or lower than both the 95% and the 99% quantiles of their corresponding reference distribution, which suggests a good model fit (Benitez et al.2020).
With the aim of comprehending turnover as one of the most relevant antecedents of nurse shortage, this research attempted to examine the determinants of nurses’ turnover intention.
Numerous studies have been conducted on such a topic (e.g., Bahlman‐van Ooijen et al.2023; Hu et al.2022; Roth et al.2024).
However, none of them has considered anomie, a psychological state in which an individual acts without any consideration for others due to a social detachment (Sánchez‐Medina et al.2024), as an antecedent of turnover intention.
The research model proposed in this study considered this variable as a direct determinant of turnover intention.
Additionally, to better understand the role of anomie on turnover intention, job satisfaction was considered as a potential mechanism in this relationship.
This mediation effect was included because job satisfaction has been identified as an important determinant of nurses’ turnover intention (Yasin et al.2020), and the relationship between anomie and satisfaction was expected to be negative.
The results show that the proposed relationship between anomie and turnover intention was supported by the data.
Although the direct effect was not supported, the total effect was significant.
This was due to a significant indirect effect through job satisfaction.
This study contributes to the literature on nurses’ turnover intention by considering psychological anomie as a determining factor.
Additionally, it contributes to the existing knowledge on the effects of anomie on organizational behavior, which, according to Sánchez‐Medina et al. (2024), is still very limited and should receive greater attention, since anomie constitutes an endemic issue in the workplace (Tsahuridu2011).
The interest in anomie lies in the fact that, although it originates outside the organization (i.e., it arises from the perceived imbalance between the goals imposed by society on its members and the means provided to achieve them; Côté and Denis2024), the organization itself can influence employees' anomie, just as anomie affects the organization (Zoghbi‐Manrique‐de‐Lara and Guerra‐Báez2018).
Regarding the former, organizations (in this case, healthcare centers) may trigger anomic feelings by imposing goals on their nurses that are unachievable with the resources provided, thereby reinforcing the perception that society lacks order and disregards the needs of its members.
Regarding the latter, anomic individuals do not care about the consequences of their actions on others and prioritize their own interests over the common good.
Therefore, for healthcare centers, the presence of anomie among their nursing staff poses a significant risk, as it may lead them to consider leaving their jobs, even though quitting would exacerbate the existing nurse shortage problem.
Concerning the theoretical contributions of this study, the data showed that there is no direct relationship between anomie and turnover intention.
However, the total effect between these two variables was significant, which confirms that there is a link between feeling anomic and considering quitting.
This is consistent with Takase's (2010) argument that turnover intention is a multistage process that begins when certain events or aspects trigger a psychological response in the individual (e.g., frustration and dissatisfaction).
Such aspects may arise from organizational (e.g., unachievable goals and lack of resources) and/or personal factors (e.g., feelings of uselessness or helplessness) that generate anomie.
The results also indicate that the influence of anomie on turnover intention is mediated by job satisfaction.
This aligns with the idea that, for anomic individuals, feeling useless and unproductive (Jahanshahi and Dehghani2019) may lead them to perceive their work as meaningless or insignificant (Dechawatanapaisal2023), which negatively predisposes them toward their role in the workplace.
This is particularly concerning in the case of nursing, a profession that is generally vocational and characterized by a high number of intrinsic motivators (Wu et al.2015).
From a managerial perspective, the main contribution of this study is a deeper understanding of turnover intention in the nursing context by incorporating anomie as a determining factor.
As stated above, anomie arises outside the organization but interacts with it, as the organization is one of the most significant social contexts for individuals.
Therefore, healthcare centers can monitor and even manage anomie.
This is necessary because, according to Zoghbi‐Manrique‐de‐Lara and Guerra‐Báez (2018), the presence of anomic individuals is detrimental to organizations, as they tend to prioritize their personal interests and motivations over social ones.
In the context of this study, anomic nurses may consider quitting their jobs despite the ongoing nurse shortage in the healthcare sector, without concern for the negative impact that leaving may have on their remaining colleagues and/or patients.
Thus, in managing anomie, the first step should be general prevention.
Promoting teamwork, establishing clear objectives and goals, and involving the nursing staff in the planning and organization of healthcare center activities are some examples of measures that can foster camaraderie, commitment, and a sense of belonging among nurses.
If, despite these organizational efforts, the presence of anomic nurses or individuals exhibiting symptoms of social disregard is identified, it is recommended that healthcare centers facilitate open communication for their staff to express concerns regarding their perceived self‐efficacy, the meaning of their work, the support they receive from others, etc. Once these individuals are identified, the next step would be to address and mitigate anomic feelings.
To this end, it is crucial for healthcare centers to create an environment that fosters organizational support, predictability, psychological security, and trust among employees, as suggested by Zoghbi‐Manrique‐de‐Lara and Sánchez‐Medina (2015). In this regard, managerial actions could include the design and implementation of coaching programs to alleviate feelings of social disconnection among anomic nurses, as well as their involvement in decision‐making processes that directly affect their work or environment, with the aim of enhancing their sense of belonging and responsibility.
Despite the theoretical contributions and practical recommendations listed above, this study is not without its limitations that deserve attention and should be considered for future research.
The main limitation is the cross‐sectional nature of the research design.
This requires caution when interpreting the study results, since cross‐sectional data do not allow us to draw conclusions about causality.
As such, a suggested future line of research is using longitudinal designs in which dependent and independent variables are measured at different moments of time.
This approach will allow researchers to verify whether the proposed effects hold true.
Another future line of research stems from the inclusion of job satisfaction as a mediating variable.
It is proposed that further studies on the anomie–turnover intention relationship include other potential mediators, either individual (e.g., stress and commitment) or organizational (e.g., management or leadership styles and perceived organizational support).
Considering additional variables would help better understand how this relationship really works, and what decision‐makers should do to prevent anomie in healthcare centers.
The results of this study indicate that there is a relationship between anomie and turnover intention, which is primarily mediated by reduced job satisfaction.
Given that turnover is one of the main causes of nurse shortage, and that anomie can be addressed within healthcare centers through a culture of support, the authors hope that this study will be useful for both academics and practitioners.