Collaboration between cardiologists and oncologists was recommended as part of Japan’s Basic Plan to Promote Disease Control Programs in 2023.
We evaluated the extent of this collaboration regarding anthracycline-related cardiomyopathy (ARCM).
Self-administered questionnaires on ARCM were distributed to all cardiologists and leading oncologists in hospitals across the Niigata Prefecture.
Overall, 126 cardiologists and 41 leading oncologists from 29 hospitals responded to the survey.
Clinical experience with ARCM was reported by 76.2% of cardiologists and 58.5% of leading oncologists (P=0.044).
Guideline recommendations for the early detection and treatment of ARCM were known by 89.1% of cardiologists and 87.8% of leading oncologists.
Among the 20 hospitals providing chemotherapy, 12 (60%) had matching answers for ‘post-event consultation’ or ‘pre-event consultation’ between the cardiology and oncology departments.
Regarding ‘pre-event consultation’, 4 hospitals had consistent responses for the most proactive response, whereas only 1 hospital had consistent responses from both departments for the majority response.
The agreement of responses between the 2 departments was significant for the most proactive response (k=0.485; P=0.005), but not for the majority response (k=0.059; P=0.675).
The importance of early detection and treatment of ARCM was understood at the individual level; however, increased emphasis on ‘pre-event consultation’ is necessary to establish an interdepartmental early detection system.
The importance of preventive strategies for ARCM has been increasingly recognized in cancer centers with the increasing number of cancer survivors in recent years.
Cardiologists and oncologists at local hospitals should update their knowledge, increase awareness, and collaborate to disseminate preventive strategies in the community.8–10The Fourth Basic Plan for Promoting Cancer Control Measures, published in March 2023, encourages collaboration between cardiologists and oncologists;10however, their awareness and collaboration regarding prevention strategies at the beginning of the fourth phase of the plan (in 2023) remain unclear.
Cardiologists may not have been aware of the disadvantages faced by patients owing to a lack of knowledge and collaboration with oncologists.
Therefore, we conducted a questionnaire survey among cardiologists and leading oncologists in Niigata Prefecture at the start of the fourth plan11to confirm their knowledge, treatment experience, and interdepartmental collaboration regarding ARCM in community hospitals.
Questionnaires were sent to 131 cardiologists and 42 leading oncologists working in community hospitals in Niigata Prefecture in May 2023.
First, we identified cardiologists working in the prefecture from the Japanese Circulation Society (JCS) specialist list.
Subsequently, we selected leading oncologists by identifying core members of chemotherapy committees at the hospitals where these cardiologists worked.
If uncertainty arose, we sought recommendations from hospital directors.
Additionally, we confirmed whether the hospitals were JCS-certified training facilities, Japanese Board of Cancer Therapy (JBCT)-certified training facilities, or cancer treatment center hospitals (CTCHs) designated by the Minister of Health, Labor and Welfare by checking each organization’s official website.
□ That decision is up to oncologists, and I am unsure if this is conducted.
□ That decision is up to oncologists, and I am unsure if this is conducted.
Guidelines recommend early detection and treatment of ARCM.
ARCM can occur several years after anthracycline treatment, and guidelines recommend regular medical examinations and tests to screen for ARCM.
□ I know this in theory (but I don’t put it into practice).
Guidelines recommend promoting a healthy lifestyle and preventing and treating cardiovascular risk factors to prevent ARCM.
□ I know this in theory (but I don’t put it into practice).
□ No oncologist has ever consulted with me or explained anything to me (no consultation).
□ Some oncologists consulted with or informed me before starting chemotherapy (pre-event consultation).
□ Some oncologists consulted with me after a suspected case of ARCM (post-event consultation).
□ Yes, I consulted or informed cardiologists before starting chemotherapy (pre-event consultation).
□ Yes, I consulted cardiologists after a case of suspected ARCM (post-event consultation).
Moreover, the questionnaire included questions on immune checkpoint inhibitor-associated myocarditis, the details of which have been published in another issue ofCirculation Reports.11To increase the response rate, we conducted follow-up telephone calls to encourage responses and offered a gift certificate worth ¥500 (US$4) to those who requested it.
The responses were collated by the secretariat of Niigata Cancer Center Hospital at the end of May 2023.
The request letter clearly stated that the response results and respondent attribute information would be disclosed to the extent that the respondents’ affiliations and institutions could not be identified.
Participation in the survey was voluntary.
The respondents signed their names on the answer sheets to signify their consent.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Niigata Cancer Center (No. 1356).
The proportion of responses was compared between cardiologists and leading oncologists using Fisher’s exact test for 2×2 tables and the chi-squared test followed by residual analysis for 2×m tables.
The response rate for an item was considered significantly different between cardiologists and leading oncologists when the absolute values of standardized residuals significantly exceeded zero.
The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare within-physician knowledge levels between the 2 questions for valid respondents.
We estimated each department’s response based on the majority of responses to Q8 from individual physicians experienced in consultation to evaluate the collaboration between the cardiology and oncology departments at each hospital.
Respondents were classified into no consultation, post-event consultation, and pre-event consultation groups, and a 3×3 table was created to evaluate the degree of agreement using the kappa statistic.11,12Moreover, we evaluated proactive collaboration between cardiologists and leading oncologists at the individual level by creating a 3×3 table based on the most proactive responses to Q8 from individual physicians.
Pre-event consultation was considered a more active collaboration than post-event consultation, and even 1 person responding to the pre-event consultation was considered the department’s response.
All statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows (version 27.0; IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).
Statistical significance was set at a 2-tailed P value <0.05.
Overall, 126 cardiologists and 41 leading oncologists from 29 hospitals (mean number of beds 357; range 52–827) responded to the survey (Figure 1).
The response rates were 96% and 98% for cardiologists and leading oncologists, respectively.
The mean number of years of experience for cardiologists was 19.8 years (range 2.0–52.0 years), whereas leading oncologists had a mean of 30.6 years of experience (range 9.0–45.0 years).Supplementary Figure 1Ashows the number of cancer registrants,13the number of cardiologists working in hospitals that provide cancer treatment with anthracyclines, the JCS-certified training facilities, the number of leading oncologists who responded to questionnaires, JBCT-certified training facilities, and CTCHs.
Statistics on hospitals and cancer treatment in Niigata Prefecture are published 4 years after registration.13Supplementary Figure 1Billustrates the specialties of leading oncologists and their roles in hospitals.Supplementary Figure 1Cillustrates the specialties of leading oncologists in CTCHs and non-CTCHs.
Notably, 9 hospitals, where 16 cardiologists worked, did not provide anthracyclines.
Among these hospitals, the median annual number of cancer registrations was 104 cases, ranging from 7 to 291 cases.
Regarding provision of treatment with anthracyclines (Q1), the response rate for ‘yes’ was 87.3% for the cardiologists and 100% for the leading oncologists (Table 1A).
Regarding clinical experience with ARCM (Q2), the response rate for ‘yes’ was 76.2% for cardiologists and 58.5% for leading oncologists (P=0.044).
Twenty of the 29 hospitals provided anthracycline chemotherapy.
In these 20 hospitals, 110 cardiologists and 41 leading oncologists reported the following clinical experiences.
***P<0.001.
ARCM, anthracycline-related cardiomyopathy.
Clinical Experience With ARCMIn response to Q2, the response rate for ‘yes’ was 80.0% for cardiologists at hospitals providing chemotherapy with anthracyclines and 58.5% for leading oncologists.
The experience rates of leading oncologists were significantly lower than those of cardiologists (P=0.012).Figure 2shows the proportion of years of practice in the 5-year age groups and clinical experience with ARCM in each subgroup.
Among cardiologists, the youngest and oldest groups had less experience with ARCM.
Almost all cardiologists had treated ARCM within 10 years of practice (Figure 2A,B).
The experience rate of the leading oncologists remained low, even among mid-career physicians (Figure 2C).
Proportion of physicians in different clinical experience year groups.
The number shown at the top end of each bar represents the count of physicians with clinical experience with anthracycline-related cardiomyopathy, and the number below each age range along the horizontal axis represents the total count of physicians.
(A) Cardiologists in all hospitals.
(B) Cardiologists at hospitals providing chemotherapy.
(C) Leading oncologists at hospitals providing chemotherapy.Figure 2Bis reprinted from Okura et al.,11with permission (©Japanese Circulation Society).
Echocardiography and BNP MeasurementRegarding regular echocardiography before and after anthracycline administration (Q3), the response rates for ‘yes, the hospital has a systematic protocol’, ‘that decision is up to oncologists’, and ‘no’ were 12.7%, 80.9%, and 3.6% for cardiologists, respectively, and 22.0%, 70.7%, and 7.3% for leading oncologists, respectively (Table 1B).
Regarding regular BNP or NT-proBNP measurement both before and after anthracycline administration (Q4), the response rates for ‘yes, the hospital has a systematic protocol’, ‘that decision is up to oncologists’, and ‘no’ were 7.3%, 76.4%, and 12.7% for cardiologists, respectively, and 22.0%, 63.4%, and 14.6% for leading oncologists, respectively (P=0.047).
Both echocardiography and BNP or NT-proBNP measurement were predominantly considered decisions to be made by oncologists regarding their implementation.
For the latter, the proportion of ‘yes’ responses was significantly higher among leading oncologists compared with cardiologists (P=0.011).
The understanding and implementation of the 3 guideline recommendations Q5–Q7 are shown inFigure 3.
The recommendation for early detection and treatment of ARCM (Q5) was understood by most cardiologists and leading oncologists.
However, the percentage of physicians who implemented this recommendation was low for both cardiologists and leading oncologists (15.5% vs. 39.0%) and significantly lower for cardiologists than for leading oncologists (P=0.002;Figure 3-A5).
Regarding the implementation of regular medical examinations and screening for ARCM (Q6), similar response rates to Q5 were observed for both cardiologists and leading oncologists (13.6% and 36.6%, respectively; P=0.002;Figure 3-A6).
Regarding the recommendation to promote a healthy lifestyle and prevent and treat cardiovascular risk factors (A7), no difference was observed between leading oncologists and cardiologists (Figure 3-A7).
The Q7 recommendation was the least understood of the 3 recommendations among both cardiologists and leading oncologists, with response rates for ‘I didn’t know this’ of 55.5% and 41.5%, respectively.
Moreover, their responses significantly shifted to ‘I didn’t know this’ compared with those for Q5 (P<0.001 and P<0.001, respectively) and Q6 (P<0.001 and P<0.001, respectively;Figure 3-A7).
To adjust for age, we also compared cardiologists and leading oncologists with ≥21 years of clinical experience, and similar results were observed (Supplementary Figure 2A-A5–A7).
There were no significant differences in responses between cardiologists at CTCHs and those at non-CTCHs, nor were any differences observed among leading oncologists (Figure 4,Table 2).
When comparing cardiologists and leading oncologists at CTCHs, the response to Q6, ‘I know it and I practice it’, was significantly higher among leading oncologists (16.1% vs. 40.0%; P=0.016).
A similar trend was observed in comparisons between cardiologists and leading oncologists within JCS-certified training facilities (10.5% vs. 36.0%; P<0.001;Supplementary Figure 2B,Supplementary Table).
Percentage of responses from physicians regarding awareness and implementation of cardio-oncology guideline recommendations.
The green bars represent cardiologists, and the yellow bars represent leading oncologists.
***P<0.001.
ARCM, anthracycline-related cardiomyopathy.
Comparison of responses between cardiologists and leading oncologists at cancer treatment center hospitals (CTCHs) and non-CTCHs.
This bar chart shows the responses from cardiologists using dark green bars for CTCHs and light green bars for non-CTCHs.
Responses from leading oncologists are shown using orange bars for CTCHs and yellow bars for non-CTCHs.
Statistical comparisons were performed between the responses of cardiologists and leading oncologists.
ARCM, anthracycline-related cardiomyopathy.
Statistical comparisons were conducted between cardiologists and leading oncologists within each hospital type.
The left side of the table shows comparisons between cardiologists and leading oncologists in cancer treatment center hospitals (CTCHs), while the right side presents the same comparison within non-CTCHs.
***P<0.001.
ARCM, anthracycline-related cardiomyopathy; BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; NT-proBNP N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide.
Regarding Q8 (for cardiologists), ‘Has the oncologist consulted with you?’, the response rates for ‘no consultation’, ‘post-event consultation’, and ‘pre-event consultation’ were 30.9%, 58.2%, and 3.6%, respectively (Table 1B).
Regarding Q8 (for leading oncologists), ‘Have you consulted with a cardiologist?’, the response rates of the leading oncologists who answered, ‘no consultation’, ‘post-event consultation’, and ‘pre-event consultation’ were 14.6%, 58.5%, and 22.0%, respectively.
The majority of participants in both groups reported experiencing ‘post-event consultation’.
The collaboration between the cardiology and oncology departments across 20 hospitals was categorized into ‘no consultation’, ‘post-event consultation’, and ‘pre-event consultation’, as presented in a 3×3 table (Figure 5).
Based on the majority of the responses to Q8, 11 (55%) hospitals reported matching answers for ‘post-event consultation’ from both departments, whereas only 1 (5%) reported consistent responses for ‘pre-event consultation’ (Figure 5A).
Based on the most proactive response from each physician to Q8, 11 hospitals (55%) reported ‘post-event consultation,’ whereas 4 (20%) had consistent responses for ‘pre-event consultation’ from both departments (Figure 5B).
No significant agreement was observed between the cardiology and oncology departments at the majority level (k=0.059; P=0.675;Figure 5A); however, a significant agreement was observed at the most proactive individual level (k=0.485; P=0.005;Figure 5B).
Furthermore, a perfect agreement between the 2 departments was observed in CTCHs (k=1.000; P=0.005;Figure 5C), whereas no statistically significant agreement was found in non-CTCHs (k=−0.200; P=0.395;Figure 5D).
All responses obtained from multiple oncologists at the same facility were consistent; therefore, responses from leading oncologists could not be divided into majority and proactive.
The timing of consultations about anthracycline-related cardiomyopathy (ARCM) between co-institutional leading oncologists and cardiologists across 20 hospitals.
(A) Majority of responses in each department, (B) most proactive responses in each department, (C) most proactive responses in each department at cancer treatment center hospitals (CTCHs), and (D) most proactive responses in each department at non-CTCHs.
The numbers presented in the 3×3 boxes denote the count of hospitals.Figure 5Ais reprinted from Okura et al.,11with permission (©Japanese Circulation Society).
In 2023, a total of 1,262 cancer survivors at Niigata Cancer Center Hospital had a history of anthracycline use.
The distribution by department was as follows: breast surgery (637 patients), hematology (302), pediatrics (97), gynecology (75), medical oncology (53), orthopedics (33), gastroenterology (22), respiratory medicine (22), urology (20), and dermatology (9), indicating that anthracyclines were used across almost all clinical departments.
When comparing responses between the top 3 departments with the highest anthracycline use (breast surgery, hematology, and pediatrics, n=15) and the remaining departments (n=26), remarkable differences were observed (Supplementary Figure 2C).
In particular, experience with the management of ARCM was reported by 93.3% of respondents in the top 3 departments, compared with 38.5% in the other departments (P=0.001).
Routine use of echocardiography according to protocol was reported by 26.7% vs. 19.2%, and routine measurement of BNP according to protocol was reported by 33.3% vs. 15.4%, respectively.
The practice of early detection of ARCM was reported by 60.0% in the top 3 departments compared with 26.9% in the other departments (P=0.051), while screening for late-onset ARCM was performed by 60.0% vs. 23.1% (P=0.041), respectively.
Preventive measures for ARCM were implemented in 40.0% of the top 3 departments, compared with only 3.8% in the other departments (P=0.006).
Pre-treatment consultations with cardiologists were performed in 33.3% and 15.4% of cases, respectively.
To the best of our knowledge, no survey has assessed cardiologists’ awareness of ARCM prevention to date.
A previous study used a similar survey to examine such collaboration regarding immune checkpoint inhibitor-associated myocarditis.11While their participants and methodology were similar to ours, we focused on ARCM, and the content of our questionnaire differed from that of the previous study.
This survey was conducted in May 2023, 2 months after the Cabinet’s decision regarding the Fourth Basic Plan for Promoting Cancer Control, which advocated the promotion of onco-cardiology.10Moreover, the Japanese National Plan for Promotion of Measures against Cerebrovascular and Cardiovascular Disease-Phase 29and onco-cardiology guidelines14were published at that time.
This survey aimed to assess the actual state of collaboration during the launch of the basic plan, establish a reference point for future evaluations, and identify gaps for improvement in community hospitals.
The survey yielded 5 key findings.
(1) Almost all cardiologists had treated ARCM within 10 years; however, the experience rate of the leading oncologists remained low (Figure 2).
(2) Most cardiologists and leading oncologists responded that it was up to the oncologist to determine whether to perform echocardiograms and BNP measurements before and after anthracycline administration (Table 1B).
(3) The recommendations for early detection and treatment of ARCM are understood by most cardiologists and leading oncologists.
However, the percentage of both cardiologists and leading oncologists who implemented this recommendation was low (Figure 3,Table 1B).
(4) While post-event consultations were established between the cardiology and oncology departments, pre-event consultations have not yet been established (Figure 5).
(5) Physicians in breast surgery, hematology, and pediatrics – the top 3 departments with the highest anthracycline use – had greater experience, knowledge, and clinical practice related to ARCM than those in other departments.
Many of these physicians practiced at CTCHs.
However, they had not yet established an in-hospital system for the early detection of ARCM (Figure 5,Table 2,Supplementary Figure 2B,C).
Effective safety measures for ARCM in each hospital are crucial, considering the use of anthracyclines in various medical departments and the potential fatality of ARCM.
Consultations between hospitals and preparation for potential patient transfers to emergency medical centers become necessary if ARCM develops into refractory HF.
Oncologists and cardiologists in leadership positions should take charge of these initiatives; however, their limited experience in ARCM treatment poses challenges.
In particular, the lack of ARCM experience among senior oncologists may hinder the establishment of preventive measures and impede the fostering of the intrahospital cooperation necessary to address emerging risks (Figure 2).
Most cardiologists and leading oncologists responded that it was up to the oncologist to determine whether to perform echocardiograms and BNP measurements before and after anthracycline administration (Table 1B).
Staging and preventive strategies for HF have been proposed since the 1990s and have been widely adopted by cardiologists.15In contrast, preventive strategies for ARCM were introduced in the late 2010s,2,16,17and their adoption by oncologists remains unclear.
Our survey revealed that BNP measurements and echocardiography, which are essential for preventive strategies, were not systematically performed and were left to the discretion of the attending physician.
Most patients with cancer are followed up by oncologists, whose knowledge and testing practices are key to the early detection of ARCM.
However, the Japanese guidelines first mentioned a preventive strategy only 2 months before the survey was conducted.14Therefore, coordinated responses within hospitals based on these guidelines are urgently required to accelerate patient relief through systemic prevention strategies.
HF is a progressive disease, classified into stages A–D to indicate early to advanced disease, respectively.
Cardiologists typically request that oncologists refer patients at stage B to slow disease progression; however, patients are often referred at stages C and D owing to delayed detection of HF by oncologists, limiting opportunities for early intervention.
A lack of pre-event collaboration exacerbates this phenomenon.
Collaboration between the cardiology and oncology departments was confirmed in 60% of cases of HF onset; however, collaboration before the start of chemotherapy was rare (Figure 5A).
Four (20%) hospitals had consistent responses from both departments for ‘pre-event consultation’ based on the most proactive response at the individual level (Figure 5B).
Our findings suggest that although ‘pre-event consultation’ began at the individual level, scaling up from the individual to the departmental level is yet to be achieved, constituting a fourth barrier.
As per Oka, these gaps indicate a lack of standardization in onco-cardiologic care.20With anthracyclines now widely used in the treatment of both advanced and early stage cancers, the urgent need for timely implementation of collaborative preventive strategies has become increasingly apparent.
Additionally, increasing rates of ARCM and CTRCD incidence have been reported in Japan.1,21Bridging these gaps is crucial for improving the safety of patients with cancer undergoing anthracycline therapy.
Reminder systems should be established to encourage regular cardiac screening in patients receiving anthracyclines, and all patients should undergo screening tests as needed.
A comparison between physicians in the top 3 departments with the highest frequency of anthracycline use and those in other departments revealed a notable gap in experience, knowledge, and practice related to ARCM (Supplementary Figure 2C).
Physicians in the top 3 departments reported significantly higher clinical experience with ARCM in A2 (93.3% vs. 38.5%; P=0.001).
While they also tended to report more frequent implementation of echocardiography and BNP testing according to protocol, approximately two-thirds indicated that such practices were dependent on individual physicians rather than being part of standardized institutional protocols (A3 and A4).
Regarding guideline-recommended practices for early detection of ARCM (A5 and A6), 60% of physicians in the top 3 departments reported practicing them.
However, even among these departments, only 33.3% reported pre-event consultations with cardiology departments (A8), and in both groups, approximately 60% of consultations were conducted post-symptom onset.
In contrast, physicians in other departments demonstrated limited experience, minimal knowledge, and low levels of ARCM-related clinical practice.
This gap may affect the motivation of leading oncologists to build institutional systems for early ARCM detection.
The importance of multidisciplinary collaboration in the field of onco-cardiology has long been emphasized.8,16–18,20,21Physicians have recognized that individual-based cooperation is fragile and unsustainable, underscoring the need for structured, institutional collaboration to ensure stability.
According to a recent guideline, onco-cardiology care teams should consist of ‘core members’, such as oncologists and cardiologists, ‘support members’ who assist in clinical care, and ‘extended members’ who include specialists and administrative personnel.22At our hospitals, leading oncologists served dual roles as both core and extended members.
In addition to providing direct clinical care, they organized team meetings and supported the establishment of institutional systems.
These physicians were highly trained, often with cross-specialty expertise in cancer pharmacotherapy, and held certifications that reflect advanced clinical and academic knowledge.
They demonstrated leadership across departments and professional roles within interdisciplinary teams.
Therefore, we regarded these ‘leading oncologists’ as suitable representatives to answer on behalf of their hospitals regarding the current status of ARCM management.
Given their broad applications and efficacy, anthracyclines are widely used, resulting in a growing population of long-term survivors.
Many of these patients are followed at community hospitals, where leading oncologists are expected to play a critical role in developing systems for early ARCM detection and intervention.
Although our survey revealed some variability in expertise and practical experience among oncologists, we believe that such differences can be effectively addressed through strong collaborations between cardiologists and oncologists.
These collaborations will enhance mutual understanding and ultimately lead to better outcomes for patients with ARCM.
As cancer survivorship rises, all physicians are likely to encounter survivors.
Cardiologists and oncologists must raise awareness of the value of lifestyle modification and promote it among colleagues and survivors in their communities.
This study had some limitations.
First, this study was based on subjective responses and thus may not necessarily represent the actual state of medical care.
Second, this study was conducted exclusively in Niigata Prefecture; therefore, the results cannot be generalized to other communities with different medical environments.
Third, the frequency of anthracycline use varies depending on the oncologist’s specialty, which influences their level of knowledge and experience with anthracyclines.
As a result, responses to questions related to anthracyclines may be affected by the oncologist’s specific field of expertise.
Additionally, the leading oncologists included in this study were selected based on specific criteria, and their perspectives may not be fully generalizable to oncologists in other regions.
This limitation should be considered when interpreting the findings, as regional and specialty-related differences may impact the applicability of the results.
Nevertheless, the high number of responses and response rates, along with all responses being signed by physicians, increase the reliability of the survey.
Therefore, this survey may provide valuable insights into the present state of onco-cardiology care in similar medical environments to Niigata prefecture.
The importance of early detection and treatment of ARCM was understood at the individual level; however, further efforts are warranted to transition from understanding to implementation and expand from practice at the individual level to the departmental level, ultimately reaching the hospital system level.
This study was funded by a Regional Medical Research Grant (GC03720223) from the Medical Association of Niigata, Japan.
The funders had no role in the design and conduct of the study, collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data, preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript, or the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
This investigator-initiated study was conducted by the Onco-Cardiology Association in Niigata (OCAN 2020), independent of the funding source.
This survey was approved by the Ethics Committee of Niigata Cancer Center (No. 1356).
Supplementary Table.
Supplementary Figure 1.
Supplementary Figure 2.
We thank the cardiologists and oncologists at Gosen Chuo Hospital, Joetsu General Hospital, Kaetsu Hospital, Kashiwazaki General Hospital and Medical Center, Kido Hospital, Kuwana Hospital, Murakami General Hospital, Nagaoka Chuo General Hospital, Nagaoka Red Cross Hospital, Nakajo Chuo Hospital, Niigata Bandai Hospital, Niigata Cancer Center Hospital, Niigata City General Hospital, Niigata Nogeka Hospital, Niigata Medical Center, Niigata Minami Hospital, Niigata Prefectural Central Hospital, Niigata Shirone General Hospital, Niigata University Medical and Dental Hospital, Ojiya General Hospital, Sado General Hospital, Saiseikai Niigata Hospital, Saiseikai Niigata Kenoh Kikan Hospital, Shibata Hospital, Shinrakuen Hospital, Tachikawa General Hospital, Uonuma City Koide Hospital, and Uonuma Kikan Hospital.
We also thank doctors Akihito Momoi, Hisashi Saigawa, Kazuyuki Ozaki, Kyoko Shoin, Masato Makino, Qiliang Zhou, Tsunehiro Fujita, Tsuyoshi Yoshida, Yuichi Nakamura, and Yuka Kobayashi of the Onco-Cardiology Association of Niigata (OCAN 2020).