To identify the routes and doses of choline supplementation required to meet the metabolic demands of preterm infants.
The information was searched in three databases: US National Library of Medicine National Institute of Health (PubMed), Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO) and Web of Science.
The search for articles was updated in August 2024, with no restrictions on publication year or language.
This review was registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews — PROSPERO (ID: 549568).
The final selection of studies yielded eight original articles, which were subsequently evaluated for their methodological quality.
The recommended dosage of parenteral choline remains uncertain.
However, studies have demonstrated a reduction in serum choline level inversely proportional to the quantity administered via parenteral nutrition, particularly in preterm infants with slow progression to enteral nutrition.
The dose of 40–50 mg/kg/day of enteral choline appears to be sufficient to maintain plasmatic levels at a concentration comparable to that observed in the umbilical cord of preterm infants.
The need for daily choline supplementation from the first day of life is still controversial.
The results of the selected studies do not allow for the determination of the optimal choline dosage for parenteral nutrition in these infants.
Nevertheless, there is some scientific evidence suggesting that providing 40–50 mg/kg/day enterally is sufficient to meet the metabolic needs of preterm infants.
Identificar as vias e doses de suplementação de colina necessárias para a demanda metabólica de recém-nascidos prematuros.
A busca das informações foi realizada em três bases de dados: US National Library of Medicine National Institute of Health (PubMed), Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO) e Web of Science.
A busca por artigos foi atualizada em agosto de 2024, sem restrições de ano ou idioma.
Esta revisão foi registrada peloInternational Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews— PROSPERO (ID: 549568).
A seleção final dos estudos resultou em oito artigos originais, que foram avaliados quanto à sua qualidade metodológica.
A dose recomendada de colina por via parenteral ainda é incerta, mas estudos mostraram a diminuição da concentração sérica de colina de forma inversamente proporcional à quantidade fornecida pela nutrição parenteral, principalmente nos prematuros com avanço lento da nutrição enteral.
A dose de 40 a 50 mg/kg/dia de colina via enteral parece ser capaz de manter os níveis plasmáticos próximos à quantidade de colina presente no cordão umbilical do prematuro.
A necessidade de suprimento diário de colina desde o primeiro dia de vida ainda é controversa.
Os resultados dos estudos selecionados não permitem concluir qual a quantidade de colina que deve ser oferecida na nutrição parenteral.
No entanto, há algumas evidências científicas sugestivas de que fornecer 40–50 mg/kg/dia por via enteral é suficiente para atender às necessidades metabólicas destes recém-nascidos.
In this context, this study aimed to identify the routes and doses of choline supplementation needed to meet the metabolic demands of premature newborns.
This study is a systematic review of scientific articles selected in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines.
The bibliographic search was conducted in the following databases: US National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health (PubMed), Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO), and Web of Science, with no limitations on year or language.
Articles published up to August 13, 2024, were selected.
This review has been registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO ID: 549568).
To define the research question that guided the search for pertinent articles and defined the inclusion criteria, the "patient, intervention, comparison, outcome" (PICOS) strategy was employed: (P) preterm infants of any gestational age were defined as participants; (I) the intervention studied was of choline supplementation, received in any amount and time of administration; (C) groups of newborns with no choline supplementation; (O) the outcomes chosen were serum choline or phosphatidylcholine concentrations any time after supplementation; and (S) original studies with no limitations on design characteristics (experimental or observational).
The search for articles used a combination of the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms: "choline" and "infant, premature", which initially resulted in 118 and 47 articles in the PubMed and Web of Science databases, respectively.
A search of SciELO yielded no results when the two selected descriptors were entered.
Next, 13 duplicate articles between the databases were excluded, leaving 152 articles.
Of these, articles that did not contain sufficient information to address the research question, review articles, letters to the editor, editorials, book chapters, series or case reports, and animal studies were excluded.
This stage was conducted by two examiners, who independently decided to exclude the studies because they were not original, did not provide information related to the research question or did not meet the methodological requirements described by the respective evaluation scales.
Disagreements between the examiners were discussed and resolved together.
The eight selected studies underwent a methodological quality check using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS).
This scale was used for the seven cohort studies, which included three dimensions of analysis (selection, comparability, and exposure/outcome) and assessment of the risk of bias according to the Cochrane Collaboration criteria for the only clinical trial included, in which the seven domains are analyzed: random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding of participants and the professional, blinding of outcome assessors, incomplete results, selective outcome reporting and other sources of bias.
Meta-analysis was not possible in this review because of the heterogeneity of the selected studies (methods, study populations, interventions, outcomes and follow-up periods) and the different types of outcomes assessed in these studies.
The selection process resulted in eight articles which met the established criteria and answered the question posed in this study.1,7,9,11-15These articles included seven cohort studies and one randomized clinical trial.
Notably, 50% (n=4) of the studies were conducted by the same group of researchers from EberhardKarls-University in Germany.
All cohort studies were classified as having "good" methodological quality in the three dimensions of analysis of the Newcastle-Ottawa scale (selection, comparability, and exposure/outcome), as presented inTable 1.
The single clinical trial had a "low" risk of bias in all the seven domains assessed according to the criteria of the Cochrane Collaboration.
Selection: 1*somewhat representative of the average in the community; 2*drawn from the same community as the exposed cohort; 3*secure record (eg surgical records); 4* demonstration that outcome of interest was not present at start of study.
Comparability: 1*study controls for (select the most important factor), 1**study controls for any additional factor (this criterion could be modified to indicate specific control for a second important factor).
Exposure: 1* independent blind assessment; 2* was follow-up long enough for outcomes to occur; 3* complete follow up-all subjects accounted for or subjects lost to follow up unlikely to introduce bias-small number lost.
Most studies showed outcomes that support the importance of maintaining optimal choline levels and the need for choline supplementation in premature newborns.
The methodological characteristics and results of interest of the eight selected studies are shown inTable 2.
The eight studies selected for review exhibited heterogeneous methodological characteristics, including differences in the material collected, the measuring instruments utilized, and the methodology employed to estimate body or breast milk choline levels in premature newborns.
The authors of these studies discussed the importance, dose, and form of choline supplementation in this group, but in different and specific ways.
The essential amino acid methionine is important for the synthesis of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), which is essential for methylation reactions in different cell compartments.
Specifically, the methylation of histones, DNA, and RNA is crucial for epigenetic processes and the regulation of protein synthesis.
This underscores the significance of methionine in parenteral nutrition in mitigating the adverse long-term consequences associated with the absence of choline supplementation during the early preterm period.3,8,20,21The principal functions of choline and its metabolites are illustrated inFigure 3.
According to the data available in the literature, the estimated AI values of choline for premature infants using this formula are generally not achieved, as demonstrated by Bernhard et al., who estimated that only 1 to 2% of premature infants using enteral diet associated with parenteral nutrition received this recommendation, especially those with extreme low birth weight.1The absence of choline in the composition of parenteral nutrition, due to the unavailability of this nutrient in the bags supplied by manufacturers, may contribute to this discrepancy.
In this regard, research findings indicate a reduction in serum choline levels that is directly correlated with the number of days during which parenteral nutrition is administered to premature infants, particularly those who exhibit a gradual transition to enteral nutrition.
This indicates that the intake of choline has been insufficient in these infants.11,13However, it should be remembered that preterm infants who remain on parenteral nutrition for a long time and do not receive enteral nutrition may be more severely ill.
Therefore, clinical severity, and not just gestational age, should be considered in the analysis of studies.
Despite carrying out a systematic and careful search of scientific articles to answer the proposed research question, it is important to note that the main difficulties in more definitively assessing the need for choline supplementation in preterm infants are the paucity of articles that have studied choline in preterm infants and the heterogeneity of the samples selected, which makes it difficult to compare the results found in the existing studies.
Furthermore, it must be acknowledged that this systematic review included eight articles, four of which were contributed by the same group of authors.
This raises concerns about potential bias, even though these studies were rated as 'good' or 'low risk of bias' in the quality analysis of the methods used.
Therefore, the results should be interpreted with caution.
However, given its relationship with various essential components of metabolism, there is little doubt that the daily supply of choline from the first day of life is critical to the normal development of preterm infants.
Although the results of the studies selected here only indicate, but do not allow us to conclude, the amount of choline that should be provided in the PN of these babies, it is important that neonatologists, pediatric nutritionists, nutritionists and pharmacists are aware of the need to include it in the current formulations of PN products and to provide it enterally as soon as possible with formulas or breast milk.
Therefore, early enteral nutrition seems to be a crucial point.
The inclusion of choline in the parenteral route would need to be better evaluated on the basis of randomised clinical trials with an adequate sample size and with relevant clinical outcomes.
Therefore, the gaps in scientific knowledge highlighted here increase the importance of carrying out other intervention studies, in addition to the one identified here, to define the need and the dose to guarantee the infants’ metabolic functions, which seem to be closely and inversely correlated with gestational age (degree of prematurity).
Finally, the interpretation of the results of the few existing studies does not allow for a definitive conclusion, but it suggests that choline supplementation should be started in the first days of life of the preterm infant (parenterally) and continued during the initiation and progression of enteral feeding.
As for the dose, there is only the current estimate that a dose of 40 to 50 mg/kg/day of choline via enteral feeding seems to be more appropriate to maintain plasma levels close to the amount of choline present in the umbilical cord of the preterm infant.