Globally, around 14% of adolescents between the ages of 10 and 19 are reported to face mental health issues.
However, mild to moderate intellectual disabilities (MMID) are very prevalent among young people, affecting between 1 and 2% of this population.
Most research has focused on risk factors associated with MMID in the Global North.
There is a dearth of literature on resilience factors among adolescents diagnosed with MMID from the Global South, including South Africa.
This study aimed to investigate the factors that enabled adolescents with MMID to be resilient.
A descriptive quantitative study investigating the resilience factors among adolescent learners diagnosed with MMID was conducted with 414 learners.
The Child and Youth Resilience Measure (CYRM-28) was used to assess the prevailing resilience factors.
The CYRM-28 consists of 28 questions to assess overall resilience.
It is designed as a screening tool to explore the individual, relational, communal and cultural resources available to individuals which may bolster their resilience.
Participants were conveniently selected from three schools that enrolled learners who had been diagnosed with MMID.
The CYRM-28 questionnaire was administered with the support of qualified and trained school psychologists and teachers between August and September 2022.
Data was descriptively analysed using SPSS.28 to get a picture of the prevailing resilience factors using scores, frequencies and percentages.
Factor analysis was used to get the mean scores for the various factors and to establish how the participants scored in the various dimensions and sub-dimensions involved in the resilience measure.
Independent t-tests were also used to investigate statistically significant differences between age, grade, race, gender and total resilience.
The factors that had the highest mean scores were Caregiver Physical Care with a mean score of 4.27 and Contextual Education with a mean score of 4.21.
The factors that were in the middle were Contextual Cultural, which had a mean score of 3.97; Individual Social Skills, which had a mean score of 3.96; and Contextual Spiritual, which had a mean score of 3.87.
The factors that had the lowest mean scores were Individual Peer Support with a mean score of 3.43, Individual Personal Skills with a mean score of 3,45 and Caregiver Psychological Care with a mean score of 3.69.
The t-tests results showed no significant differences between gender, race, age, grade and total resilience.
The results show that in most of the CYRM-28 factors, the mean scores indicated that the items were ‘somewhat’ descriptive of the participants, suggesting the need for more attention in those areas to enable them to facilitate resilience for adolescents with MMID.
In all analyses done, results indicated no statistically significant differences, which calls for any intervention to be equally focused on all adolescents regardless of their age, grade, race or gender.
Mental health is recognised as a fundamental human right that every individual should have.
It is crucial for various aspects of development, including personal development and socioeconomic growth [1].
However, this critical area is often overlooked [2].
Factors such as poverty, abuse and violence significantly heighten the likelihood of mental health challenges among adolescents.
A thorough understanding of the prevalence of these issues is essential for effectively addressing adolescent mental health [3].
The global prevalence of mental health issues is reported at 16.41 cases per 1000 individuals in low-income countries, 15.41 cases per 1000 in middle-income countries, and 9.21 cases per 1,000 in high-income countries [4].
Data indicates that approximately one in seven adolescents faces a mental health challenge, accounting for 13% of the overall disease burden in this age group [5].
Adolescents are defined as individuals aged 10 to 19 years [6].
This period is fraught with various challenges, particularly regarding mental health, which has become a critical issue.
Most adolescents facing mental health challenges do not seek treatment.
Research [7] indicates that in South Africa, for instance, around 30% of adolescents fulfil the diagnostic criteria for mental disorders; yet, South African data highlights a significant gap in the use of health services among at-risk adolescents, with only 30% seeking help for their mental health issues [8].
This scenario emphasises the necessity of exploring resilience factors to formulate inclusive approaches that can enhance the delivery of mental health services for adolescents [9].
Identifying these resilience factors could help support adolescents by harnessing their strengths to foster better mental health outcomes.
Research indicates a link between ID and mental health issues in adolescence.
For example, adolescents diagnosed with ID are at high risk of experiencing various mental health issues such as depression, anxiety disorders and behavioural disorders such as oppositional defiance disorder [15].
Research also indicates that adolescents with ID are more likely to be socially isolated or bullied and usually develop low self-esteem, which contributes to the development of anxiety and depression [15].
Due to their intellectual challenges, many adolescents with ID often struggle to express their emotions, which results in some undiagnosed mental health challenges [16].
Such emotional difficulties may be exhibited as challenging behaviours such as aggression and self-harm [17].
In many low-income countries, these challenges are exacerbated by a lack of proper health care services for adolescents with ID [18], resulting in escalated occurrences of mental health issues.
Research published in 2019 reveals the escalating mental health crisis among adolescents [19].
This troubling trend has led mental health professionals and medical experts to classify it as an epidemic affecting the teenage population [20].
Despite the global awareness of mental health's importance, there exists a notable deficiency in understanding the mental health challenges faced by adolescents with MMID.
On a national level, the progress in developing programmes and policies has been inadequate to address the mental health needs of this group [9].
A significant contributor to this situation is the lack of empirical research on the mental health of adolescents [21], such as where they draw their resilience.
This data is vital for shaping the development and execution of policies, programmes, and resource allocation for adolescents with MMID [22].
It is essential to examine the mental health of adolescents with MMID, as they are particularly vulnerable to mental health difficulties, especially in environments with lower socioeconomic status and considerable adversity [23].
The importance of maintaining healthy mental health during adolescence is critical, as it supports the development of positive social, emotional, and communication abilities [24].
This early development is a foundation for improved mental health and well-being in adulthood.
Individuals who are aware of their strengths, manage daily stress effectively, engage in meaningful work, and contribute to their communities experience mental well-being [25].
Promoting this state can be achieved by recognising and using resilience factors that enhance the mental health of adolescents with MMID.
Resilience is defined as the capacity to effectively cope with, overcome, and evolve from adversities [26], a notion that is also identified as vital for achieving happiness, commitment, and success [27].
Resilience is developed through the challenges one faces, suggesting that such adversities are integral to building resilience [28].
Learners with MMID experience a range of resilience factors, although the complete array of these factors is not yet fully understood.
There is a limited comprehension of the resilience factors that support the mental health of adolescents with MMID, particularly in the South African context.
In addition, a significant gap exists in the literature regarding the resilience factors that enhance the mental health of adolescents with MMID in Special Educational Needs (SEN) schools in South Africa.
This knowledge gap prompted the current research, which sought to identify the factors that strengthen resilience in the presence of existing risk factors.
Consequently, investigating these resilience factors is essential for improving support for adolescents with MMID, allowing them to either maintain or enhance their resilience.
This study aimed to examine the resilience factors that promote mental health among adolescents with MMID and to assess the relationships between these factors and variables such as gender, age, race and grade.
A descriptive quantitative study was done to identify the resilience factors of adolescents diagnosed with MMID in three public schools.
The sampled schools enrol learners who have been diagnosed with different disabilities, including MMID.
They are in the Ekurhuleni North educational district in South Africa.
Ekurhuleni District is in East Johannesburg, which is in Gauteng Province.
This province is in the southeast of the country.
Ekurhuleni North district has 11 schools for learners with special education needs.
Only three schools were sampled for this study because these were the ones that were willing to participate.
Since the study was done during the COVID-19 pandemic, some schools were not open to research as a precautionary measure against the spread of the COVID-19 virus.
The total population of learners in the three schools who had been diagnosed with MMID by a psychologist or medical practitioner was 725.
School A had 265 diagnosed learners in grades 8 and 9, school B had 240 and school C had 220.
Survey data was collected from a large sample of 414 learners with MMID to ensure the validity of the results (31). Of these learners, 177 were in grade 8, and 237 were in grade 9.
School A had 153 participants (87 in grade 8 and 66 in grade 9).
School B had 160 participants (61 in grade 8 and 99 in grade 9).
School C had 101 participants (29 in grade 8 and 72 in grade 9).
The participants were mostly from low to medium socioeconomic backgrounds.
More details of the biographical characteristics of the sample are provided later in Table1.
Convenient sampling was used to recruit both the participating schools and the participants.
This was the most suitable method as the study was done during the COVID-19 pandemic, and some schools were not willing to participate in research.
The first researcher approached the three schools which had agreed to participate in the study and explained the purpose of the study.
This study was performed in line with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki of 1964.
Consent to conduct the study was obtained from the Approval Committee which was the University of Johannesburg Ethics Committee with ethics number [Sem 1 2019 0–33], the Ekhululeni North District officials and the principals of the participating schools.
Since the participants were considered vulnerable due to their diagnosis and some were still minors, further consent was obtained from their parents or caregivers.
The participants agreed to participate in the study.
This was done by first explaining to them the research process and the purpose of the current study.
The participants were given information on all ethical considerations pertaining to the study, including voluntary participation and withdrawal from the study at any point.
This was done in simple language that they could understand.
They were also given the opportunity to ask questions about the research before agreeing to participate.
This was meant to ensure that their assent was informed.
Participants were selected based on their diagnosis of MMID, willingness to participate and enrolment in either grade 8 or grade 9.
We could not include all grades because of limited financial and personnel resources.
In addition, time constraints, as prolonged stays in the sites were not allowed, and logistics, given that the study was done during the COVID-19 pandemic, were also limiting factors.
Six hundred consent forms, 200 at each school, were sent out, and 186 parents/caregivers declined.
All participants who agreed to participate managed to complete the questionnaires.
This was possible because the questionnaire was done online using tablets.
The learners just had to click the answers of their choice, which was not difficult for them to do.
This resulted in 414 learners who managed to complete the questionnaire.
Data were collected using the learner biographical questionnaire and the Child and Youth Resilience Measure (CYRM-28).
Data capturing was automatically done as the participants responded to the questionnaires, which were preloaded on tablets.
The learner biographical questionnaire was developed by the University of Johannesburg to gather the learners’ biographical details and family background, such as age, grade, race and socioeconomic status.
The questionnaire had 14 questions, which provided an overview of the participants’ daily demographic/environmental settings.
This information was necessary because interventions for adolescents with MMID to improve their mental health status require a full understanding of their environment, including different factors that may increase resilience [29].
This questionnaire contained a systematic and well-organised sequence of questions meant to extract the information to provide an understanding of the nature of the phenomenon under investigation [30].
The Child and Youth Resilience Measure (CYRM-28) consisted of 28 questions.
This is designed to assess general resilience, individual traits, relationships with caregivers, and factors that encourage a sense of belonging [31].
The CYRM-28 is used as a screening tool to explore individual, relational, communal and cultural resources accessible to individuals which can support their resilience.
This tool is designed for use with young people between the ages of 9 and 23 to establish the different resources that help them face adversity to reinforce resilience.
In this study, the instrument was used to measure the individual, caregiver and contextual resources that enabled adolescents with MMID to be resilient in times of hardship.
The scale for the CYRM-28 was a five-point interval scale, which asked participants, “To what extent does the item describe you?”.
The participants could choose between 1 to 5, 1 being ‘Not at all’ and 5 being ‘A lot’.
The questionnaires were completed electronically on the tablets that were supplied by the researchers, and this was done on-site at the respective schools.
The questionnaires were presented on the tablet to the participants in English because all learners were fluent in English, and this was the language of teaching in the three schools.
When clarification, such as meaning of words or translations, were needed, the support team assisted with that.
All data collection was done soon after school teaching hours to avoid disrupting teaching time.
This took place in the three selected SEN schools’ halls.
In each school, the participants completed the questionnaires at the same time but individually.
Participants had to follow strict COVID-19 protocols and were seated according to class registers and groups in the school halls.
Schools’ heads of departments, qualified teachers, therapists and psychologists assisted in administering the research questionnaires to participants.
To safeguard influencing the participants, the supporting team was trained beforehand not to coerce or lead participants to respond in a certain way.
Their roles were clearly outlined not to include suggesting possible answers for the participants in their explanations but mainly to read and explain the requirements of each question and provide moral support if needed.
When the learners did not understand the requirements of the questions, the assisting personnel helped to explain in the language that the participant understood better.
The other languages spoken by the participants besides English were Afrikaans, isiZulu and isiXhosa.
There were personnel who were both fluent in the languages and familiar with the instruments used, which made it easy for them to assist.
Both questionnaires have been previously tested and used in different countries and contexts globally, including South Africa [32], with a high internal consistency reliability result.
For example, in Ethiopia, the learner biographical questionnaire had a Cronbach alpha result of 0.85 [33], implying strong reliability.
The CYRM-28 has been used in 14 countries globally, and reliability measures using Cronbach’s alpha to assess the internal consistency of the scale showed a result of α ≥ 0.70 [34], implying satisfactory reliability.
Recently, this tool was employed to evaluate the resilience capacity among young individuals with chronic illnesses, demonstrating strong construct validity when compared to other resilience measurement scales.
For these reasons, this questionnaire was preferred over other resilience tools.
Before data analysis, data were cleaned by checking for any inaccuracies, structural errors, duplicates and missing information.
All questionnaires had no missing information, inaccuracies or duplicates.
Outliers were identified but were not removed as they were relevant in identifying participants with low CYRM-28 scores.
Data were then analysed using the descriptive statistical method using the SPSS.28.
This was done to get a picture of the prevailing resilience factors [36] using frequencies and percentages, which were presented in tables and graphs.
Factor analysis was used to get the mean scores for the various factors and to establish how the participants scored in the various dimensions and sub-dimensions involved in the resilience measure.
Independent t-tests were also used to investigate statistically significant differences between age, grade, race, gender and total resilience.
The information on characteristics of participants included their race, age, grade and gender.
It also included who the participants lived with.
Table1provides a summary of the biographical characteristics of participants.
Table1indicates that the majority of participants were Black Africans and 39.4% were 16 years old or less, while 60.6% were 17 years old or older.
The mean age was 16.80 years, with a median of 17 and a standard deviation of 1.05, indicating a narrow age range.
The age groups were categorised into two groups for statistical analysis purposes.
Since the participants were either 16 years or younger or 17 years or older, and the mean being 16.
80, 16 years was used as a delineating point to create two reasonably balanced subgroups in terms of age span and developmental levels.
Splitting the groups at 15 would create a small group and at 17 would group together two fairly different stages of mid-to-late adolescence.
Splitting at age 16 allowed to separate participants who may be at the border of legal adulthood (18) from those still strictly within earlier adolescent stages.
This was also done to help tailor approaches, communication, or analysis more effectively according to the likely maturity and life occurrences of each group.
Male participants formed 68.1% of the sample and females 31.9%.
Participants were either in grade 8 (41.3%) or grade 9 (51.9%).
However, in mainstream education, learners with a median of 17 years of age are in grade 11 and not Grades 8 or 9.
This indicates that in this sample, learners are over-aged for the grades given and suggests that they qualified for special needs education.
There were a greater number of participants in Grade 9 compared to Grade 8, with more male participants than female ones.
Furthermore, the table indicates that the majority of the participants lived with both parents, followed by those who lived with mothers only.
A considerable number of participants also lived with their fathers only, while a small percentage lived with other relatives.
Most participants (81.6%) indicated that they lived in two to four-roomed houses.
In terms of meals eaten per day, the majority of participants indicated that they ate breakfast (71.5%) and supper (67.4%), followed by lunch (55.1%).
These meals were mainly provided by parents (86.7%), with only a few (3.6%) indicating that they got meals from school.
Similarly, the parents (89.1%) were the main source of the participants’ clothing, and 2.2% of the participants indicated the school as their source.
Items belonging to the various dimensions and sub-dimensions involved in the resilience measure were analysed to find mean scores for each item.
The various mean scores of the factors with standard deviations are shown in Table2.
Results showed that under the three first order factors, the factor with the highest mean score was Caregiver Physical Care (4.27) followed by Contextual Education (4.21), indicating that participants felt that the items described them ‘quite a lot’.
The items that were under the Caregiver Physical Care factors were item 7: ‘If I am hungry, there is enough to eat’ and item 24: ‘I feel safe when I am with my family/caregiver(s)’.
Items listed under Contextual Education factors were items 3: ‘Getting an education is important to me’ and 16: ‘I feel I belong at my school’.
The mean scores for Contextual Cultural (3.97), Individual Social Skills (3.96) and Contextual Spiritual (3.87) implied that the participants believed the items contained in these factors were ‘somewhat’ to ‘quite a lot’ true of their description.
The factor named ‘Contextual Cultural’ focused on the importance of belonging to and serving one’s community.
The factor named Individual Social Skills was concerned about one’s behaviour in social situations and development of useful social and life skills, and the factor named Contextual Spiritual was about spiritual beliefs and participation in spiritual activities as a source of resilience.
As indicated in Table2, Individual Peer Support (3.43), Individual Personal Skills (3, 45) and Caregiver Psychological Care (3.69) had lower mean scores, suggesting that more attention was needed in those areas.
Individual Peer Support was about support from friends as a source of resilience, Items listed under Individual Personal Skills included cooperation with others, being aware of one’s strengths and having problem-solving skills and items listed under Caregiver Psychological Care entailed parental support during hardships, communication and being watched closely by family as sources of resilience.
In the second order factors, the mean scores for the Context sub-scale (4.00) and Caregivers sub-scale (3.85) suggested that the participants believed that the factors were ‘quite a lot’ and ‘somewhat’ true of them, meaning they found resilience in these areas.
The Context sub-scale included those items that fell under the Contextual Spiritual, Contextual Educational and Contextual cultural categories.
The Caregiver sub-scale included items that were loaded under the Caregiver Physical Care and the Caregiver Psychological Care.
The distribution of data in the total resilience mean score is shown in Fig.1.
The five outliers were not removed from the data as they were needed to identify participants with low CYRM-28 scores.
The data distribution is slightly negatively skewed, and this could probably be due to outliers.
The mean of 3.81 suggests that the participants in the sample ‘somewhat’ believed that the items contained in the total resilience described them.
The standard deviation was 0.662.
There were no statistically significant differences present between gender, race, age and grade regarding their total resilience scores.
Despite males having a slightly higher mean score, both genders believed that the total CYRM-28 scores were ‘somewhat true’ to ‘quite true’ about them.
Also, despite African participants having a slightly higher mean score, participants from both race groups believed that the total CYRM-28 scores were ‘somewhat true’ to ‘quite true’ about them.
The effect size of the difference was small (0.12).
In terms of age, despite the participants with 17 years or higher group having a slightly lower mean score, both age groups perceived that the items were ‘somewhat’ true of them, leaning towards being ‘quite a lot’ true (16 years or less = 3.88; 17 years or higher = 3.76).
Lastly, despite grade 8 having a slightly higher mean score, both grades perceived that the items were ‘somewhat’ true of them, leaning towards being ‘quite a lot’ true (G8 = 3.85; G9 = 3.78).
This study aimed to examine the resilience factors that promote mental health among adolescents with MMID and to assess the relationships between these factors and variables such as gender, age, race and grade.
The findings indicated that essential needs that may influence participants’ resilience, such as housing, daily meals and clothing, were generally met.
One study [37] noted that children residing in rural environments often face substandard housing conditions, such as insufficient physical care, home hazards, overcrowding and disorganisation, hindering their resilience.
In contrast, the participants in this study lived in an urban area, and most were in reasonably good housing situations, which may account for the overall positive trend in resilience observed among participants in this research.
Although participants primarily derived their resilience from various factors, physical care from caregivers emerged as the predominant source of resilience.
This could be attributed to information in Table1, which indicates that most participants resided with both parents, received at least three meals daily, and had parents as their primary providers of food and clothing.
This aligns with findings from a study in South Africa [38], which indicated that children with specific learning disabilities drew their resilience from parental physical care factors.
Similarly, another study done in South Africa identified that participants' resilience was significantly influenced by healthy family environments and adequate support from caregivers [39].
Additional studies corroborate that children raised by two married parents tend to have better developmental outcomes [40,41].
This stresses the critical role of caregiver support in fostering resilience among children with MMID.
The evidence presented in this study strongly supports the notion that contextual educational factors and culture serve as vital sources of resilience for the participants.
Prior research has demonstrated that supportive and inclusive educational settings foster a sense of belonging among learners, which in turn enhances their resilience [42,43].
This finding indicates the effectiveness of the sample schools in achieving this goal.
Although previous research [44] has reported similar findings regarding children with specific learning disabilities who view cultural activities as resilience factors, such studies remain rare.
The current findings challenge the conclusions of a systematic review that examined resilience in South Africa from 2005 to 2014 [45] and the research on youth resilience from 1990 to 2008 [46], both of which suggested that culture is rarely recognised as a resilience factor.
This research is significant in addressing the scarcity of literature in this field.
The necessity of acknowledging individual cultural contexts in resilience studies is, therefore, highlighted.
The findings also indicate that Individual Social Skills and Contextual Spiritual factors are significant contributors to resilience.
This aligns with research which identified that children with MMID exhibit traits such as a desire for control, ambition for success, persistence, goal setting, and receptiveness to support [47] and research done in the United States [48] that underscores the essential role of religion in fostering resilience.
In addition, research has reported a strong positive relationship between overall social skills and resilience scores in a sample from northeastern Iowa, USA [48], and studies from South Africa indicate that religion is crucial in developing resilience [49–51].
Collectively, these findings highlight the necessity of enhancing children's social skills and encouraging religious engagement among children with MMID to enhance their resilience.
The factors related to caregiver psychology, Individual Personal Skills and peer skills were rated lower in their contribution to resilience.
A contributing factor to this result could be that some participants were raised by single parents or relatives who may find it challenging to provide comprehensive support.
As a result, these caregivers might concentrate on fulfilling material needs rather than offering psychological support or fostering the personal skills necessary for resilience.
Research indicates that single parenting can be burdensome for numerous reasons [52,53], which may lead to a lack of attention to critical areas that promote resilience in children.
Although the scores for individual peer skills were not extremely low, they were the lowest among the evaluated factors, indicating a lack of peer support.
Research emphasises the significance of supportive relationships with non-familial adults, such as peers, in fostering resilience [54,55].
This finding is at odds with a study which found high scores in this area for participants with specific learning disabilities [56].
The discrepancy, though not analysed, may be because the other study was targeted at children with specific learning disabilities, which are distinct, diagnostically, from intellectual disabilities.
Since the adaptive skills in the social domain can be a challenge for people with intellectual disabilities, it may follow that participants were not able to use their social skills to access peer support in a way that could facilitate resilience effectively.
Children with specific learning disabilities may not have the same kind of social deficits, hence, this could explain the difference in results.
The findings of this study indicate that there were no statistically significant differences in total resilience scores among the sampled participants when analysed by gender, race, grade and age.
In contrast, prior investigations [57,58] revealed statistically significant differences, with boys exhibiting lower resilience scores than girls.
The gender differences in resilience were also noted in research done in the United States, which indicates that girls were more resilient than boys [59].
This discrepancy may be attributed to the fact that these earlier studies sampled learners who had not been diagnosed with MMID.
The diagnosis could have played a part in the differences in the results of these studies.
The current study did not find statistically significant differences in terms of resilience between the younger and the older participants because the sampled participants were not that far apart in age.
However, since the mean age was 16.80 years and the mean of total resilience was 3.81, this shows that the sampled age group was resilient.
This observation confirms earlier research which classified over two thirds of sampled adolescents as exhibiting moderate to high resilience [57].
As noted in the literature, resilience can be taught [60], implying that the lack of significant differences in resilience across groups may reflect shared experiences related to resilience among learners in this cohort.
Therefore, resilience programmes should be targeted at addressing age-related needs.
The study relied on self-reported responses that are prone to bias as participants could report what they thought was socially acceptable.
Therefore, the results could be a limited view of the prevailing resilient factors among adolescents diagnosed with MMID.
Owing to all participants having intellectual disabilities, which could limit their understanding of the questionnaire items, there is a possibility that the responses given could be incorrect as this depended on how the participants understood the explanation given to the items by the assisting team.
However, the questionnaires used to collect data on resilient factors were valid and reliable, which strengthened the study.
The role of the support team could have negatively influenced the findings, however, only a few participants asked for clarification on how they were required to answer some questions, which could have minimised the effect in case the support team influenced the participants while assisting them.
Although the sample was racially diverse, the results generally depicted views of the Black African race group as they dominated the sample.
Also, the results of the study cannot be generalised as the entire population was not well-represented in the sample.
However, the sample size from the three schools was large and can provide a descriptive picture of the topic under investigation.
The study also analysed for any significant differences between gender, race, age and grade groups and prevailing resilient factors.
The results of this study provide critical information towards implications for policy and practice.
The study results underscore the necessity for intervention programmes tailored to support learners with MMID, addressing specific resilience challenges that may be linked to age, gender or race.
However, it is crucial to ensure that support is not disproportionately focused on specific groups at the expense of others.
Consequently, all children with MMID require comprehensive attention to foster their resilience.
The lower mean score for social skills as a source of resilience calls for schools and caregivers to teach social skills to learners with MMID, as these skills are crucial for navigating challenging circumstances.
The lack of peer support for resilience building highlights the urgent need for programmes that encourage the development of peer support among learners with MMID.
Given that the factors that had the highest mean scores were Caregiver Physical Care and Contextual Education, this implies the need for existing policies and practices to maintain and strengthen support in areas which make the learners feel cared for and belonging so that learners do not regress.
For the factors that scored lower, there is a need for policymakers to put policies in place that enhance the development of peer support, personal skills and psychological care by caregivers.
Schools, with the help of the Department of Education, should develop and implement comprehensive programmes adapted to the needs of adolescents with MMID.
These programmes should include teaching learners with MMID how to develop and maintain friendships to enhance peer support since this is one area they struggle with.
Furthermore, programmes could also target developing healthy problem-solving skills and cooperation with others to enhance personal skills.
In terms of Caregiver Psychological Care, there is a need to create community support groups and safe environments for caregivers of children with MMID where they can share, support or learn about parenting skills.
Such support groups can target education on parenting styles that facilitate good relationships and communication with children to enhance this area as a resource for resilience.
Since there were no statistically significant differences between gender, race, age, grade and total resilience, this implies that any policy decisions or intervention programmes should indiscriminately target all adolescents with MMID as they are generally affected the same.
The study recommends that policymakers, intervention programme designers, health professionals and caregivers incorporate the identified resilience factors in their various domains when planning and implementing anything related to the resilience and well-being of adolescents diagnosed with MMID.
Overall, these findings imply that in terms of policy and practice, any activities directed at learners with MMID must capitalise on the resilient factors that were identified in this study.
The study recommends that future research include more younger participants and tests to see if single versus joint parenting is associated with resilience, as this was not tested in this study.
Future research with more participants of other race groups, using qualitative methods, is needed to get an in-depth understanding of the factors promoting resilience among adolescents with MMID.
The reasons for lower scores on social skills as a source of resilience among learners in the sample could be further investigated.
Participants in this study generally drew their resilience from Caregiver Physical Care, contextual educational, contextual cultural, Individual Social Skills and Contextual Spiritual factors, respectively, as portrayed by the results of the CYRM-28.
Further analysis indicated that Individual Peer Support, Individual Personal Skills and Caregiver Psychological Care had lower mean scores.
There were no statistically significant differences found between gender, race, age and grade concerning total resilience factors.
These results imply the need for more support for adolescents with MMID in the areas identified as characterised by low resilience.
Creating opportunities for participants that enable them to continue to be resilient can help them from regressing and becoming vulnerable to risk factors.