During the oil and gas extraction, the corrosion of carbon steel pipelines poses a serious threat to the safe production of oil and gas.
The use of corrosion inhibitors is one of the effective methods to solve this tough issue.
In this work, a novel dimmer acid imidazoline derivative (DIMTU) was developed as corrosion inhibitor for carbon steel in CO2-containing oilfield produced water.
The experimental test results show that DIMTU has outstanding corrosion inhibition effects, with an inhibition efficiency of 98.54% at the concentration of 250 ppm.
Quantum chemical calculations indicate that the introduction of thiourea into dimmer acid imidazoline can significantly increase the adsorption sites, effectively improving the adsorption ability of DIMTU.
GTN-xTB calculations reveal that DIMTU molecule could strongly adsorb on the steel surface through the bonding of the S, N, C atoms of imidazoline ring and thiourea fragment to steel surface.
The adsorbed DIMTU film could prevent the contact of corrosion species to the steel surface and effectively suppress the corrosion of steel.
Carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS) is the effective technology to reduce CO2emission and then address the global climate change issue [1–5].
Meanwhile, the captured CO2in the CCUS technology could be injected into the oil and gas reservoirs to enhance the oil recovery (EOR) [6–8], which is known as CO2-EOR and has been widely used in oil and gas fields.
However, the injected CO2would cause severe corrosion problem of the carbon steel pipelines, which poses a serious threat to the production safety of oil and gas extraction [9–14].
The use of corrosion inhibitors (CIs) is one of the effective methods to alleviate the pipeline corrosion in oil and gas field systems [15–22].
In recent years, various organic compounds with aromatic rings and heteroatoms (O, N, S or P) have been designed to control the corrosion of carbon steels [23–25].
Despite their valuable inhibitive effects, these compounds are difficult to meet the requirement of low cost and high efficiency [26–28].
Imidazoline and its derivatives with the five-membered N-heterocyclic ring, due to their low toxicity, low cost, high efficiency and simple synthesis, have been extensively applied as CIs to prevent the corrosion of pipelines in CO2environments in the oil and gas industry [29–30].
However, imidazoline has poor water solubility, easy hydrolysis, and still exhibits insufficient inhibition effect.
To improve the inhibition effect of imidazoline CIs, modification or mixture with other CIs has been widely studied [15,32–34].
Thiourea (TU), which contains S and N atoms, usually exhibits high inhibition effect, and then is frequently used as compounded CIs by mixing with other inhibitors [35–37].
With the C-NH2and -C = S groups in the TU molecule, it is expected that introduction of TU into the imidazoline CIs will significantly improve its corrosion inhibition effect.
In recent years, quantum chemical calculations (QCCs) have been widely employed to determine the electronic structure characteristics of CIs molecules and predict possible active adsorption sites [20].
In addition, the interaction mechanism between CIs and metal surfaces can be revealed at the atomic level by theoretical calculations, such as molecular dynamics (MD) simulations [38,39], GFN-xTB (Geometry, Frequency, Noncovalent, and eXtended Tight Binding) calculations [40,41] and first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) [42], and then the adsorption configuration and bonding mode for the adsorption of corrosion inhibitor molecules on metal surfaces can be determined.
Therefore, the theoretical calculations are very important to reveal the inhibition mechanism of corrosion inhibitor molecules at the atomic level [43,44].
In particular, as a semiempirical method, the computational speed of GFN-xTB method can be two orders of magnitude faster than that of first-principles calculations, and provide relatively close accuracy to first-principles calculations.
Therefore, GFN-xTB method has gradually achieved valuable application in the study of inhibitors adsorption.
In this work, dimmer acid imidazoline (DIM) was first synthesized and then further modified with TU to develop a novel thiourea-based dimmer acid imidazoline (DIMTU) corrosion inhibitor.
The inhibition effect of DIMTU for the N80 carbon steel in the CO2-saturated oilfield produced water was evaluated by electrochemical tests and surface analysis.
The theoretical calculations based on GFN-xTB method were performed to investigate the adsorption process of DIMTU to obtain the interaction information (e.g. charge density difference, bonding mode, charge transfer) between the DIMTU molecules and carbon steel surface.
With the calculations based on GFN-xTB method, the adsorption mechanism of DIMTU on carbon steel surface was in-depth explored firstly.
The synthetic route of the DIMTU corrosion inhibitor was shown in Fig.1.
Firstly, 0.1 mol dimmer acid was dissolved in 70 mL xylene in a three-necked round bottom flask.
Then, diethylenetriamine (0.24 mol) was added dropwise, and 1% NH4Cl was added as the catalyst.
The reaction was carried out at 135 °C for 4 h under stirring condition.
Subsequently, the temperature was raised to 200oC for cyclization reaction for 4 h. After reaction, the xylene solvent was removed by vacuum distillation to obtain dimmer acid imidazoline (DIM).
Then 0.1 mol DIM and 0.2 mol thiourea (TU) were mixed in a round bottom flask, and underwent deamination reaction at 150 °C for 2 h under stirring condition to obtain thiourea based dimmer acid imidazoline (DIMTU).
At last, the crude DIMTU product was purified by silica gel column chromatography (dichloromethane and methanol with a volume ratio of 20:1 as solvent) and the calculated yield was 78%.
The DIM and DIMTU products were characterized by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy.
The purified DIMTU product was characterized by1H NMR to confirm its structure.
N80 carbon steel (CS) was used as the testing material in this work.
Its chemical composition (given by the supplier) was as follows (wt%): 0.34 C, 0.20 Si, 1.45 Mn, 0.02 P, 0.015 S, 0.15 Cr, 0.008 Cu, 0.18 Mo, 0.03 Ni, and Fe balance.
The size of CS coupons was 10 mm × 8 mm × 5 mm.
A copper wire was soldered to each CS coupon for electric connection for electrochemical tests.
The CS electrodes were then sealed with epoxy, leaving an exposed area of 0.8 cm2.
Before corrosion tests, the CS coupons were abraded with 600# SiC paper.
The testing solution was the simulated oilfield produced water, with the composition listed in Table1.
Electrochemical tests were conducted in a three-electrode cell with CS electrode as working electrode, a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as reference electrode, and a platinum plane as counter electrode, as shown in Fig.2.
Before the tests, the solution was deoxygenated by purging CO2for 4 h. Then, after the CS electrode was immersed in the solution for 1 h to reach a stable open circuit potential (OCP), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) test was conducted at OCP in the frequency from 105to 10− 2Hz with 5 mV of sinusoidal perturbation.
Finally, polarization curve (PC) was measured from − 0.3 V to 0.25 V vs. OCP with a scan rate of 0.5 mV/s.
During the tests, CO2gas was continuously purged into the test solution to maintain a CO2-saturated condition, and the test temperature was 60 °C.
After being immersed in the solution without or with 200 ppm DIMTU for 72 h, the corroded CS coupon surfaces were observed by scanning electron microscope (SEM) to analyze the corrosion morphology.
The surface composition was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).
The structure of DIMTU molecule was optimized at B3LYP/6–311 g (d, p) level with Gaussian 09 [45].
In the calculation, the water solvent effect was considered with the SMD (Solvation Model based on Density).
After calculation, the distributions of frontier molecule orbital (HOMO, LUMO), Fukui function of DIMTU molecule were obtained.
The corresponding quantum chemical parameters, the energies of HOMO and LUMO, and their energy gap (ΔE=ELUMO-EHOMO), were determined.
All these post-processes were completed by using Multiwfn [46] program, while the images were generated by using the VMD [47] program.
In order to reveal the adsorption mechanism of DIMTU on the steel surface, GFN-xTB calculations were conducted.
Firstly, a Fe cluster (11 × 11 × 3 Fe atoms) was constructed with Fe (1 1 0) surface.
A DIMTU molecule was then placed above the model, and then the model was optimized using the GFN-xTB method [48].
Then, single-point property was calculated for the optimized adsorption model to gain the electronic structure information, such as energy, bonding mode, charge density difference distribution, and so on.
In the process of geometric optimization and property calculations, the magnetic structure of Fe atoms was considered.
Finally, wavefunction analysis, data post-processing, and graphical output were completed by using the Multiwfn and VMD visualization softwares.
Figure3(a) shows the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of TU, DIM, and DIMTU.
For DIM, the strong absorption peaks at 2924.57 cm− 1and 2853.5 cm− 1are associated with the stretching vibration of–CH2–, while the absorption peak at 1607.1 cm− 1corresponds to the stretching vibration of the C = N in the imidazoline ring [49].
The absorption peak at 1467 cm− 1is related to the bending vibration of–NH–.
Therefore, the FTIR spectrum of DIM indicates that the synthesized compound likely contains amine and isocyanide groups, and the spectrum is what could be expected for DIM.
For DIMTU, compared to the FTIR spectrum of TU, the appearance of strong absorption peak at 2051.3 cm− 1in the FTIR spectrum of DIMTU indicates the successful induction of TU fragment in DIMTU, with a shift of the absorption peak of C = S double bond.
The FTIR spectrum of DIMTU emphasizes the fact that the C = S peak observed with the synthesized DIMTU is not due to the mere presence of TU in the medium but rather to the introduction of the TU fragment in the DIM molecule.
Figure3(b) shows the1H NMR spectrum of DIMTU molecule:1H NMR (400 MHz, Methanol-d4) δ 9.53 (d, 4 H), 9.01 (s, 2 H), 5.34 (s, 2 H), 3.75 (t, 4 H), 3.57–3.6 (m, 8 H), 3.4 (t, 4 H), 2.15 (t, J = 7.7 Hz, 6 H), 2.00 (s, 2 H), 1.59 (h, J = 10.0, 8.2 Hz, 6 H), 1.10–1.45 (m, J = 11.4 Hz, 44 H), 0.90 (t, J = 6.5 Hz, 6 H).
The1H NMR spectrum confirm the structure of DIMTU molecule.
EIS and PC tests were conducted to assess the inhibition effect of DIMTU.
Figure4(a) shows the EIS Nyquist diagram of the steel electrode in the CO2-saturated solution without or with adding different concentrations of DIMTU.
It is seen that a slightly flattened semicircle is observed in the Nyquist diagram in the blank solution, which may be associated with the rough steel electrode surface after corrosion.
After adding DIMTU, the diameter of the capacitive loop dramatically increases, indicating the outstanding inhibition effect of DIMTU.
Furthermore, the diameter of the capacitive loop increases with the increased DIMTU concentration.
This indicates that with the increased concentration of DIMTU, more DIMTU molecules are adsorbed on the steel surface, thus more effectively inhibiting the corrosion of steel.
From Table2, the smallRpvalue (88 Ω cm2) in the blank solution suggests the rapid corrosion of CS in the CO2-saturated oilfield produced water.
After adding 50 ~ 250 ppm DIMTU, theRpvalues significantly increase to 1773 ~ 8106 Ω cm2, with the corresponding inhibition efficiencies of 95.04%~98.91%.
Therefore, DIMTU has outstanding inhibition effect in CO2corrosion environment.
The inhibition efficiency of DIMTU is significantly higher than those of other imidazoline derivatives in the literature (Table3).
From Fig.5; Table4, compared to the blank condition, the addition of DIMTU leads to a significant positive shift inEcorr.
However, the positive shift value is less than 85 mV, which suggests that DIMTU is a mixed-type corrosion inhibitor with predominant anodic effect [57,58], i.e., DIMTU exhibits a more significant inhibition on the anodic process of CS corrosion.
In addition, compared with the blank condition, the addition of DIMTU leads to a significant decrease in both cathodic and anodic current densities, which indicates the simultaneous inhibition on both anodic and cathodic processes by DIMTU.
The inhibition of anodic process is more evident, leading to a positive shift in corrosion potential.
When adding 50 ~ 250 ppm DIMTU, thevalues decrease from 1.12 × 10− 4A cm− 2in the blank solution to 4.17 × 10− 6~ 1.63 × 10− 6A cm− 2, with the corresponding ηp% of 96.28%~98.54%, which further confirms that the synthesized DIMTU has outstanding inhibition effect.
In order to verify the successful synthesis of DIMTU corrosion inhibitor, EIS and PC tests were conducted to compare the corrosion inhibition effects of DIM, TU, DIMTU, and the complex of DIM and TU (mixing DIM and TU directly without reaction in a molar ratio of 1:1, denoted as DIM + TU) at the same concentration (200 ppm).
As shown in Fig.6; Table5, the polarization resistance with adding TU (425 Ω cm2) is small, corresponding to a low inhibition efficiency of 79.29%.
The polarization resistance with adding DIM is 1237 Ω cm2, and the corresponding inhibition efficiency is 92.88%.
While after adding DIMTU, the polarization resistance significantly increases to 5843 Ω cm2with an inhibition efficiency of 98.49%, which is far more than that of DIM.
Therefore, the inhibition effect of DIMTU is obviously better than that of DIM at the same concentration, indicating that the modification of TU can significantly improve the inhibition effect of DIM.
In addition, the polarization resistance with adding DIMTU is also much larger than that with adding DIM + TU complex (1276 Ω cm2, corresponding to an inhibition efficiency of 93.10%).
This indicates that the synthesized DIMTU is not a mixture of DIM and TU, but rather a thiourea group possibly modified to the DIM molecule.
Meanwhile, the PC test results also show that thewith adding DIMTU (2.11 × 10− 6A cm–2) is smaller than that with adding DIM + TU complex (6.22 × 10− 6A cm–2), as shown in Fig.7; Table6, indicating that the synthesized DIMTU was not the mixture of DIM and TU, but rather the reaction between DIM and TU did occur.
To explore the inhibition stability of DIMTU, EIS was measured in the solution with 200 ppm DIMTU at every 2 h with a total exposed time of 72 h. From Fig.8(a), it is seen that the impedance increases significantly with the prolongation of exposure time.
Correspondingly, the inhibition efficiency increases from 98.37% at 2 h to 99.21% at 8 h, and eventually reach 99.64% at 72 h (Fig.8(b)).
This indicates that DIMTU has outstanding long-term inhibition stability, which is important to the application of CIs.
From Table7, the calculatedof DIMTU is ‒45.53 kJ/mol.
The large negative value ofindicates the largely spontaneous adsorption of DIMTU on the CS surface.
Surface analysis is the powerful means to further confirm the inhibition effect of CIs.
Figure10shows the SEM images of the steel coupons after corrosion test in the solution without or with 200 ppm DIMTU at 60oC for 72 h. From Fig.10(a), it is seen that severe corrosion occurs on the steel coupon surface in the blank solution with a rough surface.
When adding DIMTU, the corrosion of steel coupon surface is slight.
The scratches on the steel coupon surface before corrosion are still clearly visible, indicating that DIMTU adsorption on the steel surface could significantly suppress the corrosion of steel.
Therefore, DIMTU has outstanding corrosion inhibition performance.
XPS analysis was further conducted to identify the elemental composition and valence state on the steel coupon surface after corrosion test in the solution without or with 200 ppm DIMTU at 60oC for 72 h. As revealed in Fig.11(a), the presences of N and S elements in the full-scan spectrum verify the adsorption of DIMTU.
Figure11(b-f) presents the high-resolution XPS spectra of Fe 2p3/2, C 1s, O 1s, N 1s, and S 2p, and the corresponding peak fitting data and element contents are listed in Table8.
From the high-resolution spectra, it is seen that the Fe 2p3/2 spectrum could be deconvoluted into two peaks at 710.2 eV and 711.9 eV, corresponding to FeO/FeCO3[23] and FeOOH [61], respectively.
The C 1s spectrum could be fitted to three peaks at 284.8 eV, 286.2 eV, and 288.1 eV, which correspond to adventitious C, C = N, and C = S, respectively [62,63].
In the N 1s spectrum, the deconvoluted peaks at 399.8 eV and 398.8 eV could correspond to C-N/C = N and -C-NH2, respectively [64].
For O 1s spectrum, the deconvoluted peaks at 529.7 eV and 531.2 eV could be assigned to O2−/CO32−and OH−, respectively [27,63].
The two peaks in the S2p spectrum at 163.2 eV and 168.1 eV could be ascribed to Fe-S and C = S [65,66].
The XPS analysis indicates that the corrosion inhibition of DIMTU is achieved by chemical adsorption bonding with steel surface.
QCCs were employed to optimize the structure of DIMTU molecule and gain its electronic structure information.
Figure12shows the geometric optimized structure and HOMO-LUMO distribution of DIMTU molecule, and the energies of HOMO, LUMO (EHOMO,ELUMO), and their energy gap (ΔE) are listed in Table9.
It is seen that the HOMO of DIMTU molecule is mainly presented on the imidazoline ring and the S atom of TU fragment, while the LUMO is mainly distributed at the TU fragment.
Based on the frontier molecular orbital theory, the electrons in the HOMO tend to escape and transfer to the empty orbitals of metal atoms to form coordination bonds.
While the LUMO is inclined to accept the electrons from metal atoms to form feedback bonds.
It has been well documented that the adsorption of imidazoline inhibitors is realized through the imidazoline ring, with the HOMO and LUMO distributed on the imidazoline ring [55,67].
Therefore, the imidazoline ring and TU fragment should be the main adsorption sites for the adsorption of DIMTU molecule, which indicates that the introduction of TU fragment can effectively improve the adsorption capacity of DIMTU, and then significantly promoting its corrosion inhibition effect.
This has been confirmed by the electrochemical tests.
where,andare the electron densities of DIMTU molecule with N, N‒1 andN+ 1 electrons, respectively.
Figure13presents the Fukui functions (electrophilic () and nucleophilic () reactions) distribution of DIMTU molecule.
It is seen that thedistribution is mainly located at the two N atoms of the imidazoline ring and the S atoms of the TU fragment, while the distribution ofis mainly presented at the TU fragment and the ‒C = C‒ of the long carbon chain.
Therefore, the imidazoline ring, TU fragment, and ‒C = C‒ group should be the main sites for electrophilic and nucleophilic reactions, respectively, which is associated with the HOMO-LUMO distribution characteristics.
The Fukui function distributions further prove the improvement of the adsorption effect by introducing TU fragment.
The ‒C = C‒ of the long-chain alkyl group mainly presents a nucleophilic reaction tendency with a certain adsorption capacity.
GFN-xTB calculations were conducted to determine the adsorption configuration and strength of DIMTU molecule on steel surface.
Figure14(a) presents the optimized adsorption configuration of DIMTU molecule on Fe (110) surface by GFN-xTB calculations.
It is seen that the DIMTU molecule is adsorbed on the Fe surface through the bonding of the S, N, C atoms of TU fragment and the N atom of the imidazoline ring to Fe atoms.
Therefore, the imidazoline ring and TU fragment exhibit the strong adsorption ability, which supports the calculation results of the distributions of the frontier molecular orbital and Fukui function.
Meanwhile, the long carbon chain extends away from the steel surface towards the solution, forming a hydrophobic layer to block corrosive species from reaching the steel surface.
The lengths of the formed Fe-S bonds and Fe-N bonds are in the range from 2.203 to 2.312 Å and from 1.935 to 1.963 Å, respectively, and the formed Fe-C bond length is 1.949 Å, which are close to the sum of the covalent radii of the respective atoms (the covalent radii of S, Fe, N, and C are 1.05 Å, 1.32 Å, 0.92 Å, and 0.77 Å, respectively).
This indicates that DIMTU molecule can stably adsorb on the Fe surface through the S, N, C atoms by the formation of chemical bonds.
From Table10, the calculated adsorption energy of DIMTU molecule on Fe (110) surface was − 762.51 kJ/mol.
The large negative adsorption energy indicates that DIMTU molecules could strongly adsorb on the steel surface, and effectively alleviate the corrosion of steel.
whererepresent the electron densities of the entire adsorption system, the Fe surface and the DIMTU molecule, respectively.
In Fig.14(b), the blue regions indicate electron deficiency, while the green regions represent electron accumulation.
It is seen that the electron densities around the S, N and C atoms (blue regions) involved in bonding with the Fe atoms reduce, while the electron densities around the bonded Fe atoms (green regions) increase.
This redistribution of electron density confirms that there is electron transfer between the DIMTU molecule and steel surface, i.e., the formation of chemical bonds, during the adsorption process of DIMTU molecule.
Meanwhile, the long carbon chains in the DIMTU molecules extend towards the solution, forming a hydrophobic layer to block corrosive species from reaching the steel surface.
Then, an adsorbed DIMTU film was formed on the steel surface, which could prevent the contact of corrosion species to the steel surface and effectively alleviate the corrosion of steel.
In this work, a novel imidazoline derivative (DIMTU) was synthesized as corrosion inhibitor for carbon steel in CO2-containing oilfield produced water.
The experimental test results show that DIMTU exhibits an outstanding corrosion inhibition effect, with an inhibition efficiency of 98.54% at the concentration of 250 ppm.
Furthermore, DIMTU has outstanding long-term inhibition stability with an inhibition efficiency of 99.64% after corrosion for 72 h. DIMTU acts as a mixed-type corrosion inhibitor with predominant anodic effect.
Its adsorption on CS surface follows the Langmuir isotherm.
Quantum chemical calculations indicate that the introduction of thiourea into dimmer acid imidazoline can significantly increase the adsorption sites, effectively improving the adsorption ability of DIMTU.
GTN-xTB calculations reveal that DIMTU molecule could strongly adsorb on the steel surface through the bonding of the S, N, C atoms of imidazoline ring and thiourea fragment to steel surface.
Meanwhile, the long carbon chains in the DIMTU molecules extend towards the solution, forming a hydrophobic layer to block corrosive species from reaching the steel surface.
Then, an adsorbed DIMTU film was formed on the steel surface, which could prevent the contact of corrosion species to the steel surface and effectively suppress the corrosion of steel.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Hongfang Liu, who provided invaluable results of SEM and XPS for this study.