The genetic diversity ofTrypanosoma cruziand the epidemiological characteristics of the environments in which the parasite occurs are essential for understanding infection dynamics and controlling Chagas disease.
This systematic review aimed to: (i) identify and analyze studies that evaluated the genetic variability and epidemiological aspects ofT.
cruziinfection in the state of Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil; (ii) summarize the information reported in the literature; and (iii) suggest new control strategies tailored to the region’s epidemiological profile.
Following the application of inclusion and exclusion criteria, 13 studies catalogued inPubMed, theBrazilian VirtualHealthLibrary,Scopus, and theWeb of Sciencewere selected.
T. cruziisolates were primarily obtained from triatomine speciesTriatoma brasiliensis,Panstrongylus lutzi, andTriatoma pseudomaculata, as well as from wild mammals such asEuphractus sexcinctus,Galea spixii, and humans.
A total of 295T.
cruziisolates were genotyped: 46.5% (137) were identified as Discrete Typing Unit (DTU) I, 29.1% (86) as DTU II, and 20% (59) as DTU III.
Mixed infections were detected in 4.4% (13/295) of hosts.
Triatomine species were found in both peridomestic and intradomestic environments and were occasionally infected withT.
This review provides a comprehensive overview of the circulation of distinctTrypanosoma cruzigenotypes (I, II, and III) in both wild and human-modified environments in Rio Grande do Norte.
Chagas disease (CD), caused by the protozoan parasiteTrypanosoma cruzi(Chagas, 1909), originated millions of years ago as an enzootic infection among wild nonhuman animals and began to be transmitted as an anthropozoonosis when humans encroached upon sylvatic ecotopes1.
The parasite is found across mammalian fauna in the Americas and in triatomine insects, ranging from the southern United States to southern Argentina.
Two decades ago, CD was thought to be under control in Brazil and no longer posed a significant public health threat.
However, the disease has persisted and has re-emerged as a health concern under varying epidemiological scenarios, both within and beyond the Americas2.
Recent data indicate ongoing challenges in diagnosing and effectively treating human infection, alongside underreporting of morbidity and mortality, which means CD continues to represent a significant public health issue in endemic regions3.
Biological differences betweenT.
cruzistrains isolated from different hosts have been observed, including variations in trypomastigote morphology, parasitemia levels, mortality curves in experimental models, treatment susceptibility, and tissue tropism4,5.
Biological, biochemical, and molecular studies have demonstrated thatT.
cruziis a highly heterogeneous taxon.
Over time, its population structure has been studied using a variety of research tools and methodologies6-10.
In 2009, a committee of experts proposed an intraspecific nomenclature system recognizing six Discrete Typing Units (DTUs), designated TcI to TcVI, based on data from biological, genetic, and biochemical markers11.
A seventh DTU, Tcbat, was later identified in several bat species in Brazil12.
More recent phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies using multiple molecular markers specific to Tcbat have definitively supported its classification as a distinct DTU13.
Consequently, investigating the intraspecific genetic variability ofTrypanosoma cruziis essential for better understanding its relationship with different environments and transmission cycles.
The diversity of triatomine vectors and mammalian hosts likely plays a significant role in the distribution of different DTUs and may help maintainT.
cruziheterogeneity by facilitating the emergence of new variants over time through natural selection and genetic drift14.
The Northeast region of Brazil holds considerable epidemiological importance in the context of Chagas disease due to its high vulnerability to the chronic form of the disease and its ranking as the region with the second -highest incidence in the country15.
The Caatinga biome dominates much of this region, andTriatoma brasiliensis(Neiva, 1911) is the primary vector.
This species is currently found in both sylvatic and anthropogenic environments and has adapted to various ecotopes in peridomestic and intradomestic settings15,16.
Furthermore, its broad mammalian host preference for blood meals increases the chances of repeated infections with different DTUs, thereby raising the likelihood of mixed infections within individual vectors16-18.
Given this context, it is crucial to identify theT.
cruzigenotypes circulating in the different mesoregions of Rio Grande do Norte (RN), an administrative state located in northeastern Brazil, to improve our understanding of local transmission dynamics.
Accordingly, a systematic review was conducted to identify and analyze studies that evaluated the genetic variability and epidemiological aspects ofT.
cruziinfection in the region, and to compile existing literature that could inform the development of new, targeted control strategies.
This systematic review was conducted following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Protocols (PRISMA-P) guidelines19and was registered in the PROSPERO database (ID: 403597).
Searches were performed inPubMed, theBrazilian VirtualHealthLibrary (BVS), andScopus.
The search strategy was adapted for each database using the following terms and Boolean operators: forPubMed- (Trypanosoma cruzi) AND (Rio Grande do NorteState); forBVS- (Trypanosoma cruzi) AND (Rio Grande do NorteState); and forScopus-Trypanosoma cruziANDRio Grande do NorteState.
We searched for articles published between January 2010 and January 2025.
Searches were carried out between January 2024 and January 2025.
Two authors (NRMH and ANBS) independently screened all retrieved records based on titles and abstracts using the following eligibility criteria: studies involving genetic characterization ofT.
cruziisolates obtained from either vertebrate or invertebrate hosts in the state of Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil.
All types of primary research were included, including clinical, preclinical, and observational studies.
However, secondary literature (e.g., reviews) and gray literature (e.g., theses, dissertations, and course- conclusion papers) were excluded.
No language restrictions were applied.
When necessary, a third author (ANBS) resolved disagreements regarding study inclusion.
Following the initial screening, the full texts of the selected articles were independently reviewed to confirm eligibility.
Some articles were excluded at this stage because the data they contained did not meet the selection criteria.
The detailed screening and selection process is illustrated in the PRISMA flowchart (Figure 1).
From the final set of included articles, the following data were extracted: year of publication, authors,T.
cruziisolate name, DTU type, DNA extraction and characterization method, host species from which the sample was obtained, transmission cycle associated with the isolate, and the municipality where the sample was collected (seeSupplementary Material(1.1MB, pdf)).
The eligibility criteria were first applied to the titles and abstracts of documents retrieved from public databases and then to the full texts of a subset of these initially selected articles.
A total of 418 articles were identified and assessed for eligibility.
Following full-text screening, 88 articles were excluded due to duplicate data, 53 for not referring toT.
cruzi, 78 for not reporting parasite genotyping, and 186 because the geographical origin of the isolates was not within the state of the RN.
Ultimately, 13 articles met all criteria and were included in this systematic review (seeSupplementary Material(1.1MB, pdf)).
These studies identifiedT.
cruziisolates from various municipalities across RN, as shown inFigure 2.
The geographical distribution and genotypes ofT.
cruziisolates reported in the 13 included studies, each conducted in different municipalities of RN, are summarized inFigure 2.
In total, 295T.
cruziisolates were identified across the studies: 46.4% (137) were genetically characterized as DTU I, 29.2% (86) as DTU II, and 20% (59) as DTU III.
Mixed infections were also detected: DTU I + II in 3.4% (10) of cases, DTU I +Trypanosoma rangeli(Tejera, 1920) genotype A (TrA) in 0.7% (2), and DTU I + II + TrA in 0.3% (1).
DTU I isolates were identified in 2.7% of theHomo sapiens sapiens(Linnaeus, 1758) samples (n = 8) and in three triatomine species:Triatoma brasiliensis(43.1%; n = 127),Triatoma pseudomaculata(Corrêa & Espínola, 1964) (0.3%; n = 1), andTriatoma petrochiae(Pinto, 1927) (0.3%; n = 1).
Among the 86 isolates characterized as DTU II, 19.7% (n = 58) were obtained fromT.
brasiliensis, 9.2% (n = 27) fromH.
sapiens, and 0.3% (n = 1) fromOvis aries(Linnaeus, 1758).Trypanosoma cruziDTU III isolates were derived from five different species: 9.8% (n = 29) fromPanstrongylus lutzi(Neiva & Pinto, 1923), 7.1% (n = 21) fromT.
brasiliensis, 1.7% (n = 5) fromH.
sapiens, 1.1% (n = 3) fromEuphractus sexcinctus(Linnaeus, 1758), and 0.3% (n = 1) fromGalea spixii(Wagler, 1831) (Table 1).
The isolates reported and genotyped in the 13 studies included in this systematic review were primarily collected from peridomestic environments (44.2 %; n = 131).
Of the total isolates analyzed, 33.5% (n = 99) were classified as DTU I, 4.4% (n = 13) as DTU II, and 4.0% (n = 12) as DTU III.
Mixed infections were also identified, with DTUs I + II present in 1.7 % (n = 5) of samples, DTU I +T.
rangeligenotype A (TrA) in 0.3 % (n = 1), and DTUsI + II + TrA in 0.3 % (n = 1).
The sylvatic environment was the second most common source of genotyped isolates (37.6 %; 111/295).
Within this setting, DTU II was the most prevalent genotype, accounting for 15.9% (n = 46) of total isolates, followed by DTU III (12.2 %; n = 36) and DTU I (9.5 %; n = 28).
The intradomestic environment contributed 14.9% (n = 44) of the total isolates, primarily consisting of DTU II (9.2%; n = 27), followed by DTU I (3.3%; n = 10) and DTU III (2.4%; n = 7) (Table 2).
More detailed results from each of the included studies can be found in theSupplementary Material(1.1MB, pdf).
DTU:discrete typing unit;TrA:Trypanosoma rangeliA.
In this systematic review, we compiled data from 13 previously published studies and summarized information on the genotypes ofTrypanosoma cruziisolates identified in the state of Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil.
DTUs I, II, and III were detected in both single and mixed infections (the latter referring to the presence of more than one DTU in a single sample), as well as in combination withTrypanosoma rangeli.
In our study area,T.
cruzicirculates in both sylvatic and anthropogenic environments and has been identified in four species of triatomine vectors, three species of wild mammals, and in humans.
This review of the existing literature highlights overlapping areas of occurrence for differentT.
cruzigenotypes and reveals a complex epidemiological landscape of parasite transmission in this part of northeastern Brazil.
DifferentT.
cruzigenotypes are widely distributed across the American continent, with DTU I being the most geographically widespread.
In Brazil, DTUs I, II, III, and IV are the most frequently reported, with DTU II most commonly associated with human infections, and the other DTUs primarily linked to sylvatic transmission cycles20.
However, these transmission cycles are not fully delineated, and their spatial boundaries remain poorly defined.
Factors such as the mobility of infected synanthropic animals, capable of moving between environments, and human encroachment into sylvatic areas, which alter natural habitats, contribute to this uncertainty.
As a result, co-occurrence of different genotypes in the same areas is common, and mixed infections in both invertebrate and vertebrate hosts are frequently observed, as documented in the state of RN.
This study provides evidence that changes in the parasite genome can lead to hybridization events20,21.
This review demonstrated that DTU I was identified in approximately 50% ofTrypanosoma cruziinfections recorded in the state of RN, primarily inTriatoma brasiliensisand humans, and across both sylvatic and peridomestic environments17,20-27.
DTU I exhibits a wide distribution pattern consistent with long-term evolutionary history and is considered the most ancient ancestral genotype14,28.
In a separate literature review analyzing 6,343T.
cruziisolates from 19 countries, DTU I was found to be the most prevalent genotype, accounting for approximately 60% of all isolates.
In Brazil, DTU I is also the most frequently reported genotype, followed by DTU II14.
In the present study, DTU I was similarly the most common, widely distributed, and often co-occurring with DTU II22,25and, in some cases, with both DTUs II and III17,23-27.
Human infection with DTU I is prevalent in northern South America, Central America, and Mexico and is often associated with Chagas heart disease.
In the Brazilian Amazon, DTU I is the primary cause of acute and cardiac forms of Chagas disease, though it is not typically linked to megasyndromes28.
Although the number ofT.
cruziisolates obtained from humans in RN was relatively low, DTU I has been associated with chronic Chagas disease in patients presenting with indeterminate, cardiac, digestive, and cardio-digestive clinical forms25.
Our results also showed that DTU I isolates were obtained fromT.
brasiliensis,T.
pseudomaculata, andT.
petrochiae, suggesting a potential association between DTU I and members of the genusTriatoma(Laporte, 1832).
This association may contribute to the sustained transmission of DTU I in the region12,17,22-24.
Notably,T.
brasiliensisinfected with DTU I was implicated in a 2016 oral outbreak ofT.
cruziinfection in the municipality of Marcelino Vieira (RN), linked to sugarcane juice contamination29.
DTU II was the second most common genotype identified in the state of RN, occurring across all three transmission environments -sylvatic, peridomestic, and intradomestic -with the highest frequency observed in sylvatic settings.
This genotype was also found inT.
brasiliensis, Ovis aries, and humans17,22,23,25,27,30-32.
DTU II has demonstrated low levels of genetic variability across different hosts and geographic locations in semi-arid regions26.
In other parts of Brazil, DTU II is more frequently associated with the domestic transmission cycle and has been implicated in numerous human infections presenting with various clinical forms of Chagas disease.
This genotype has been identified in patients in the chronic phase of Chagas disease with indeterminate, cardiac, digestive, and cardio-digestive clinical forms, supporting previous findings that DTU II plays a significant role in human disease in Brazil33,34.
In RN, DTU II has been similarly associated with indeterminate, cardiac, and digestive clinical manifestations25.
Trypanosoma cruziDTU III was identified in RN in two vector species,T.
brasiliensisand Panstrongyluslutzi, and two wild mammal species,E.
sexcinctusandG.
spixii, which together likely constitute an azoonotic transmission cycle.
DTU III has also been isolated from humans17,23,24,25,27,32,35-37.
This genotype shows broad distribution among vectors and both wild and anthropogenic mammalian hosts.
Its actual prevalence in northeastern Brazil may be underestimated, as DTU III is believed to circulate predominantly in sylvatic cycles in Brazil and neighboring countries.
Still, it is rarely reported in human cases.
This DTU is almost exclusively associated with transmission cycles involving fossorial mammals, including marsupials25,27,38.
DTU III was reported for the first time in humans in the state of RN, where it was associated with the indeterminate clinical form of Chagas disease25.
It has also been identified in the state of Minas Gerais34.
The detection of this DTU in bothTriatoma brasiliensisandP.
lutzisuggests a potential for wider distribution of this genotype in the region, particularly in the absence of continuous entomological surveillance and effective vector control.
These vector species may serve as epidemiological links between sylvatic and domestic transmission cycles in specific geographic areas, facilitating the spread of this genotype across different environments17,27.
DTU III has been identified in various contexts, including the western Brazilian Amazon, where it has been linked to contamination ofaçaíjuice39; in domestic mammals in Argentina and Paraguay; and in wild mammals, domestic dogs, and humans in Brazil12,38.
Some studies suggest that DTU III may have originated from an ancestral hybridization between DTUs I and II, resulting in low genetic diversity and a likely preference for specific mammalian hosts40,41.
The high frequency of DTU III inT.
brasiliensisin RN supports itsdualepidemiological role in both sylvatic and potential domestic transmission cycles26,27.
Although the triatomine species associated with this DTU are not yet fully characterized, infections have been reported in bothP.
lutziandT.
brasiliensis25,27.
The co-occurrence of DTUs I and II in the same geographic areas indicates that DTU III is capable of coexisting with other genotypes in environments where sylvatic and peridomestic transmission cycles overlap-epidemiological patterns observed in the region studied17,23-27.
This overlap may be facilitated by the ecological characteristics of the northeastern Brazilian biome.
In this region,P.
lutziinfected with DTU III participates in the sylvatic cycle.
In contrast,T.
brasiliensis, infected with DTUs II and III, can contribute to both sylvatic and peridomestic transmission.
The presence of mammalian reservoirs and triatomine vectors near human settlements removes barriers to the introduction of DTU III into anthropogenic environments25,26.
In our study area, the Caatinga biome is undergoing desertification, a trend also observed in the neighboring state of Ceará42, possibly linked to climate change43.
This desertification is driven by both natural and anthropogenic factors18including agricultural expansion, livestock farming, and surface mining.
These activities have accelerated environmental degradation, leading to soil salinization, infertility, erosion, and significant biodiversity or migration of local fauna to neighboring stable environments, favoring the proximity of sylvatic triatomines and human habitations18.
In this context, the sympatric presence of two or more DTUs within a single mammalian host and/or triatomine vector can lead to the formation of multiclonal strains44and, consequently, the emergence of new favorable recombinant genotypes45.
Mixed infections involving DTUs I+II have been identified inT.
brasiliensisin both sylvatic and peridomestic environments17,23.
The occurrence of co-infections withT.
cruziandT.
rangeligenotypes further underscores the importance of strengthening differential diagnostic efforts, asT.
rangeli, although nonpathogenic, shares a similar geographic distribution and is transmitted by the same vectors asT.
Cross-reactivity may also occur in serological tests for chronic infection, complicating diagnosis23,46.
The intradomestic transmission cycle ofT.
cruziarises from interactions between humans and vectors, often driven by social and ecological changes caused by human activity.
These changes facilitate the colonization of artificial ecotopes by triatomines18.T.
brasiliensisplays a central role in this epidemiological context, as it is the most frequently infected species in the studied area.
It has been found with monoinfections of DTU I17,22-24, DTU II17,22,23,27,32or DTU III17,23,24,27,32.
Mixed infections of DTUs I+II17,23and DTUs II+II+TrA or DTU/species I+TrA have also been reported23.T.
brasiliensisandT.
pseudomaculataare native triatomine species, with their dispersal epicenter located in northeastern Brazil18.
In its natural habitat,T.
brasiliensisis commonly found among rocky outcrops and cacti, feeding primarily on rodents.
These rodents, such asPilosocereus gounellei, often share the same ecotopes with the vector species47-49.
In artificial ecotopes,T.
brasiliensiscan infest and establish colonies near human dwellings, feeding on a variety of domestic and peridomestic animals and acting as a bridge between sylvatic and anthropogenic environments42,50-52.T.
brasiliensisis the most studied member of thebrasiliensiscomplex due to its strong capacity to invade and/or colonize households.
This behavior enables transmission through the classic vectorial route, as well as via ingestion of food contaminated with infected feces17,29,32,47-48.
The behavior of this vector, combined with its high infection rates and insufficient vector control measures, facilitates the occurrence of oral transmission outbreaks involvingT.
brasiliensis, such as the 2016 outbreak in the municipality of Marcelino Vieira in RN29.
This remains an ongoing public health issue in the state, where there continues to be a risk of recolonization in both peridomestic and intradomestic environments53.
Previous studies50, reported triatomine populations with extremely highT.
cruziprevalence (>94%) that fed exclusively on cavies-one of which (MV188P) was collected near a sugarcane mill linked to a recent Chagas disease outbreak.
Furthermore, another study54, showed that individuals feeding onDidelphisspp.
spixiicarried higher parasitic loads, reinforcing their roles as important reservoirs.
In Caicó, sylvaticT.
cruzi-infected insects were also found to feed almost exclusively onKerodon rupestris, another caviid species, further suggesting the importance of this group of rodents in maintaining sylvatic transmission cycles55.
The speciesP.
pseudomaculata, andT.
petrocchiaeare additionalT.
cruzivectors identified in the state of RN, and they may play important roles in sustaining parasite transmission cycles17,56.
P. lutzi isrestricted to the Caatinga biome in northeastern Brazil, where it inhabits both peridomestic and domestic environments.
It is considered an important species for maintaining the enzootic transmission cycle ofT.
cruzi, as it feeds on a wide range of animal hosts57.
Nymphs of this species have been detected in both peridomestic and intradomestic environments, indicating its capacity to colonize anthropogenic habitats, where it shows high rates of natural infection withT.
cruzi17,26,27,32.
These findings suggest that several triatomine species may currently be undergoing a process of domiciliation in the region, potentially driven by climate change and biodiversity loss, resulting in increased dispersion as they seek new blood meal sources.
This behavior leads to greater interaction with domestic animals and humans17.
Various mammalian species infected withT.
cruziin RN, such asE.
sexcinctus,G.
spixii, and Ovisaries, are also essential for the establishment and maintenance of the parasite in anthropogenic environments, supporting the potential for active vector-borne transmission12,25,30,35,37.
However, the most critical factor in sustaining transmission in endemic areas appears to be the ecological plasticity of vector species.
Their ability to colonize both sylvatic and anthropogenic ecotopes allows them, and the synanthropic mammals they feed on-to inhabit the same spaces as humans.
This expansion and adaptability of triatomine vectors represent one of the greatest challenges for entomological surveillance, which must be ongoing and continuous.
This study demonstrates that the detection ofTrypanosoma cruzigenotypes across a range of mammalian hosts, including humans, and multiple vector species underscores the persistent risk of active transmission to human populations.
These findings reinforce the urgent need for sustained and continuous entomological surveillance in the state of Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil.
Future research will be essential to deepen our understanding of infection dynamics and to enable comparative analyses based on the baseline data established here.
Moreover, in regions where the epidemiological patterns of Chagas disease are unstable, primarily due to anthropogenic activities and the exploitation of natural resources -such insights are critical for informing the development and implementation of effective strategies for the control and prevention ofT.
cruziinfection.
The authors thank theConselho de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico(CNPq) for L.M.C.
Galvão research fellowship and postdoctoral scholarship for G. H. F. Sampaio and A.N.
Barbosa Silva; and theCoordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior(CAPES) for granting scholarships (N.R.M.
Honorato, M.A.
Santana and L.A.
The authors thank the Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences at theUniversidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte(UFRN).
We would also like to thank Dr. Luke Baton for revising the manuscript.