Transportation of pigs may be associated with stress, which can negatively affect animal welfare and study outcomes.
When acclimation is not possible prior to surgical manipulation, it is not well known whether duration of transportation affects stress biomarkers and clinical parameters in pigs under suitable transport conditions.
This study evaluated the impact of transport time on various stress biomarkers including cortisol, chromogranin A and testosterone.
In addition, clinical observations and physiological parameters for the two groups of pigs were monitored for evidence of distress.
Group 1 consisted of seven female (Yorkshire 25%/Landrace 25%/Duroc 50%) swine.
These animals were transported for 1 h and 45 min prior to surgical intervention.
Group 2 consisted of five female (Yorkshire 50%/Landrace 50%) swine.
These animals were transported for 8 h prior to surgical intervention.
Animals in both groups underwent an acute surgical study within 2 h of arrival at the test facility.
The results showed that there were no significant differences in cortisol from baseline and following transportation for Groups 1 and 2 (p> 0.05).
Data for testosterone in both groups were identical in the pre‐ and post‐transport periods.
Data for chromogranin A showed very little variability for both groups.
Furthermore, there were no significant clinical or physiologic observations to suggest that one group experienced greater stress than the other.
These results support the conclusion that transport times of less than 8 h do not result in distress to pigs.
The results of the study demonstrate that neither a transportation time of 1 h and 45 min (Group 1) nor a transportation time of 8 h (Group 2) has a negative impact on the animals.
Serum cortisol was relatively unchanged, both between pre‐ and post‐transportation samples, as well as between groups.
The biomedical research community has long recognized the effects that stress and distress may exert on scientific results and the welfare of animals.
Stress has been defined as ‘the biologic response an animal exhibits in an attempt to cope with threats to its homeostasis’ (Carstens and Moberg2000).
This response can involve immunologic, metabolic, autonomic, neuroendocrine and behavioural changes (Obernier and Baldwin2006).
It is critical to recognize stressors in laboratory animals both from an animal welfare perspective and a scientific perspective.
It has been demonstrated that the biologic effects of stress and distress have the potential to compromise experimental results (Moberg2000).
In addition to animal welfare concerns, stress‐inducing experiences may markedly complicate research reproducibility.
Transportation of swine is believed to be associated with ‘shipping stress’, possibly through a combination of social, environmental and handling stressors.
For example, swine may be regrouped for transport, which could lead to social stress; handling to move animals onto the transportation vehicle or crates can potentially cause acute stress; and environmental changes such as differences in temperature and humidity, noise and vibration of the vehicle can potentiate stress (Martínez‐Miró et al.2016).
For facilities with a vivarium, animals benefit from an acclimation period after arrival in which physiological, psychological and nutritional stabilization can occur.
In contrast, facilities that do not have a vivarium, such as the facility at which these studies were conducted, animals are typically transported to the surgical site on the day of their scheduled, terminal experiment.
Many of these facilities conduct acute experiments and vendors may be travelling from various distances.
This raises the question of whether duration of transportation is a factor in causing stress in research swine when transport conditions (Institute for Laboratory Animal Research2006) are otherwise optimized.
The study described here evaluated the impact on swine being transported to a test facility from two different vendors.
One vendor is located 1.75 h from the facility and the other is located a distance requiring 8 h of transport time.
Stress biomarkers were measured at baseline at the housing location and approximately 24 h later after transportation.
Biomarkers measured included: serum cortisol, chromogranin A and testosterone.
In addition, clinical observations and homeostasis under anaesthesia (prior to surgical intervention) were observed and recorded.
We hypothesized that there would be no significant difference in stress indicators when a research pig was transported 1.75 h versus 8 h duration in acceptable transportation conditions.
All experiments involving animals were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (Protocol #2022‐1201).
All swine (n= 12) used in this study were randomly selected based on weight appropriate for their scheduled surgical procedure.
All swine were within the weight range of 35.2–66.0 kg and were Yorkshire cross‐breeds.
Animals were housed in conditions that satisfied requirements of theGuide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals(Institute for Laboratory Animal Research2011) and were maintained on a diet formulated for swine fed ad libitum.
Animals were overnight food fasted approximately 8–10 h prior to their scheduled study time.
Stress biomarkers that were selected for this study included chromogranin A, testosterone and cortisol.
Chromogranin A has been used as a marker in pigs for activation of the sympathetic‐adrenal‐medullary (SAM) axis response (Martínez‐Miró et al.2016).
Testosterone has been shown to increase in pigs undergoing acute stress (Chichinadze and Chichinadze2008).
Cortisol is the primary glucocorticoid in pigs and is widely used for stress testing.
Cortisol level, however, can vary widely between individuals and may not be affected in all stressful conditions.
Serum for testosterone was sent to the Animal Health Diagnostic Center at Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine (Ithaca, NY) on dry ice.
A radioimmunoassay (RIA) was employed for a testosterone analyte.
Serum was sent to the Veterinary Diagnostic Lab, Colorado State University (Fort Collins, CO) and evaluated by a CLIA‐certified laboratory using an automated immunofluorescent assay (Brahms CgA II Kryptor, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) for chromogranin A. Serum cortisol was assayed by Cornell University via immunoassay using the Immulite 2000 PI system (Siemens Medical Solutions, Inc., Flanders, NJ).
Seven animals (Group 1) raised and housed at a USDA‐licensed vendor site approximately 1 h and 45 min away were used as one cohort for this experiment.
Mean body weight of animals in this group was 47.1 kg (±10.6 kg).
Animals from this site are produced both for production and research purposes.
Animals were fed a vendor‐milled diet nutritionally balanced for swine using Ralco product (#156258 Enmax G/F mill premix; Marshall, MN).
Swine were given free access to water.
The herd is screened annually for: Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS),Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, porcine circovirus 2 and 3 andActinobacillus pleuropneumoniae.
Swine that were selected for this study were scheduled to be transferred to an IACUC‐approved acute surgical protocol once they arrived at the AAALAC‐accredited test facility.
Between 7:00 AM and 8:00 AM, approximately 24 h prior to the scheduled surgical procedure, pigs were observed for clinical abnormalities at the vendor site.
Subsequently, each pig was sedated and immobilized with Telazol (tiletamine and zolazepam) at ∼5 mg/kg administered via the intramuscular (IM) route.
Blood samples were collected early in the morning to avoid a circadian variation of cortisol and time of day.
Samples (∼5 mL) were drawn from either the auricular or the cephalic vein into serum separator tubes and allowed to clot before centrifugation and separation of serum, which was stored at ≤ 0°F until the assay was performed.
The following morning the animals were transported to the test facility in either a fully insulated and ventilated van or a livestock trailer.
Temperature inside the van or trailer was between 40°F and 60°F.
Pigs were not confined, and wood shavings were provided for comfort.
Pigs were confined to a crate once they arrived at the test facility and were observed for abnormalities or signs of stress.
Clinical signs of stress in swine may include excessive vocalization, hyperaemia and excessive rooting/attempting to jump out of crate/enclosure.
Animals were sedated and immobilized with Telazol (tiletamine and zolazepam) at ∼4 mg/kg administered via the IM route in preparation for an acute surgical procedure.
Timing of blood draws corresponded to the sample collection times on the previous day (±60 min).
Blood samples (∼5 mL) were drawn from the cephalic vein(s) and processed as above prior to being sent to the laboratory on dry ice.
A second group consisting of five animals (Group 2) raised and housed at a USDA‐licensed vendor site approximately 8 h away were used as an additional cohort for this experiment.
Mean body weight of animals in Group 2 was 50.88 kg (±9.2 kg).
Animals were fed a formula for Stage 2 pigs from a commercially available diet for swine.
The diet consists of 16% crude protein, is a nutritionally balanced, and corn soybean‐based (Star Milling, Perris, CA).
Swine were given free access to water.
This herd is screened quarterly for:Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae,Brucella suis, influenza A virus,Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae, leptospirosis, pseudorabies and transmissible gastroenteritis.
Animals that were selected for this study were scheduled to be transferred to an IACUC‐approved acute surgical protocol once they arrived at the AAALAC‐accredited test facility.
Between 7:20 AM and 8:10 AM, approximately 24 h prior to the scheduled surgical procedure, swine were observed for clinical abnormalities at the vendor site.
Subsequently, each pig was sedated and immobilized with Telazol (tiletamine and zolazepam) at ∼5 mg/kg administered via the IM route.
Blood samples were collected early in the morning to avoid a circadian variation of cortisol.
Samples (∼5 mL) were drawn from the jugular vein into serum separator tubes and allowed to clot before centrifugation and separation of serum, which was stored at ≤ 0°F until the assay was performed.
At approximately 9:30 PM, the same day, the pigs were transported to the test facility in a fully insulated van.
Temperature inside the van or trailer was between 68°F and 73°F.
Animals were confined individually in crates throughout transport.
Swine were transferred to a test facility crate once upon arrival and were observed for abnormalities or signs of stress.
The animals were sedated and immobilized with Telazol (tiletamine and zolazepam) at ∼4 mg/kg administered via the IM route in preparation for an acute surgical procedure.
Timing of blood draws corresponded to the sample collection times on the previous day (±19 min).
Blood samples (∼5 mL) were drawn from the cephalic vein(s) and processed as above prior to being sent to the laboratory on dry ice.
After instrumentation and vessel access, animals underwent an acute surgical procedure.
Statistical analyses were performed using Minitab (Copyright 2023 Minitab, LLC.
All rights Reserved).
A pairedt‐test was performed using the pre‐ and post‐cortisol values for Group 1 and also for Group 2.
The null hypothesis was that there was no significant difference in biomarker levels when baseline samples were compared to post‐transportation samples from the 1.75‐h group (Group 1) and the 8‐h group (Group 2).
Statistical analysis was not performed for chromogranin A and testosterone.
Data for these two biomarkers consisted of numerous values that were non‐specific and described as being less than a specific, pre‐defined value for that assay.
Data for testosterone in both groups were identical in the pre‐ and post‐transport periods.
Data for chromogranin A showed very little variability for both groups.
At baseline, no animals in the study were observed to display clinical signs of stress.
On the day of the study, all animals were either bright or quiet, and all were alert and responsive.
One animal from Group 2 demonstrated vocalization and excessive salivation when being transferred to the holding crate.
Average heart rate, average temperature and average mean arterial pressure for all animals under anaesthesia prior to surgical manipulation were within historical norms for the facility.
Mild tachycardia, hypothermia, hyperthermia and basic pH were noted for several animals in both Group 1 and Group 2 and anaesthetic intervention was taken to correct parameters outside of the normal reference range.
Chromogranin A and testosterone values did not deviate significantly from baseline (Tables1and2).
Chromogranin A increased an insignificant amount in one pig post‐transport in Group 1 (Table1).
The cortisol level dropped on average by 2.12 µg/dL after transportation for Group 1, with mean (standard deviation) of 6.743 (1.529) and 4.627 (1.376) for the pre‐transport and post‐transport cortisol levels (Figure1).
The 95% confidence interval of the mean difference is (−0.194, 4.425) andp= 0.066 indicating lack of statistically significant difference in cortisol from pre‐transport to post‐transport atα= 0.05 significance level.
Group 1 individual animal cortisol (µg/dL) levels at baseline (pre‐transportation) and post‐transportation (1.75 h) with mean and standard deviation (A).
Group 1 cortisol mean and standard deviation at baseline (pre‐transportation) and post‐transportation (1.75 h) (B).
The cortisol level increased slightly on average by 0.13 µg/dL after transportation for Group 2, with mean (standard deviation) of 2.396 (0.933) and 2.530 (0.642) for the pre‐transport and post‐transport cortisol levels (Figure2).
The 95% confidence interval of the mean difference is (−1.947, 1.679) andp= 0.847 showing there is no statistical difference in cortisol from pre‐transport to post‐transport at 0.05 significance level.
Group 2 individual animal cortisol (µg/dL) levels at baseline (pre‐transportation) and post‐transportation (8 h) with mean and standard deviation (A).
Group 2 cortisol mean and standard deviation at baseline (pre‐transportation) and post‐transportation (8 h) (B).
Results failed to demonstrate a statistically significant difference in cortisol levels between pre‐ and post‐transportation samples for both groups (Group 1,p= 0.066; Group 2,p= 0.847).
Per theGuide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, ‘Regardless of whether the animals are quarantined, newly received animals should be given a period for physiologic, behavioural and nutritional acclimation before their use’ (Institute for Laboratory Animal Research2011).
Indeed, the impact of transportation on parameters associated with the cardiovascular, endocrine, immune and reproductive systems is well documented for several laboratory animal species (Obernier and Baldwin2006).
In this regard, it is essential to consider the potential impact of such confounding variables on experimental outcomes.
This is particularly true for circumstances under which such pragmatism is not practical.
The results of the study described here demonstrate that neither a relatively short transportation time of 1 h and 45 min (Group 1) nor a relatively long transportation time of 8 h (Group 2) has a negative impact on the animals.
Direct clinical observations of the animals, as well as homeostasis while under anaesthesia failed to identify evidence of stress in either group following transportation.
Further, serum cortisol was relatively unchanged, both between pre‐ and post‐transportation samples, as well as between Groups 1 and 2.
Finally, testosterone values remained unchanged pre‐ and post‐transport in both groups; and a mild increase was noted for chromogranin A in a single animal from Group 1 following transport.
Taken together, these data suggest that swine may be transported for up to at least 8 h with no associated increase in stress.
For those institutions that are not structured to house and acclimate research animals prior to experimentation, it is important to understand the specific factors that have the most significant impact on animal welfare and scientific results.
In pigs, several indicators of stress have been studied surrounding transportation.
For example, it has been shown by studying the morphology, intestinal mucosal barrier and autophagy/mitophagy levels in pig jejunum, that transportation induced obvious stress responses with morphological and histological damage in the jejunum, accompanied with an elevated level of malondialdehyde (He et al.2019).
A separate study, however, concluded that subjectively, pigs transported for 8, 16 and 24 h did not appear to be stressed during transport, and the concentration of cortisol was very low (Brown et al.1999).
For institutions without a vivarium, animals will typically undergo some length of time in road transportation before terminal experimental manipulation.
The purpose of this study was to determine if swine undergoing road transportation for relatively short (Group 1) or long (Group 2) experienced stress.
The results did not indicate evidence of stress, can help inform decisions to be made with respect to vendor transportation distance and the likelihood of stress as a confounding research variable.
Because the animals selected for this study were from herds of different genetic backgrounds, our study design allows greater representation of circumstances frequently encountered by research institutions.
Evaluating stress in animals involves considering multiple indicators and understanding the limitations of each of them.
For example, increased cortisol is a response of the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal axis and although many stressors elicit an increase in glucocorticoid activity, there are some stressors that do not result in this response (Mason1968).
Furthermore, a confounding factor is the interpretation of cortisol in response to stress.
A variety of factors, such as age, time of day and social status, may affect cortisol levels (Hicks et al.1998; McGlone et al.1993).
It has been shown that pigs with more submissive social status have higher circulating cortisol levels (Hicks et al.1998).
Future studies are needed to continue to evaluate factors associated with transportation that might contribute to stress and distress in animals, as understanding such variables will enable approaches to mitigate the impact of transportation stress as a confounding variable that complicates animal welfare and research reproducibility.