Morphogenesis and development of hair follicle fundamentally depend on the interaction between the epidermis and dermis, with dermal papilla cells (DPCs) playing a critical role in these processes.
H3K4me3, one of the key histone modifications, is essential for coordinating gene expression.
However, the epigenetic modification profile of H3K4me3 in cashmere goat DPCs and its mechanism of action in hair follicle development remain unexplored.
In this study, the apparent regulation map of H3K4me3 was drawn by CUT&Tag technology.
DPCs were exogenously treated with the H3K4me3 inhibitor BCL-121 and the agonist PBIT.
Functional experiment results showed that increasing H3K4me3 levels significantly enhanced the proliferation capacity of DPCs and promoted the expression of Wnt signaling pathway-related genes.
Subsequently, the regulatory mechanism of H3K4me3 was explored, and the differentially expressed geneRSPO3in the embryonic stage regulated by H3K4me3 was screened through CUT&Tag and RNA-seq correlation analysis.
Functional studies demonstrated thatRSPO3could promote DPCs proliferation, inhibit apoptosis, and increase the expression of genes related to the Wnt signaling pathway.
In summary, our findings indicated that H3K4me3 regulates the transcription ofRSPO3in DPCs, which would lay the foundation for the molecular mechanism of hair follicle development.
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13072-025-00611-8.
The morphogenesis of cashmere goat hair follicle is divided into three stages: the induction stage (embryonic day 60, E60), the organogenesis stage (embryonic day 90, E90), and the cytodifferentiation stage (embryonic day 120, E120) [10,24].
Dermal papilla cells (DPCs), a critical component of hair follicle, are located in the hair bulb.
They interact with matrix cells and surrounding tissues to promote the formation and development of hair follicle [5,19].
Cashmere goat hair follicle morphogenesis during embryonic development results from the interactions between epithelial and dermal cells.
In the organogenesis stage, the epithelial placode signals the underlying dermal cells, which gradually differentiate into dermal papilla cells (DPCs) and become encapsulated by matrix cells [31], forming the hair bulb.
DPCs regulate follicular cell proliferation, differentiation, and migration by secreting extracellular vesicles during follicle morphogenesis and development.
For example, miR-218-5p in DPC-derived exosomes promotes hair regeneration by regulating the β-catenin signaling pathway [15], and miR-181a-5p in DPCs exosomes activates the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway to promote hair follicle stem cell proliferation, thereby influencing hair growth [50].
These findings underscore the critical role of DPCs in hair follicle morphogenesis.
Hair follicle morphogenesis arises from mesenchymal-epithelial interactions and involves numerous signaling pathways, such as Wnt/β-catenin, Sonic hedgehog (Shh), bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), and Notch signaling pathways [44].
Among these, the Wnt signaling pathway plays a key role in the induction, organogenesis, and differentiation stages of hair follicle development, influencing cell proliferation, apoptosis, and fate determination [18,22,40].
Especially in DPCs, activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway in DPCs can effectively enhance their activity and promote hair regeneration [48].
Inhibition of Dkk1 in mouse DPCs can promote the nuclear entry of β-catenin, thereby promoting hair growth [12].
The activation of β-catenin in DPCs can effectively inhibit dihydrotestosterone-induced ferroptosis and promote hair regeneration in mice [7].
Tn41 can upregulate the transcription factor Lef1 of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, thereby affecting the growth of mouse DPCs [21].The exosomes secreted by DPCs can increase the expression levels of β-catenin and Lef1 in fibroblasts and dermal cells from skin wounds, thereby affecting the regeneration of mouse hair follicle [33].The Wnt signaling pathway is classified into canonical and non-canonical types.
The two pathways often counteract each other at critical cell fate decision points.
The canonical Wnt signaling pathway, known as the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, is characterized by β-catenin-dependent transcription activation triggered by Wnt [29].
In contrast, non-canonical Wnt pathways, including Wnt/Ca2+and Wnt/JNK pathways, primarily activate various intracellular signaling cascades and are independent of β-catenin activity [13].The Wnt signaling pathway is highly conserved across mammals, with Wnt gene family sequences showing high similarity across species [14].
This remarkable conservation underscores the pathway’s indispensable role in developmental processes across multicellular life forms [17,25].Tri-methylation of lysine 4 on histone H3 protein subunit (H3K4me3) is a typical chromatin mark associated with transcriptional activity.
The role of histone methylation varies across functional elements, with H3K4me3 at gene promoter regions generally facilitating transcriptional activation [26,41].
Studies have shown that BCL-121 is an effective SMYD3 inhibitor, while SMYD3 is a critical protein involved in H3K4me3 modification [11].
BCL-121 has been demonstrated to suppress the proliferation of various cancer cells [45], but its effects on normal primary cells remain unexplored.
PBIT is a specific Jumonji/AT-rich interaction domain 1 (JARID1) inhibitor that can suppress the histone demethylase KDM5B [16,23].
However, existing studies have primarily focused on its role in cancer cells, leaving its effects on normal cells unknown.
The RSPO (R-spondin) family in mammals consists of four members (RSPO1, RSPO2, RSPO3, and RSPO4), all of which share similar protein domains [20].
The RSPO family acts as an agonist of the Wnt signaling pathway, interacting with LGR4/5 on the cell surface to enhance Wnt signal transduction [2,29,35].
RSPO3 is involved in various cellular processes.
For instance, it can induce the differentiation of myocytes into type I fibers [27] and is closely associated with intestinal epithelial cell differentiation in necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) [28].
In diabetic mice, abnormal intestinal epithelial cell differentiation has been observed, with RSPO3 being upregulated in intestinal epithelial cells, indicating its role as a critical regulator of LGR5+stem cells [32].
These findings suggest that RSPO3 is a key growth factor with a significant role in promoting cell proliferation.
Recent studies have shown that RSPO3 can promote the maturation of mouse hair follicle stem cells by enhancing the classical Wnt signaling pathway [30], but the role of RSPO3 in dermal papilla cells has not been reported yet.
Six 2-year-old pregnant ewes with similar size and weight were selected for fetal tissue collection.
Embryos at 90 days (organogenesis stage) and 120 days (differentiation stage) of development were surgically obtained, with three fetuses for each stage.
Skin and internal tissues were collected [9,39].
DPCs were isolated from secondary hair follicle of cashmere goat and cultured in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% FBS (Hyclone, USA) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37 °C in 5% CO₂ [38].
HEK293A cells were cultured in high-glucose DMEM [46].
Take out the cryovial and shake it in a 37 °C water bath to quickly thaw it within 1–2 min.
Cells were centrifuged for 5 min at 600×g at room temperature.
Cell activity was detected with LUNA-FLTM and counted.
CUT&Tag assay was performed as described below.
The library preparations were sequenced on the Illumina Novaseq platform at Novogene Science and Technology Co., Ltd (Beijing, China), and 150 bp paired-end reads were generated.
Reference genome and gene annotation files were downloaded from genome website directly.
Index of the reference genome was built using BWA (v0.7.12) and clean reads were aligned to the reference genome using BWA mem.
Only uniquely mapped (MAPQ ≥ 13) and de-duplicated reads were used for further analysis.
Peaks were adjusted to the same size (500 bp) centered peak summits and motif discoveries of these loci sequences were performed using findMotifsGenome.pl program in HOMER v4.11 software.
ChIPseeker was used to retrieve the nearest genes around the peak and annotate genomic region of the peak.
GO enrichment analysis was implemented by the GOseq R package, in which gene length bias was corrected.
We used KOBAS software to test the statistical enrichment of peak-related genes in KEGG pathways.
Genes regulated by H3K4me3 were compared with transcriptomic data to generate Venn diagrams using RStudio.
Overlapping genes were identified as H3K4me3-regulated candidates.
When DPCs reach approximately 70% confluence, BCl-121 (SIGMA-ALDRICH, Cat# SML1817) was added to the culture medium to a final concentration of 150 µM, and PBIT (SIGMA-ALDRICH, Cat# SML1058) to a final concentration of 2 µM.
Add the same amount of DMSO into the cells as the vehicle control group.
Follow the procedure and transfection scale described in the Gibco Lipofectamine®3000 Transfection Reagent manual for cell transfection.
RSPO3full-length cDNA was amplified by PCR using skin tissue cDNA as a template, with RSPO3-CDS-F and RSPO3-CDS-R primers.
The purified PCR product was digested withKpnIandNotIand cloned into the pAd-Track-GOI adenoviral shuttle vector, generating pAd-Track-RSPO3.
This shuttle vector was linearized withPmeIand recombined in BJ5183 competent cells to produce the final recombinant vector, pAd-RSPO3, used for adenovirus packaging.
siRNA was synthesized by GenePharma (Shanghai, China).
The recombinant plasmid pAd-RSPO3 was linearized withPacIand transfected into HEK293A cells using Lipofectamine®3000.
After comet-like cytopathic effects were observed, the virus was harvested via repeated freeze-thaw cycles and subjected to secondary amplification.
The viral stock was aliquoted and stored at − 80 °C.
Viral titer was measured, and infection efficiency in goat DPCs was assessed in 96-well plates.
Crystal Violet Staining: Transfection was performed when DPCs density in 96-well plates reached 70%.
After 48 h, the medium was removed, and cells were fixed with methanol for 30 s, stained with crystal violet (Beyotime, C0121) for 30 min, and washed with distilled water.
Staining was further developed with 33% acetic acid for 15 min.
Absorbance at 570 nm was measured using a multifunctional microplate reader.
Each treatment was performed with eight replicates, and the data were normalized.
CCK-8 Assay: Procedures followed the instructions for the CCK-8 kit (Sangon, E606335).
EdU Assay: Procedures followed the instructions of the Cell-Light EdU Apollo567 In Vitro Kit (RiboBio,C10310).
RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA using the EasyScript®One-Step gDNA Removal and cDNA Synthesis SuperMix kit, following the manufacturer’s instructions.
RT-qPCR was performed on a Roche quantitative PCR instrument with a 15 µL reaction system comprising 50 ng cDNA template, 7.5 µL 2X TransStart®Green qPCR SuperMix, 0.3 µL of 10 µmol/L forward and reverse primers, and water to the final volume.
The reaction conditions were 95 °C for 3 min, followed by 45 cycles of 95 °C for 5 s and 50–60 °C for 30 s. Each experiment was performed with at least three biological and three technical replicates.
Gene expression was normalized toβ-actinand calculated using the 2−ΔΔCTmethod.
Primers were designed using Primer Premier 5, with sequences provided in TableS1.
When DPCs reached 70% density in 6-well plates, cells were transfected.
After 48 h, cells were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (Solarbio, R0020), and protein concentrations were measured using a BCA protein assay kit (Solarbio, PC0020).
Proteins were mixed with 5X loading buffer (Solarbio, P1040) and boiled at 100 °C for 15 min.
Proteins were separated by electrophoresis, transferred to membranes, blocked, and incubated with primary and secondary antibodies.
Signals were visualized with exposure reagents (Epizyme, SQ201), and grayscale analysis was performed using ImageJ software.
Antibody information provided in TableS2.
When cultured cashmere goat DPCs reached approximately 85% confluence, they were subjected to experimental treatments.
After an additional 48-hour incubation, CTNNB1 protein expression was evaluated by immunofluorescence staining.
The calculated relative gene expression levels were performed using the 2-∆∆ CTmethod.
EdU positive cells were counted using Image J, and the WB results were grayscale quantified.
The bar chart was drawn using GraphPad 9.0, and the results were expressed as mean ± standard error of mean (mean ± SEM).
* IndicatesP< 0.05, * * indicatesP< 0.01, * * * indicatesP< 0.001.
The modification landscape of H3K4me3 across the whole genome in Shaanbei white cashmere DPCs remains unexplored.
We performed CUT&Tag sequencing for DPCs to address this gap.
Quality control of sequencing data was performed (TableS3,S4) (Fig.S1).
To characterize the genome-wide distribution of H3K4me3 modifications at different developmental stages, we analyzed the density of Total mapped reads on both positive and negative strands across all chromosomes (Fig.S2A).
Using deepTools, we visualized the distribution of H3K4me3 signals around transcription start sites (TSS) and gene body regions (± 3 kb) (Fig.S2B, C).
Results revealed that H3K4me3 modifications predominantly localized near TSSs.
Visualization of peak distributions across chromosomes indicated widespread and relatively uniform modifications without chromosome preference (Fig.1A).
Peak-centered ± 3 kb signal intensity analysis showed a near-normal distribution (Fig.1B).
Additional analyses on peak width, enrichment, significance, and proximity to TSS highlighted the chromosomal characteristics of H3K4me3 peaks (Fig.1C).
The gene corresponding to the TSS closest to the peak is considered to be the peak-related gene.
In this study, GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed on the peak-related genes (Fig.2A, B).
Gene expression and other items were enriched in the GO enrichment analysis, and cell cycle and other items were enriched in the KEGG enrichment analysis, indicating that H3K4me3 plays an important role in regulating the gene expression of cashmere goat papilla cells and affecting cell proliferation.
Motif indicates the sequence conservation of the peak location, which may play a role in regulating gene expression.
In this study, we used the sequence information of 250 bp (500 bp in total) upstream and downstream of the peak to identify the conservative sequence characteristics of the peak enrichment location using Homer software (Fig.S3).
The results showed that motif analysis predicted the transcription factors, such as IRF2, that were significantly enriched in the genome region of peak (Fig.2C).
The distribution of the peak relative to the gene TSS locus can predict the degree of openness around the TSS.
We used peakannotator to detect the nearest TSS site at each peak, counted the peak number according to the distance between the peak and the TSS site, and analyzed the distance distribution between the peak and the gene TSS site (Fig.2D).
Then, the ChIPseeker software was used to calculate the distribution of peak in various functional regions (Fig.2E).
The results showed that H3K4me3 bound the most sites in the promoter region of the gene and the least sites in the first exon, indicating that H3K4me3 may regulate gene transcription by affecting promoter activity.
To investigate the impact of H3K4me3 on DPCs, we used the H3K4me3 inhibitor BCL-121 and agonist PBIT.
CCK8(Fig.3A), crystal violet staining(Fig.3B), and EdU assays(Fig.3C, D) showed that enhancing H3K4me3 levels promoted DPCs proliferation, whereas reducing H3K4me3 levels produced the opposite effect.
Western blot (WB) analysis confirmed that BCL-121 and PBIT significantly altered H3K4me3 levels in DPCs after 48 h. qPCR and WB results indicated that inhibition of H3K4me3 reduced the expression of proliferation and Wnt signaling pathway-related genes, whereas activation of H3K4me3 had the opposite effect (Fig.3E-G).
The results of cellular immunofluorescence showed that the number of CTNNB1 translocated into the nucleus decreased significantly after the addition of BCL-121, while the opposite results were observed after the addition of PBIT, indicating that H3K4me3 can promote the transport of CTNNB1 into cells, and then activate the Wnt signaling pathway (Fig.3H).
These findings demonstrated that changes in H3K4me3 levels influence DPCs proliferation.
To investigate the role of H3K4me3 in hair follicle development in Shaanbei white cashmere goat, CUT&Tag data from DPCs were integrated with RNA-seq in embryonic skin [47] from embryonic skin samples at E90 and E120.
14,741 genes regulated by H3K4me3 were identified (Fig.4A).
Differential expression analysis revealed 2163 upregulated and 3266 downregulated genes at the E90 stage (Fig.4B).
GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed on these differentially expressed genes (Fig.4C, D).
Nine shared genes were identified by intersecting terms related to embryonic organogenesis and the Wnt signaling pathway in the GO analysis (Fig.4E).
By analyzing scRNA-seq [10] of cashmere goat embryonic skin measured by the research group in the early stage, it was found thatRSPO3was significantly enriched in DPCs (FigS4A) and was verified by WB (FigS4B).
Therefore,RSPO3was ultimately selected as the downstream target gene of H3K4me3 (Fig.4F).
According to the correlation analysis between H3K4me3 CUT&Tag and RNA- seq mentioned above, the expression level ofRSPO3was significantly upregulated in the skin tissue at E90 compared to the skin tissue at E120.
This trend ofRSPO3was verified by RT-qPCR (FigS4C), and the ability of H3K4me3 to regulate the transcription ofRSPO3was also confirmed by RT-qPCR and WB (FigS4D, E).
An adenoviral overexpression system forRSPO3was constructed (FigS5A, B).
After infecting DPCs for 48 h, green fluorescence was observed in nearly all DPCs, indicating successful adenoviral infection.
RT-qPCR results demonstrated thatRSPO3expression was significantly upregulated in the pAd-RSPO3 group (FigS5C), confirming high overexpression efficiency.
ForRSPO3knockdown, siRNA-665 was identified as the most efficient among three candidate siRNAs and was selected for subsequent experiments (FigS5D).
DPCs were infected with pAd-RSPO3 and pAd-NC or transfected with siRNA-665 and siRNA-NC.RSPO3overexpression or knockdown effects on DPCs viability were assessed using CCK-8(Fig.5A), crystal violet staining(Fig.5B), and EdU assays(Fig.5C).
The results showed thatRSPO3overexpression (pAd-RSPO3 group) significantly enhanced DPCs proliferation, whileRSPO3inhibition (siRNA-665 group) markedly reduced DPCs proliferation.
To further confirm the effects ofRSPO3overexpression/interference on cell proliferation, RT-qPCR results showed that the mRNA expression levels of proliferation-related genesCCND1,MKI67,PCNA, andC-MYCwere significantly increased afterRSPO3overexpression, while interference withRSPO3led to the opposite trend (Fig.6A).
Western blot results revealed that the protein expression level of the proliferation-related gene PCNA was also significantly elevated afterRSPO3overexpression and reduced uponRSPO3interference (Fig.6D, G).
These findings further demonstrate thatRSPO3promotes the proliferation of DPCs of Shaanbei white cashmere goat.
To investigate the effect ofRSPO3on the Wnt signaling pathway, RT-qRCR and WB were used to detect the mRNA and protein expression levels of Wnt signaling pathway-related genes.
The results showed that the overexpression ofRSPO3significantly increased the mRNA expression levels of Wnt signaling pathway-related genesLGR4,CTNNB1,TCF4, andWnt5a, while interference withRSPO3resulted in the opposite effect (Fig.6B).
The WB results showed that overexpression ofRSPO3significantly increased the protein expression level of CTNNB1, while interference withRSPO3resulted in the opposite effect (Fig.6D,E), indicating thatRSPO3can promote the expression of genes related to the Wnt signaling pathway.
RT-qPCR results also showed thatRSPO3overexpression significantly increased the expression of the anti-apoptotic geneBCL2, whereas interference withRSPO3resulted in the opposite effect (Fig.6C).
Conversely, the expression levels of pro-apoptotic genesCASP3andCASP9were significantly decreased afterRSPO3overexpression and increased followingRSPO3interference (Fig.6C).
WB results indicated that the protein expression of BCL2 was elevated considerably afterRSPO3overexpression and reduced withRSPO3interference (Fig.6D,F).
The results of cellular immunofluorescence showed that the number of CTNNB1 translocated into the nucleus increased significantly after overexpression ofRSPO3in DPCs, but the opposite results appeared after interference withRSPO3, indicating that RSPO3 can promote CTNNB1 into the nucleus, and then activate the Wnt signaling pathway(Fig.6H).
These findings suggest thatRSPO3inhibits apoptosis in DPCs.
H3K4me3, as a histone modification, is known to influence transcriptional regulation by modulating the activity of proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, thereby promoting abnormal cancer cell proliferation and tumor progression [1,37].
However, the distribution and regulatory mechanisms of H3K4me3 in DPCs remain unexplored.
In this study, we utilized the state-of-the-art CUT&Tag sequencing technology to analyze the genome-wide H3K4me3 modifications in DPCs, thereby creating an epigenetic landscape of this mark.
Previous RNA-seq studies on different embryonic stages of Shaanbei white cashmere goat skin tissues identified 40,639 mRNAs [47].
By integrating CUT&Tag data with RNA-seq, we identified 14,741 H3K4me3-regulated genes, among which 2,163 were upregulated, and 3,266 were downregulated at E90, providing a solid foundation for future research.
DPCs originate from dermal condensate (DC) cells during organogenesis and play a critical role in hair follicle development [4,8,49].
In this study, we employed the small-molecule inhibitors BCL-121 and PBIT to reduce or increase H3K4me3 modification levels, respectively, to evaluate their impact on the biological functions of DPCs.
Recent research demonstrated that changes in H3K4me3 modification levels significantly affect the Wnt signaling pathway in lung adenocarcinoma cells, influencing their proliferation, migration, and invasion [6].
However, its role in normal cells remains unexplored.
In DPCs of Shaanbei white cashmere goats, we observed that increased H3K4me3 levels enhanced the expression of Wnt signaling-related genes, aligning with previous findings in cancer cells.
Due to the joint analysis of CUT&Tag and RNA-seq, it was found thatRSPO3is regulated by H3K4me3 and differentially expressed during the E90 and E120.
At the same time, analysis of the previous scRNA- seq data of the research group [10] revealed thatRPSO3has the highest expression level in DPCs.
Research has shown thatRSPO3can promote cancer cell proliferation [36], which is speculated to have a similar effect in some normal cells.
Therefore, we selectedRSPO3as the target gene of H3K4me3 and studied its role in cashmere goat dermal papilla cells.
By constructing anRSPO3adenovirus overexpression system and using siRNA to overexpress and interfere withRSPO3in DPCs, we explored the function ofRSPO3in these cells.
These results indicated that overexpressingRSPO3significantly promoted the proliferation of Cashmere goat DPCs while interfering withRSPO3had the opposite effect.
RT-qPCR and WB analyses further confirmedRSPO3overexpression inhibited DPCs apoptosis, whileRSPO3knockdown promoted apoptosis.
These findings indicate thatRSPO3facilitates DPCs proliferation and inhibits apoptosis, consistent with its functions observed in other cell types.
The difference in cell proliferation activity between siRNA-NC and pAd-NC was due to the fact that pAd-NC was an adenovirus, which entered the cell by virus infection, while siRNA-NC entered the cell by chemical transfection.
And when siRNA-NC was chemically transfected, some components of the chemical transfection reagents may also affect the proliferation of cells, while pAd-NC group did not use these chemical transfection reagents.
In addition, pAd-NC and siRNA-NC have different ways of action in cells.RSPO3interacts with VEGF, Akt, and Wnt signaling pathways to regulate biological processes such as apoptosis and angiogenesis [3,43].
Among these, its interaction with the Wnt signaling pathway is particularly noteworthy.
RSPO3 binds to the LGR4 receptor to enhance Wnt signaling activity [34].
Previous studies demonstrated that H3K4me3 regulates Wnt pathway-related gene expression in DPCs.
Previous studies have shown that the canonical Wnt signaling pathway and the non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway are competitive with each other [42].
The non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway activated byWnt5aantagonizes the upregulation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway in the early stage of hair follicle development, so that the active β-catenin will not be overexpressed and lead to periodic disorder of hair follicle.
In this experiment, the activation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway byRSPO3triggered the negative feedback regulation of cells, resulting in the upregulation ofWnt5a, but the specific mechanism of its feedback regulation remains to be further studied.
Hence, we hypothesized that H3K4me3 influences cellular functions by modulatingRSPO3transcription, thereby affecting the Wnt signaling pathway.
Subsequent experiments validated this hypothesis (Fig.7).
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.