Anaesthesia‐associated complications are problematic in veterinary practice; acupuncture can facilitate post‐anaesthesia recovery in dogs.
This study aimed to evaluate the effects of theHuiyangjiuzhenacupuncture technique (HAT) on dogs’ recovery from general anaesthesia.
Ten healthy female dogs were induced by tiletamine–zolazepam (5 mg/kg) and dexmedetomidine (5 µg/kg) intramuscularly, followed by orotracheal intubation.
Both control treatment (CT) and acupuncture treatment (AT) groups were connected to a volume‐controlled mechanical ventilator.
For AT, needles were placed on nine acupoints and manually stimulated (T0).
Heart rate (HR), respiratory rate, rectal temperature (RT), peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2), end‐tidal partial pressure of carbon dioxide, and systolic, diastolic and mean arterial blood pressures were recorded every 5 min.
The time of first spontaneous breath (p< 0.05), the presence of swallowing reflex (p< 0.05) and attempt of head‐lifting (p< 0.05) were significantly shorter in the AT group than in the CT group.
The decrease in HR atT10when compared toT0was significant less in the AT group than in the CT group and was significantly higher in the AT group atT25andT30(p< 0.05), as was RT (p< 0.05).
SpO2increased significantly in the AT group atT25(p< 0.05),T30(p< 0.01) and immediately before extubating (p< 0.01) compared to that in the CT group.
The HAT improves recovery from anaesthesia in dogs by shortening the time of regaining spontaneous breath, swallowing reflex, head‐lifting and standing.
It also facilitated normal HR, oxygenation and RT maintenance.
HAT application to improve the quality of recovery is clinically relevant in anaesthetised dogs.
Huiyangjiuzhenacupuncture technique (HAT) significantly improves the quality of recovery in dogs anaesthetised with tiletamine–zolazepam–dexmedetomidine.
Anaesthesia‐associated complications are problematic in clinical veterinary practice.
A previous study has reported that approximately 49.1% and 8.7% of dogs showed anaesthesia‐associated complications during and after general anaesthesia, respectively (Gruenheid et al.2018).
The mortality rate associated with anaesthesia is approximately 1.35% in healthy dogs; however, this rate increases to 4.77% for patients with a higher American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) score (Bille et al.2012).
Anaesthesia is particularly challenging for small animals owing to detrimental complications such as hypoventilation, hypotension, hypothermia and hypoxaemia (Chemonges2014).
Hypoventilation‐induced hypoxemic hypoxia can cause an increase in anaesthesia‐associated mortality during the recovery period in dogs (Brainard et al.2007).
In addition, the laryngeal reflex diminishes when dogs are under general anaesthesia, leading to an increased risk of aspiration pneumonia (Wang et al.2009).
Therefore, allowing dogs to recover from general anaesthesia and regain laryngeal reflex and smooth spontaneous breath is crucial.
Recently, the importance of safe anaesthesia strategies to improve recovery after general anaesthesia has received attention (Hendel and Absalom2018).
Acupuncture, an antiqueness medical treatment from China, is a recognised effective method to facilitate smooth recovery after general anaesthesia.
Several human studies revealed that perioperative acupuncture application not only shows anaesthetics‐sparing effects but also minimises the anaesthesia‐associated complications and preserves tissue perfusion during general anaesthesia (Asmussen et al.2019).
Dry needle acupuncture and electroacupuncture facilitate patients’ recovery from general anaesthesia (Gemma et al.2015).
TheHuiyangjiuzhenacupuncture technique (HAT) has been recognised to have clinical benefits for some emergencies and critical diseases (Tan1999).
According to traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) theory,Huiyangindicates restoringYang, which means maintaining body warmth.Jiuzhenindicates nine acupoints:Ya‐men(GV‐15),Lao‐gong(PC‐8),San‐yin‐jiao(SP‐6),Yong‐quan(KID‐1),Tai‐xi(KID‐3),Zhong‐wan(CV‐12),Huan‐tiao(GB‐30),Zu‐san‐li(ST‐36) andHe‐gu(LI‐4).
HAT was first described inZhēn Jiŭ Jù Yīng (A collection of gems of acupuncture and moxibustion) in the Ming Dynasty (Lu and Xu2018).
Recently, HAT has been successfully applied in human medicine for central nervous system diseases, such as stroke (Wang et al.2019; Kong2021).
The previous research on the effect of HAT suggests that haemorheology can be reduced in dogs under general anaesthesia (Zhang et al.2021).
However, data regarding the clinical effects of HAT on the recovery quality from general anaesthesia in dogs are sparse.
This study aimed to evaluate the clinical effects of HAT on the quality of recovery from general anaesthesia in dogs.
We hypothesised that HAT could improve the quality of recovery from tiletamine–zolazepam–dexmedetomidine (TZ–DEX)‐induced anaesthesia in dogs.
Ten healthy mixed‐breed female dogs (aged 3–5 years, body weight: 5.2 ± 0.6 kg) were used in this study.
Dogs were fed twice daily and housed in clean kennels with free access to fresh water and periodical air ventilation.
In this non‐randomised crossover study, all dogs received the control treatment (CT) followed by the acupuncture treatment (AT), with a 1‐month washout period.
After the washout period, all dogs underwent physical examination and laboratory testing (haemorheology (Zhang et al.2021)) before anaesthesia to confirm their health.
The dogs’ overall ASA status was 1–2, indicating general health and suitability for the study.
This study was a prospective, non‐blinded clinical trial.
All dogs were fasted for 10 h and restricted from water for 2 h before anaesthesia.
Heart rate (HR), respiratory rate (fR) and rectal temperature (RT) were recorded before induction as the baseline to ensure that the dogs were healthy.
After physical examination, all dogs were determined as ASA I. All dogs were administered TZ (5 mg/kg, Virbac Laboratories, Carros, France) and DEX (5 µg/kg, Pfizer H.C.P.
Ltd., Orion Corporation, Finland).
TZ was reconstituted with sterilised water and had a final concentration of 100 mg/mL; 0.05% DEX was used.
The drugs were withdrawn from the vial separately and mixed in one syringe for intramuscular injection into the quadriceps femoris.
Orotracheal intubation was performed after the jaw tone and laryngeal reflex diminished.
All dogs were directly connected to a volume‐controlled mechanical ventilator (WATO EX‐20Vet Shenzhen Mindray Biomedical Electronics Co. Ltd., China) through a rebreathing circuit, with tidal volume calculated based upon body weight from 10 to 20 mL/kg and supplement of 100% oxygen with fresh gas flow at 30 mL/kg/min.
Peak inspiratory pressure was maintained between 10 and 15 cm H2O by adjusting tidal volume accordingly.
A pulse oximetry probe was placed on the tongue, a temperature probe was placed rectally, and electrocardiogram leads (Ipm12 VET, Shenzhen Mindray Biomedical Electronics Co. Ltd., China) were placed on the left front leg, right front leg and left hind leg, with lead II signal detection, for vital signs’ monitoring and recording.
T0(baseline) was defined as after mechanical ventilators and multiparametric monitors were connected to the dogs, which was approximately 10–15 min after TZ–DEX administration.
Vital signs, including HR, RT, peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2),fR, end‐tidal partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PE′CO2), oscillometric systolic arterial blood pressure (SAP), diastolic arterial blood pressure (DAP) and mean arterial blood pressure (MAP), were measured by a multiparametric monitor (Ipm12vet.
Shenzhen Mindray Biomedical Electronics Co. Ltd., China) every 5 min fromT0toT30.
The cuff was attached to the dog's left front leg using a cuff size of approximately 40%–50% of the measured thoracic limb circumference.
The first attempt of head‐lifting was recorded concurrently with vital signs if the time of the first attempt of head‐lifting was overT30.
The duration of recovery was defined as the time fromT0to extubation.
In addition, the times of the first presence of palpebral reflex, spontaneous breath, swallowing reflex, attempt of head‐lifting and attempt of standing were also recorded.
Dogs receiving AT were treated by a well‐trained veterinary acupuncturist with acupuncture on theHuiyangjiuzhenacupoints, which wereYa‐men(GV‐15),Lao‐gong(PC‐8),San‐yin‐jiao(SP‐6),Yong‐quan(KID‐1),Tai‐xi(KID‐3),Zhong‐wan(CV‐12),Huan‐tiao(GB‐30),Zu‐san‐li(ST‐36) andHe‐gu(LI‐4), starting fromT0.
Dry needles were placed intramuscularly based on the anatomic landmarks.
Dry needles were only placed on the right side for GV‐15, PC‐8, SP‐6, KID‐1, KID‐3, CV‐12, GB‐30, ST‐36 and LI‐4.
Needles were manipulated every 5 min by scraping the handle of the needle to reinforce the clinical effects of acupuncture.
Needles were retained on dogs for 30 min.
The names and landmarks of the nine acupoints are listed in Table1(Xie and Preast2007) and Figure1.
Location and techniques of theHuiyangjiuzhenacupoints (Xie 2007).
Names and landmarks of the acupoints used for HAT.
HAT,Huiyangjiuzhenacupuncture technique; HR, heart rate; RT, rectal temperature.
Dogs in both treatments were laterally recumbent on the surgical table for recovery.
The mechanical ventilator was disconnected from the subject after the first spontaneous breath by observing a notch on the capnography.
The dogs were extubated after the first attempt of head‐lifting.
The dogs were moved to the floor after extubation for observation of their first attempt of standing.
The dogs were kept for further study according to the guidelines for laboratory animals of the Animal Care and Use Committee of our institution.
The sample size was determined (http://biomath.info/power/ttest.htm) by comparing a mean and standard deviation recovery time of 80 ± 5 in one group and 50 ± 5 in another group, with 80% power and a 0.05 significance level for the hypothesis test.
This analysis estimated that six animals per group were required.
The data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation.
Data distribution was determined by the Shapiro–Wilk test, and a pairedt‐test detected differences between treatments.
Within‐treatment differences were detected by a repeated measures analysis of variance.
Analyses were performed using SPSS v.20.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
A significant difference was defined whenp< 0.05.
The appearance times of different recovery signs are presented in Table2.
The time of the first presence of spontaneous breath (p< 0.01), swallowing (p< 0.05) and attempt of head‐lifting (p< 0.05) was significantly shorter in the AT group than in the CT group.
However, there was no significant difference between treatments in the first presentation of the palpebral reflex and the time of the first attempt of standing (p> 0.05).
Recovery time (mean ± SD) of generally anesthetised dogs (n= 10) by tiletamine–zolazepam–dexmedetomidine (TZ–DEX) fromT0.
Extremely significantly different from control treatment and acupuncture treatment at the same time point (p< 0.01).
Significantly different from control treatment and acupuncture treatment at the same time point (p< 0.05).
Changes in physiological variables during recovery between the CT and AT groups are shown in Table3.
The HR decreased over time in both groups; however, it decreased significantly atT5compared toT0in the CT group (p< 0.01) but not in the AT group.
Significant differences in HR between treatments were noticed atT25(p< 0.05) andT30(p< 0.01).
Effect ofHuiyangjiuzhenacupuncture technique (HAT) on physiological variables (mean ± SD) in dogs (n= 10) during recovery from general anaesthesia by tiletamine–zolazepam–dexmedetomidine (TZ–DEX).
Abbreviations: AT, acupuncture treatment; CT, control treatment; DAP, diastolic arterial pressure; DEX, dexmedetomidine; HAT,Huiyangjiuzhenacupuncture technique; HR, heart rate; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PE´CO2, end‐tidal partial pressure of carbon dioxide; RT, rectal temperature; SAP, systolic arterial pressure; SpO2, peripheral haemoglobin oxygen saturation; TZ, tiletamine–zolazepam.
Significant difference from timeT0within the same treatment (p< 0.05).
Significant difference from timeT0within the same treatment (p< 0.01).
Significant difference from timeT0within the same treatment (p< 0.001).
Significantly different from control treatment and acupuncture treatment at the same time point (p< 0.05).
The RT in both groups decreased gradually over time.
In the CT group, the RT significantly decreased atT10compared toT0(p< 0.05) and atT30compared toT15(p< 0.01).
In the AT group, the RT began dropping significantly atT25(p< 0.05) and even more so atT30(p< 0.01) relative toT0.
Nonetheless, the RT atT25andT30was significantly higher (p< 0.05) in the AT group than in the CT group.
The SpO2values in the CT group showed a decreasing trend over time, whereas the SpO2in the AT group showed an increasing trend.
Additionally, significant differences between treatments were detected atT25(p< 0.05) andT30(p< 0.01).
The PE′CO2decreased over time in both treatments, albeit not significantly (p> 0.05).
The SAP, DAP and MAP showed a downward trend in both treatments, with no significant differences within or between groups.
Physiological variables during the first attempt of head lifting are shown in Table2.
The HR and RT in the AT group were significantly higher than those in the CT group (p< 0.05 and < 0.01, respectively).
There were no significant differences in SpO2, PE′CO2,fR, SAP, DAP and MAP between treatments at this time point.
This pilot study investigated the effects of HAT on dogs recovering from TZ–DEX‐induced anaesthesia.
The results suggest that HAT improves the quality of recovery compared to CT.
HAT shortened the duration of recovery by reducing the time of the first presence of spontaneous breath, swallowing reflex and the first attempt of head‐lifting.
Furthermore, HAT aided the maintenance of the RT and SpO2during recovery.
Thus, HAT improves anaesthesia recovery compared with no HAT treatment.
The definition of complete recovery remains controversial in anaesthesiology.
Polis et al. (2001) considered that the presence of palpebral and swallowing reflexes could be two indicators of recovery from general anaesthesia for dogs, whereas Zang reported that the first attempt of head‐lifting is the main recovery indicator (Zang2018).
We found that the return of spontaneous breath is an important indicator of recovery for canine patients, especially when the patient is connected to a mechanical ventilator.
Furthermore, the time of the first attempt of standing or walking can indicate the recovery quality following TZ anaesthesia (Chang et al.2021).
Therefore, we used all the aforementioned criteria to assess the recovery quality in this study.
The clinical effects of acupuncture in improving recovery from general anaesthesia are clinically relevant and have been used extensively to facilitate patients’ recovery from anaesthesia.
According to the pathophysiology of TCM, patients lose consciousness under general anaesthesia due toQi(the circulating life force whose existence and properties are the basis of TCM) and blood imbalance or stagnation induced byYinorYangdeficiency (Deng1990).
Therefore, regulating the balance betweenQiand blood is important in maintaining or regaining consciousness.
Most of the acupoints used in this study regulateQiand blood.Ya‐men(GV‐15) has been recognised as the sea ofQiin the TCM theory.
The clinical effects can be enhanced when GV‐15 is used concurrently with stomach meridian (e.g., ST‐36) and conception vessel points (e.g., CV‐12).
The application ofLao‐gong(PC‐8) andSan‐yin‐jiao(SP‐6) facilitates the regulation of blood.
In addition, the Kidney Meridian promotes regaining consciousness (Inchauspe2010).
Therefore, using KID‐1 helps patients regain consciousness.
KID‐1 has been known as a Jing‐well point of the Kidney Meridian, meaning that this acupoint elevatesQiand activates blood effectively (Tseng et al.2015).
Faiz et al. (2019) reported that the use of KID‐1 shortens the duration of recovery in patients after general anaesthesia.
The long‐loop pathway is reportedly the main mechanism of action for acupuncture in improving cardiovascular function and, subsequently, clinical markers.
Although the long‐loop pathway was primarily considered a stimulus at PC‐6 and ST‐36, it might be applied to explain why using other acupoints would have similar neurohumoral effects (Ni and Frishman2018).
The acupoints used in the current study were more likely from the same meridians as those in Ni's study, including stomach, pericardium, governor and Kidney Meridians, which have been used to treat chronic heart failure; therefore, similar clinical effects regarding cardiovascular function improvements could be expected.
The long‐loop pathway, identified by Li et al. (2009), is the main mechanism of action explaining the clinical effects of acupuncture in improving cardiovascular function and analgesia.
The aforementioned pathway could be activated after needle placement to an acupoint and exert clinical effects through the arcuate nucleus, rostral ventrolateral medulla, and ventrolateral periaqueductal grey, thus, stimulating different neurotransmitters for desired clinical effects (Li et al.2009).
Although the long‐loop pathway explains the mechanism of the clinical effects of acupuncture, some clinical parameters, such as cardiac output, remain worthy of further study.
It is well known in TCM that manipulation of needles by different techniques, either manual or electrical, enhances the clinical effects of acupuncture.
In this study, we applied manual stimulation to the needles with a scraping technique to reinforce the clinical effects of HAT.
Manipulation of acupuncture needles is essential for the clinical practice of acupuncture; needle manipulation dynamically alters the extracellular milieu, resulting in rotational deformation of fascia tissue (Langevin et al.2002), and it may affect the physiological and gene expression of fibroblasts (Langevin et al.2015).
Undeniably, the performance of the manipulation technique is subjective and affected by the practitioner's experience.
Therefore, the use of electrical acupuncture is an alternative option for objective and consistent stimulation.
We used manual manipulation in this study because we were trying to simulate the regular general practitioner setting, which may not have an electrical acupuncture device on site.
However, a well‐trained and experienced veterinary acupuncturist placed the needles and performed the manipulation technique to minimise the confounding factors that might have affected the study results.
Further studies are needed to differentiate the effects of different manual manipulations, acupuncturists’ techniques and electrical stimulation when using HAT for recovery from general anaesthesia.
The needles were retained on the right side of the subjects only because of the TCM theory, which emphasised that theQiflow is mainly on the right side and stimulation of the acupoints on the right side could tonifyQiflow better than retaining the needles on the left side (Yao et al.2013).
Nonetheless, the risk of regurgitation could be minimised by reducing the times of reposition when a subject is under general anaesthesia (VISKJER and SJÖSTRÖM2017).
However, the comparisons of the clinical effects of HAT by retaining the needles on both sides or left side need to be further investigated in the future studies.
Monitoring a patient's vital signs is important during general anaesthesia and recovery (Grubb et al.2020).
It has been reported that anaesthesia‐associated risks increase significantly if the patient's ASA status has not been appropriately assessed or the perioperative monitor is inadequate (Matthews et al.2017), which increases anaesthesia‐associated mortality by 5–35 times (Brodbelt2009).
Therefore, we used a multiparametric monitor in this study to carefully monitor vital signs.
Analyses revealed that HAT benefits patients by increasing the HR, RT and oxygenation, indicating that cardiac output and metabolism are enhanced after applying HAT to TZ–DEX‐anaesthetised dogs during recovery.
DEX induces profound vasoconstriction and reflex bradycardia, and any adverse effects can be easily observed during the first 45 min after administration (Martin‐Flores et al.2019).
DEX is anα2adrenergic receptor agonist; the activation of the presynaptic terminal leads to decreased transmission of pain signals, and activation of the postsynaptic terminal inhibits the sympathetic nervous system, elucidating its hypotensive and bradycardic effects (Gertler et al.2001).
However, in the current study, the HR in the AT group decreased more slowly and less than that in the CT group, indicating that HAT exhibits potential benefits in preventing bradycardia.
Although cyclohexylamine derivatives (ketamine) reportedly increase HR by stimulating sympathetic nerves, and its combination with DEX may be contradictory, the combination of DEX and ketamine is used extensively in the veterinary field.
It has been reported that the combination of DEX–ketamine–opioids significantly decreases cardiac output (Barletta et al.2011), and DEX and ketamine act as negative inotropes (Kellihan et al.2015; Sprung et al.1998).
In the present study, we assumed that the cardiac output was compromised after administration of DEX and a more potent dissociative agent (tiletamine) because of the significant decrease in HR and profound vasoconstriction.
Therefore, cardiac output could be preserved by preventing bradycardia or increasing HR after HAT treatment.
The impact of HAT on cardiac output should be assessed in future studies.
Hypoxaemia is a common anaesthesia‐associated complication perioperatively and postoperatively.
Most anaesthetics induce hypoxaemia via different mechanisms of action, such as a decrease in tidal volume, an increase in shunt fraction and induction of hypoventilation (Ehrenfeld et al.2010).
Therefore, monitoring oxygen–haemoglobin saturation and preventing hypoxaemia are important when patients are under general anaesthesia and during recovery.
In the current study, the SpO2values in the AT group increased gradually over time and were significantly higher atT25andT30than those in the CT group, indicating that HAT improves oxygenation.
This finding corroborates that from a previous study by Kristen et al. (2010), which indicated that acupuncture improves the efficacy of ventilation through an increase in parasympathetic tone and a potential decrease in proinflammatory factors.
End‐tidal carbon dioxide has been recognised as a reliable surrogate for arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Razi et al.2012).
We used capnography to assess respiratory indicators and determine the clinical effects of HAT on ventilation.
Furthermore, we connected all dogs to a mechanical ventilator to minimise confounding effects, such as hypoventilation or dependent side pulmonary atelectasis.
However, the results showed no significant changes in PE′CO2over time; therefore, the observed decreasing trend in PE′CO2may be due to hyperventilation from the mechanical ventilator.
Even mild hypothermia (body temperature < 36.7°C) results in adverse reactions when a patient is under general anaesthesia (Pottie et al.2007).
In this study, the RT of dogs decreased over time, which might have been an adverse effect of DEX (Granholm et al.2007).
However, DEX‐induced hypothermia is not always clinically relevant.
The trend of decreased RT was most likely because of loss of thermoregulation in unconscious patients.
It has been reported that autonomic responses are markedly impaired under general anaesthesia, and most anaesthetics increase the warm response and reduce the cold response thresholds, making patients more poikilothermic and decreasing their basal metabolic rate (Bindu et al.2017).
Therefore, maintaining a normal body temperature is essential during anaesthesia and recovery.
We found that the RT decreased more rapidly in the CT group, whereas the RT increased significantly atT25andT30in the AT group compared to that in the CT group.
These findings suggest that HAT delays the decrease in RT and facilitates increased RT during recovery.
According to TCM theory, the property of the heart belongs to fire, which means that the heart can keep the body warm (e.g.,Yang).
The current study demonstrated that HAT could increase HR and body temperature, which corresponds to the findings of a previous study (Ji and Yan2007).
This finding reflects the name of the acupuncture technique,Huiyang(restore warmth), and it explains why the technique could benefit patients requiring emergency medicine.
Nevertheless, further studies are needed to explore the mechanism by which HAT affects the HR and thermoregulation system.
There are several limitations of this study.
First, the study was not designed as a randomised trial because of the acupuncturist's availability during the study period.
Second, the clinical effects of needle manipulation should be compared with an objective needle handling method—electrical acupuncture—which is an ongoing study by our research team.
Third, a validated recovery scale was not used because the clinical observer was the acupuncturist who was not blinded to the treatment groups.
Therefore, the validated scale might not have reflected the real situation of recovery compared to other relatively objective physiological values, such as HR,fRand standing, which were recorded in the current study.
In this pilot study, we found that HAT has its potential to improve the quality of recovery in TZ–DEX‐anaesthetised dogs by shortening the time of regaining spontaneous breath, swallowing reflex, head‐lifting and standing.
Furthermore, HAT might facilitate the maintenance of relatively normal HR, oxygenation, and RT, potentially through long‐loop pathway regulation and increased parasympathetic tone.
Further clinical effects of HAT on cardiac output and ventilation should be investigated in the future.
According to the findings of this pilot study, the application of HAT to improve the quality of recovery is clinically relevant in TZ–DEX‐anaesthetised dogs.