This study aimed to analyze the prognostic and diagnostic value ofLactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA)and solute carrier family 16 member 1 (SLC16A1) in low-grade gliomas (LGG).
Gene expression datasets for LGG were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA), and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases.
The prognostic value ofLDHAandSLC16A1in LGG was analyzed using the survival package.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were drawn to evaluate the ability of the model to distinguish between patients with LGG and controls.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of single gene was utilized to explore the potential biological function of the two genes.
The protein levels ofLDHAandSLC16A1were analyzed using the Human Protein Atlas database.LDHAandSLC16A1expression was verified using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
Finally, the effects of lowSLC16A1expression on the proliferation, migration, and invasion of LGG cells were investigated using CCK-8 and Transwell assays.
LDHAwas downregulated, andSLC16A1was upregulated in LGG tissues compared to normal tissues in TCGA dataset.
Kaplan–Meier (K–M) survival and ROC curves revealed that these two genes have potential prognostic and diagnostic performances.LDHApositively correlated withSLC16A1in TCGA and CGGA cohorts.
GSEA demonstrated thatLDHAis involved in the chemokine and NOD-like receptor signaling pathways, whereasSLC16A1is involved in the JAK-STAT and NOD-like receptor signaling pathways.
Immunohistochemical profiles ofLDHAandSLC16A1were consistent with their mRNA expression levels.
SLC16A1 overexpression and downregulation ofLDHAhave been validated in glioma cell lines.
Additionally, lowSLC16A1expression inhibited the proliferation, migration, and invasion of glioma cells.
LDHAandSLC16A1have potential prognostic and diagnostic values for LGG.
Therefore,SLC16A1may serve as a potential biomarker for the diagnosis and treatment of LGG.
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s12672-025-03297-2.
Gliomas are the most common malignant neural epithelial tumors with high morbidity and recurrence rates.
According to the tumor histopathology, gliomas are divided into four World Health Organization (WHO) grades, ranging from benign grade I tumors to highly malignant grade IV gliomas [1].
Low-grade glioma (LGG), including grades I and II as classified by the WHO, is usually slow-growing, intermittently progressive, and invasive, accounting for approximately 22% of all adult brain tumors [2].
However, recent developments have shown that classification is unnecessary and have led to the term “LGG” to designate both grades II and III gliomas [2,3].
Although epileptic seizures is the most common manifestation in grade II gliomas, some patients with LGG is asymptomatic, which affects patient prognosis [4].
Thus, it is necessary to identify specific biomarkers for the individualized treatment and prognosis of LGG.
In recent years, molecular markers for the diagnosis, prediction, and prognosis of gliomas have been extensively explored.
Ali et al. found that miR-29a, miR-106a, and miR-200a can serve as biomarkers for monitoring therapeutic efficacy of patients with glioblastoma (GBM) [5].
Another study confirmed that patients with GBM with IDH1 mutations and MGMT methylation have better survival patterns, and when the two were used in combination, the treatment effect and survival rate improved [6].
Swellam et al. found that NDRG2 methylation in patients with GBM significantly increased with the deterioration of overall survival and progression-free survival, and that NDRG2 methylation levels can serve as an effective biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis [7].
Metabolic reprogramming is a hallmark of cancer [8,9].
Lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) is a key glycolytic enzyme that converts pyruvate to lactate in the final step of glycolysis [9,10].
Lactate has been suggested to promote the survival, invasiveness, resistance, and activation of oncogenic signaling pathways in cancer cells [11].
Lactate is a hydrophilic and weak acid; thus, its transport across membranes requires transporters belonging to the monocarboxylate transporter (MCT) family [12].
It has been reported that lactate uptake is mediated by MCT1 (encoded bySLC16A1).
MCT1 upregulates the lactic acid exchange [13].
A recent study demonstrated that the growth and proliferation of intestinal and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms and hepatocellular carcinoma subtype tumors mainly rely on lactate dehydrogenases (such asLDHA) andSLC16A1gene expression [14].
However, the roles ofLDHAandSLC16A1in LGG development have not been reported to our best knowledge.
In the present study, we investigated the roles ofLDHAandSLC16A1in LGG.
The expression of these two genes in tumor and normal tissues was investigated.
Furthermore, the prognostic value of these two genes in LGG was evaluated.
We performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) ofLDHAandSLC16A1to investigate the potential mechanisms of the two genes in LGG progression.
The protein levels ofLDHAandSLC16A1were analyzed using the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) database, and the differential expression and function ofLDHAandSLC16A1were validated in glioma cell lines.
Gene expression data for LGG were obtained from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database [15].
Moreover, 105 normal cerebral cortex samples from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) database were used as controls.
According to the clinical information of the LGG samples downloaded simultaneously, disease samples with prognostic information were retained, and 628 samples were obtained, including 523 LGG samples and 105 controls.
Among the 523 LGG samples, 518 had complete survival information and were used for prognostic analyses.
Grade I gliomas are rare, and grade IV gliomas present with superior malignancy.
The TCGA database classifies grades II and III gliomas as LGG [16].
Thus, LGG was defined as a grade II or III glioma in the following investigation.
The inclusion and exclusion criteria are as follows: (1) Samples from patients with grades II and III in TCGA were included, with grades I and IV excluded from the analysis; (2) Standardized patient follow-up data, patients with complete survival information were used for follow-up prognostic analysis; (3) Data sets that include the largest possible sample size; (4) All expression values are log2 logization.
The RNA-seq dataset, including 172 LGG samples, was downloaded from the Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA) database [17], and the survival information of the patients was downloaded to analyze the prognosis ofLDHAandSLC16A1.
Two expression datasets,GSE15824andGSE16011, were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database.GSE15824included 45 samples (five control samples and 40 tumor samples from 26 GBM and 14 LGG), which were sequenced on aGPL570([HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array.
GSE16011contained 284 cases (eight control samples, 117 LGG, and 159 GBM samples), and the sequencing platform used wasGPL8542(Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 array [CDF: Hs133P_Hs_ENTREZG.cdf]).
Owing to the lack of survival information, theGSE15824andGSE16011datasets were only used for expression pattern and diagnostic value analysis ofLDHAandSLC16A1.
The clinicopathological features of the patients were shown in Table1.
Details of the sample size are shown in Table2.
Download the mRNA probe expression matrix file corresponding to each dataset, and download the annotation file corresponding to the sequencing platform.
Converts probes to gene symbol one by one, removing probes that do not match the gene symbol.
For different probes mapped to the same gene, the average value was taken as the expression value of the gene, that is, the gene expression matrix was obtained for subsequent analysis.
The expression levels ofLDHAandSLC16A1in the TCGA + GTEx,GSE15824, andGSE16011cohorts were analyzed.
Differences betweenLDHAandSLC16A1in the tumor vs. normal groups were analyzed using the Wilcoxon test in the R language.
Based on the TCGA-LGG and CGGA-325 datasets, the tumor samples were classified into high- and low-expression groups according to the median values ofLDHAandSLC16A1gene expression [18,19].
Kaplan–Meier (K–M) survival analysis was conducted using survival 2.41-1 [20] to analyze the relationship between gene expression and LGG patient survival.
The combined effects ofLDHAandSLC16A1on LGG cell survival of LGGs was also investigated.
To analyze the diagnostic value ofLDHAandSLC16A1in LGG, ROC curves were plotted for the TCGA-LGG,GSE15824-LGG, andGSE16011-LGG cohorts using the R package pROC 1.18.0 [21].
The area under the ROC curve (AUC) was calculated to evaluate the ability of the model to distinguish between patients with LGG and controls.
The AUC is between 0 and 1, and the greater the AUC value (the closer it is to 1), the better are the diagnostic results.
To explore the correlation betweenLDHAandSLC16A1in LGG, Spearman’s correlation analysis was employed based on TCGA and CGGA datasets using R software.
With MSigDB v7.1 [22] database c2.cp.kegg.v7.4.
symbols.gmt as the enrichment background, the expression profile of TCGA-LGG patients was analyzed using GSEA.
The significant Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways enriched byLDHAandSLC16A1were analyzed, and pathways withP< 0.05 were presented.
The HPA database is a collection of protein expression in 48 human normal tissues, 20 tumor tissues, and 64 cell lines through immunoassays [23].
Immunochemistry images ofLDHAandSLC16A1in the normal cerebral cortex and glioma tissues were retrieved from the HPA online database.
Normal human glial cells were purchased from Shanghai Cell Bank of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China).
The LGG cell lines of SW1088 and HS683 cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, USA).
Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) and maintained at 37 °C under 5% CO2.SLC16A1small interference RNA (si - SLC16A1) and the negative control (si - NC) sequence (Gemma, Shanghai) was as follows: si-SLC16A1:5’- GAGGAAGAGACCAGTATAGATGTTGCTGG-3; si-NC: 5’- CCGCCCTTTTTTGGGCCTAAAACCCCTGAATAGTCCG − 3.
’ si-SLC16A1 and si-NC were transfected into LGG cells lines by Lipofectamin3000 and continued cultured for 48 h.
Real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was used to validate the relative mRNA levels ofLDHAandSLC16A1.Total RNA was extracted using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, USA).
cDNA was generated using MMLV reverse transcriptase (Promega, USA).
RT-qPCR was performed using a LightCycler 480II qRT-PCR instrument (Roche, Switzerland).
The sequences of primer pairs:LDHA: F: 5′-CTCCTGTGCAAAATGG-CAAC-3′, R: 5′-CCTAGAGCTCACTAGT-CACAG-3′;SLC16A1: F: 5′-CCATTGTGGAATGCGTCCT-3’, R: 5′-CCTACTTCTTTCCCCCATCC-3′.
Actin was used as an internal reference.
The relative expression of each gene was quantitatively analyzed using the ΔΔCtmethod.
Glioma cells in the logarithmic growth phase were selected and seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 4 × 103cells/well.
Three wells were used for each group.
After cultivation, 10-µL CCK-8 solution was added to each well and continue incubating for 4 h, and the absorbance (A) value at 450 nm was detected on the microplate reader (Thermo Fisher, USA).
Uniform Matrigel (BD, USA) was added to the upper layer of the basement membrane of the Transwell chamber (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), and 100-µL cell suspension was spread to the upper chamber of the Transwell (5 × 104cells/chamber).
A total of 600 µL of medium containing 10% FBS was aspirated and added to the lower Transwell chamber.
After 24 h of cell culture, the chambers were removed and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min, followed by crystal violet staining (Beyotime, Hangzhou, China) for 30 min.
Migration results were observed under a microscope.
For the invasion experiment, the BD Matrigel™ Matrix was frozen thawed and diluted with serum-free medium at a ratio of 1:2 and then coated onto the bottom membrane of the chamber and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. After rinsing with serum-free medium, 70 µL of serum-free medium was added and incubated at 37℃ for 30 min, and the remaining experimental procedures were similar to the migration assay.
48 h after transfection, cells were collected and lysed with RIPA cell lysate to extract total cell protein.
The protein concentration was determined by BCA method, then 30 µg protein per well was deposited on PVDF membrane by electrophoresis, and enclosed in 5% skim milk at room temperature for 1 h. Mouse anti-human SLC16A1 monoclonal antibody diluted at 1:500 and mouse anti-human GAPDH monoclonal antibody diluted at 1:1000 were added (as internal reference), respectively, and the reaction was overnight at 4 ℃.
After TBST rinsing, secondary antibody (1:2000) was added and reacted at 37 ℃ for 1.5 h. And finally visualized using an enhanced chemiluminescence system (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA).
Data analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism Software and R packages.
The list of R packages implemented in this study is shown in Table3.
Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation, and statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t-test.
Differences were considered statistically significant atP< 0.05.
The expression levels ofLDHAandSLC16A1in LGG and control samples were extracted from TCGA and GTEx expression profile datasets, and the expression differences ofLDHAandSLC16A1in the tumor vs. normal groups were analyzed by R Wilcoxon test according to grading.
Based on the TCGA dataset,LDHAwas significantly downregulated andSLC16A1was significantly up-regulated in the LGG (grade II and grade III) groups compared to the normal controls (P< 0.001, Fig.1A and B).
The expression levels ofLDHAandSLC16A1inGSE15824andGSE16011of all tumor samples (grades I–IV) were also extracted.
The expression ofLDHAandSLC16A1in all grade tumor samples (grades I to IV) in theGSE15824dataset was not significantly different from that in the control group (P> 0.05, Fig.1C and D), and the expression ofLDHAin grade I to grade IV in theGSE16011dataset was significantly lower than that in the control group (allP< 0.05, Fig.1E).SLC16A1was not annotated based on theGPL8542platform, and its expression profile ofSLC16A1was obtained from theGSE16011dataset.
Furthermore, we analyzed the expression profiles ofLDHAandSLC16A1in LGG samples from theGSE15824(14 LGG and 5 control) andGSE16011(117 LGG and 8 control) datasets.LDHAexpression in LGG was relatively low in theGSE15824(P> 0.05, Fig.1F) andGSE16011datasets (P< 0.05, Fig.1G), which was consistent with the results of theLDHAexpression trend based on the TCGA dataset.
However, there was no significant change in the expression ofSLC16A1in theGSE15824dataset (P> 0.05, Fig.1F).
We observed diverseLDHAexpression in LGG, possibly due to the heterogeneity of the tumor samples and differences in tumor purity‌.
In this study, we also analyzed the IDH status of the patients, as shown in Fig.2A.
It can be seen that the mutation frequency of IDH accounts for 77%.
In addition, we also analyzed the correlation between the expression of LDHA and SLC16A1 and clinical features such as age, gender, primary diagnosis, and race demographic.
The results showed that the expression of LDHA and SLC16A1 was significantly correlated with primary diagnosis, but not with other clinical features (Fig.2B-J).
The correlation betweenLDHA/SLC16A1expression and prognosis was analyzed using survival analysis in TCGA and CGGA datasets.
K–M survival curves demonstrated that high expression ofLDHAandSLC16A1was significantly correlated with poor outcomes of LGG patients in TCGA cohort (n= 518,P< 0.001, Fig.3A and B).
We observed similar results in the CGGA cohort, where high expression ofLDHAandSLC16A1was significantly associated with poor outcomes in patients with LGG (n= 172,P< 0.001, Fig.3C and D).
Furthermore, the prognostic value of the combination ofLDHAandSLC16A1was analyzed.
As depicted in Fig.3E and F, patients with high expression ofLDHAandSLC16Acorrelated with worse prognosis, while those with lowLDHAandSLC16Aexpression displayed the best outcomes compared with the other groups (allP< 0.001).
To further illustrate the diagnostic value ofLDHA/SLC16A1in LGG, ROC curves were established.
As shown in Supplemental Fig. 1A, in the TCGA-LGG, the AUC values of the two genes were > 0.65, indicating thatLDHAandSLC16A1have potential diagnostic value in LGG.
Moreover, LGG samples from theGSE15824andGSE16011datasets were collected for ROC analysis.
The results showed that the AUC values were 0.686 forLDHAand 0.629 forSLC16A1in theGSE15824LGG cohort and 0.751 forLDHAin theGSE16011LGG cohort (Supplemental Fig. 1B and C).
This suggests that these two genes have better diagnostic value for LGG.
In the TCGA cohort,LDHAexpression was positively correlated withSLC16A1expression (R= 0.34,P< 0.05).
Similarly,LDHAexpression positively correlated withSLC16A1expression in the CGGA dataset (R= 0.33,P< 0.05) (Fig.4A and B).
Furthermore, the GSEA algorithm was used to identify the differential regulatory pathways between the high- and low-expression groups ofLDHAandSLC16A1based on the TCGA dataset.
The pathways closely related to the high-expression groups were considered activated pathways.
The top five pathways ranked by enrichment score are revealed in Fig.4C and D, and the top10 pathways ranked byP-value are presented in Fig.4E and F. For both genes, allograft rejection, autoimmune thyroid disease, asthma, systemic lupus erythematosus, and graft-versus-host disease were activated in the high-expression groups.
In the ridge maps,LDHAwas closely related to the chemokine and NOD-like receptor signaling pathways.SLC16A1is involved in JAK-STAT and NOD-like receptor signaling pathways.
The immunohistochemical images ofLDHAandSLC16A1in normal cerebral cortical and glioma tissues were retrieved from the HPA database.
As shown in Fig.5, the protein level ofLDHAwas relatively low andSLC16A1was higher in tumor tissues than in controls.
The patient’s organizational characteristics are shown in Table4.
The expressions ofLDHAandSLC16A1were validated in LGG cell lines.
As illustrated in Fig.6A,LDHAwas aberrantly de-expressed andSLC16A1was significantly upregulated in LGG cells, which was consistent with the results of the bioinformatics analysis.SLC16A1was selected for subsequent experiments.
si-SLC16A1 was transfected into SW1088 and HS683 cells, and the mRNA and protein expression levels ofSLC16A1in SW1088 and HS683 cells were significantly reduced (Fig.6B and C), indicating successful transfection of si-SLC16A1.
Proliferation analysis of CCK-8 demonstrated that the proliferative capacity of SW1088 and HS683 cells was reduced after transfection with si-SLC16A1 (Fig.7A and B).
Moreover, Transwell analysis revealed that low expression ofSLC16A1inhibited the migration and invasion abilities of SW1088 and HS683 cells compared to the negative control group (Fig.7C and D).
Lactate secreted by tumors, produced from aerobic glycolysis in cancer cells, is associated with an elevated incidence of metastasis, angiogenesis, and metabolic reprogramming in adjacent tissues.LDHAplays a critical role in human cancers owing to its role in promoting glycolysis and converting pyruvate to lactate [24].
Lactate transport across the membrane requires MCT1.
Thus, the contribution ofLDHAandMCT1(SLC16A1) to tumor progression deserves attention.
In this study, by downloading glioma-related datasets from TCGA, CGGA, and GEO, we analyzed the expression, prognosis, and diagnostic values ofLDHAandSLC16A1in LGG cohorts.
The results showed thatLDHAwas downregulated andSLC16A1was upregulated in LGG tumor tissues compared to normal tissues in TCGA dataset.
The protein expression ofLDHAandSLC16A1based on the HPA database was consistent with the mRNA expression levels.
QRT-PCR also showed a similar trend.
Furthermore, lowSLC16A1expression inhibited the proliferation, migration, and invasion of SW1088 and HS683 cells.
K–M survival curves revealed that high expression ofLDHAandSLC16A1predicted poor prognosis in patients with LGG.
ROC curve showed that the two genes exerted potential diagnostic value.
GSEA revealed thatLDHAis involved in the chemokine and NOD-like receptor signaling pathways, whereasSLC16A1is involved in the NOD-like receptor and JAK-STAT signaling pathways.
Lactate is the final metabolite of highly proliferative tumors, including GBM, which can be transported to the tumor microenvironment and mediate the survival of tumor cells via MCTs, members of the SLC16 family [25].
MCT1 encoded bySLC16A1exerts functions in L-lactate transport to maintain energy balance [26].
In tumor cells,SLC16A1is highly expressed during the transport of L-lactate derived from glycolysis.
MCTs and L-lactate accumulate and contribute to tumor development and progression [27].
MCT1 is overexpressed in GBM and has been suggested as a potential therapeutic target.
In the present study,SLC16A1was upregulated in LGG.
Although little is known regarding the role of MCT1 in LGG, we infer thatSLC16A1upregulation plays a key role in the LGG development and progression.
Furthermore, suppressingLDHAexpression leads to diminished glycolysis, cell growth, and invasion, while increasing apoptosis [28].
As reported in an study in vivo, inhibition of MCT function considerably reduced glioma invasion [25].
Interestingly, in the present study,LDHAencoding lactate dehydrogenase A was downregulated in LGG tumor tissues, which may cause less lactate accumulation, leading to reduced growth and invasion of LGG, despite the MCT1 (SLC16A1) upregulation.
Recently, enzymes associated with catabolism have emerged as prognostic biomarkers of tumors.
Zhang et al. found that the cyclin-dependent kinase regulatory subunit 2 is highly expressed in various malignancies and is an independent prognostic factor in HCC [29].
Flap endonuclease 1 is overexpressed in HCC and has been implicated in the progression and metastasis of tumor cells [30].
Overall,LDHAandSLC16A1are potential targets for LGG therapy.
We also explored the prognostic and diagnostic value ofLDHAandSLC16A1in patients with LGG.
The high expression ofLDHAandSLC16A1indicated poor prognosis in LGG, which is in accordance with previous studies [31–34].
For instance, Girgis et al. [31] reported thatLDHAis a potential prognostic biomarker of clear cell renal cell carcinoma, and the upregulation ofLDHAindicates poor prognosis.
A recent study by Dong et al. [32] also demonstrated that high expression levels ofLDHAare implicated in the poor differentiation of pancreatic adenocarcinoma, leading to poor survival outcomes.
Zhang et al. [33] indicated that high expression ofSLC16A1predicts poor prognosis in urological cancers.
A recent study revealed that the mRNA level ofSLC16A1was significantly increased in high-grade gliomas compared to LGG and non-tumor controls, suggesting thatSLC16A1expression is positively correlated with WHO pathological grading and poor survival of gliomas [34].
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate the diagnostic and prognostic value ofLDHAandSLC16A1in LGG.
To explore the potential mechanisms of these two genes, we conducted GSEA.LDHAis involved in chemokine and NOD-like receptor signaling pathways, whereasSLC16A1is involved in JAK-STAT and NOD-like receptor signaling pathways.
The chemokine system controls almost all types of leukocyte trafficking in the immune system.
Chemokines and their receptors are upregulated in numerous human cancers, including gliomas [35,36].
A pan-cancer analysis by Neapolitan et al. [37] reported that the chemokine signaling pathway is notable in LGG.
The JAK-STAT signaling pathway is the response of the cell membrane to extracellular growth factors and cytokines that transmit signals from the cell membrane to the nucleus.
Activation of this pathway is effective in predicting the clinical prognosis of glioma [38].
Interestingly, bothLDHAandSLC16A1are involved in the NOD-like receptor signaling pathway.
NOD-like receptors are essential for sensing pathogens and risk-associated molecular patterns.
NLR signaling dysregulation is critical for the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative and autoimmune diseases and cancers [39].
Notably, NOD-like receptors play a key regulatory role in angiogenesis [40], which is associated with the pathogenesis of gliomas [39].
Glioma growth is closely associated with the brain vascular structure.
Once the diameter of the primary tumor reaches 1–2 mm, the cerebrovascular system is destroyed.
Thus, tumor growth and invasion in gliomas are marked by angiogenesis [41].
Nevertheless, the exact mechanisms underlying angiogenesis and the expression of these two genes require further investigation.
Altogether, we speculate thatLDHAandSLC16A1may be implicated in LGG pathogenesis via the signaling pathways described above.
Overall, this study suggests thatSLC16A1has a potential prognostic and diagnostic value for LGG.
This study also shows that low expression ofSLC16A1inhibits the biological processes of SW1088 and HS683 cells and can be used as a potential diagnostic and therapeutic target for LGG.
The current study used advanced analytical methods and molecular techniques (bioinformatic analysis combined with experimental validation) to identify new targets for the diagnosis and prognosis of LGG, laying the foundation for the development of personalized treatment for patients.
In summary, our study suggests thatLDHAis abnormally downregulated, andSLC16A1is upregulated in LGG.
Furthermore, these two genes have potential prognostic and diagnostic values for LGG.
Importantly, lowSLC16A1expression inhibited the proliferation, migration, and invasion of SW1088 and HS683 cells.SLC16A1may serve as a potential diagnostic and therapeutic target for LGG.
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.