A noninvasive method to estimate oxygenation and oxygen (O2) consumption rates in mouse brain tissue based on T1‐weighted tissue oxygen level‐dependent (TOLD) MRI was developed.
The aim of the present study was to estimate the kinetics of O2in tissue in order to facilitate the planning of radiation therapy.
The relationship between the proton T1relaxation rate and O2concentrations was examined in water and corn oil samples, which are models of the aqueous and lipidic phases of cell components.
T1maps of the mouse brain were obtained under breathing high oxygen concentration gas, carbogen (95% O2+ 5% CO2), or 100% O2, and shifts in the concentration of O2from the physiological state in the brain were then estimated.
Pseudo‐TOLD signals in blood samples, hemoglobin, and myoglobin aqueous solutions under oxygenation were measured to examine the effects of heme iron on T1.
O2metabolism in mouse brains was evaluated by the enhancement/diminishment rates of the TOLD signal when the breathing gas was switched from air to carbogen or 100% O2and when it was switched back to air.
Carbogen or 100% O2inhalation increased cortical O2levels by 0.28 or 0.26 mmol/L, respectively.
By analyzing the time course profile of the TOLD signal, the oxygenation rate, oxygenation level, and O2consumption rate were successfully estimated.
TOLD MRI has potential as a useful tool to estimate the quantitative indices of oxygenation and O2consumption rates in brain tissue.
The oxygenation rate,kox, and the O2consumption rate,koc, in the mouse brain parenchyma were estimated based on the increasing and decreasing phases of the tissue oxygen level dependent (TOLD) signal, which is oxygen‐induced enhancement of the T1‐weighted signal in the tissue.
An insufficient oxygen (O2) supply due to an immature vascular structure in tumor tissue induces tissue hypoxia [1,2].
Hypoxia shifts energy production in the cell from the TCA cycle to glycolysis [3].
Glycolysis results in lactate accumulation and causes a low pH environment [4].
Hypoxia may lead to treatment resistance and modify the redox status of tumor tissue [5].
Therefore, the quantitative detection of the partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) and evaluations of hypoxia in tumor tissues are important for planning cancer radiotherapy [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14].
Accurate and high‐resolution mapping techniques for hypoxia, pO2, and/or O2kinetics in tumor tissues may facilitate the success of treatment.
Positron emission tomography (PET) with molecular probes has been developed to detect tumor hypoxia [6,8,14].
However, the ability of PET techniques to map hypoxic regions in tumors based on the specific chemical binding reaction of the probe under low O2conditions is limited, and background signal contamination is unavoidable due to the pharmacokinetics of the contrast agent.
Although quantitative O2‐mapping methods based on electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) have been developed [7,8,9,10] and used on small animals, difficulties are associated with their application to humans due to weak signal intensity as a result of a low radio frequency (RF) with a larger resonator [15].
In contrast, MRI has high spatial resolution and provides three‐dimensional images of deep regions in humans.
Blood O2level‐dependent (BOLD) MRI has been utilized to investigate tissue O2requirements, particularly in brain functions.
The BOLD signal is the response of a T2*‐weighted signal induced by a population shift from paramagnetic deoxyhemoglobin (deoxy‐Hb) to diamagnetic oxyhemoglobin (oxy‐Hb), which decreases magnetic susceptibility and extends T2* [16,17].
Although O2kinetic parameters have been analyzed using T2*‐based BOLD MRI [18,19], BOLD signal intensity is less quantitative for pO2because it depends not only on tissue pO2but also on blood volume.
On the other hand, O2is a stable free radical species with two unpaired electrons that enhance T1‐weighted MRI contrast [19,20,21,22,23] and is less dependent on blood volume.
Molecular O2may enhance the spin–lattice relaxation rate similar to other paramagnetic contrast agents, such as gadolinium compounds [24].
Therefore, T1‐based tissue O2level‐dependent (TOLD) MRI detects direct responses in tissue pO2and is an important quantitative parameter [20].
Tissue T1shortening and T1‐weighted signal enhancement induced by breathing hyperoxic gas have been demonstrated in both animals and human volunteers.
Beeman et al. [25] reported a linear relationship between R1values and pO2in the brains of mice breathing gas containing a specific concentration of O2.
Winters et al. [26] showed T1shortening in normal abdominal tissues, including the liver, kidney, and paraspinal muscle, of rabbits breathing 100% O2, whereas T1extension was observed under breathing 10% CO2in air as well as carbogen (10% CO2+ 90% O2).
O'Connor et al. [27] examined the abdominal organs of healthy human volunteers at 1.5 T and found a positive shift in the T1‐weighted signal in the spleen, liver, paraspinal muscle, and renal cortex under breathing 100% O2.
The switching of gas from 100% O2to carbogen resulted in an additional signal increase in the liver, but not in the paraspinal muscle or renal cortex, and a slight decrease in the spleen [27].
Tadamura et al. [28] also detected T1‐weighted signal enhancement in the spleen and myocardium under breathing 100% O2in healthy human volunteers.
Furthermore, Jones et al. [29] reported positive T1‐weighted signal enhancement in the renal cortex of human volunteers under breathing 100% O2.
The use of TOLD in the planning of radiation therapy and controlling tumor/cancer is already several years in development.
Salem et al. [30] proposed that the oxygen refractory volume of lung tumor tissue under a 100% O2challenge in animals and/or human patients measured by mapping R1changes from that under breathing air has potential as a marker of hypoxic volume.
McCabe et al. [31] similarly estimated hypoxic fractions in the oropharyngeal tumors of patients by mapping the insensitive tissue volume of T1shortening caused by an O2challenge.
Dubec et al. [32] also evaluated tumor hypoxia in patients with oropharyngeal tumors and found that radiation therapy modified hypoxic volume.
Arai et al. employed oxygen‐sensitive MRI to differentiate radiation‐responsive from nonresponsive tumor areas based on tumor hypoxia and to predict tumor control.
Squamous cell carcinoma tumor tissue planted in the mouse hind leg showed a positive TOLD signal under high concentration O2breathing [20].
The amplitude of the positive TOLD signal, that is, the enhancement of the T1‐weighted signal, is associated with an increase in the concentration of O2in the target tissue.
However, in normal healthy muscle tissue, a negative shift in the TOLD signal, that is, the attenuation of the T1‐weighted signal, under high concentration O2breathing has been observed.
A negative TOLD signal makes the evaluation of pO2variations in muscle tissue challenging.
The incidence of the negative TOLD signal may be dependent on the tissue/organ.
Although the T1value observed in normal muscle tissue was stable or slightly extended under high concentration O2breathing [20,34], it remains unclear whether the negative TOLD signal in normal muscle tissue reflects variations in the concentration of O2in the tissue.
A population shift from paramagnetic to diamagnetic heme iron may also extend the T1value in muscle under O2breathing because muscle is rich in myoglobin (Mb).
Therefore, an O2‐induced positive TOLD signal may be observed in tissue containing low heme iron, such as the brain.
Effective oxygenation procedures that cancel hypoxia and enhance the effects of radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy in tumor tissues have been investigated.
Breathing carbogen or 100% O2represents an effective approach to increase tissue oxygenation [20,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34].
The T1‐based oxygenation responses of some tissues/organs do not always depend on the O2concentration in the breathing gas [20,26,34].
To select better oxygenation treatments for the brain, the oxygenation ability of carbogen and 100% O2was compared.
In the present study, a method was developed to evaluate O2metabolism, that is, oxygenation and O2consumption, in brain tissue.
Linearity between dissolved O2concentrations and the O2‐induced positive TOLD signal in the sample was confirmed.
The mechanisms underlying the negative shift in the TOLD MRI signal in muscle under O2breathing were then elucidated.
To establish whether the TOLD signal observed in brain tissue was positive and dependent on O2, the relationship between the shift in the T1‐weighted signal and changes in the T1value in the mouse brain induced by switching the breathing gas from air to high concentration O2was investigated.
A kinetic analysis of the increasing/decreasing phase of the TOLD signal induced by switching the breathing gas of mice was performed.
To assess pO2shifts in the brain, the volume ratio of water and lipid components in tissue was estimated in vitro.
A shift in the T1relaxation rate (R1), that is,ΔR1, in a sample induced by increasing/decreasing pO2is converted to a shift in pO2based on the T1relaxivity (r1) of O2.
In in vivo experiments, the tissue T1relaxation time (T1EXP) in a pixel/voxel comprises several different relaxation components (Equation1).
In mammalian cells, 70%–80% of cell components are water, while 30%–50% of residual cell components other than water are lipids.
Therefore, the T1value in tissue (T1T) is assumed to mainly comprise aqueous (T1A) and lipidic (T1L) components.
By using T1values in water and corn oil as T1Aand T1L, respectively, the ratio of aqueous and lipidic components in the mouse brain is roughly predicted (Equations2and3).
where VAand VLare the ratios of aqueous and lipidic volumes, respectively.
When r1of O2in water (r1A) and corn oil (r1L) is used as the estimation of r1in the aqueous and lipidic phases in tissue, a shift in pO2(ΔO2) in tissue may be expected as Equation (4) based on experimentally observed tissueΔR1.
Brain tissue oxygenation and O2consumption rates may be estimated by the time course of the tissue T1‐weighted signal enhancement induced by O2, that is, the TOLD signal, with the assumption that the TOLD signal in brain tissue is linearly related to pO2.
In the present study, the oxygenation rate,kox, the maximum level of the TOLD signal, Smax, and the O2consumption rate,koc, were proposed as indices for O2metabolism.
An exponential function (Equation5) is fitted on the increasing phase of the TOLD signal, and the parameters Toxand Smaxare estimated.
where Smaxis the maximum level of the T1‐weighted signal, and Toxis the time required to increase the TOLD signal to 63.2% of Smax.
The reciprocal of Tox, that is,kox= 1/Tox, estimates the increment rate of the TOLD signal, that is, the oxygenation rate.kocmay be estimated from the slope of the semi‐logarithmic plot of the decreasing phase of the TOLD signal.
Carbogen gas (a mixture of 95% O2and 5% CO2) was purchased from Tomoe Shokai Co. Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan).
Hemoglobin (Hb) and Mb were purchased from Sigma‐Aldrich Co. (St.
Louis, MO).
Lithium phthalocyanine (LiPc) crystals were synthesized according to a previously reported method [35].
Other chemicals were of analytical grade.
Seven‐week‐old female C3H/HeSlc mice were supplied by Japan SLC Inc. (Shizuoka, Japan).
Animals were housed five per aluminum cage with a woodchip bed in climate‐controlled (23 ± 1°C and 55 ± 5% humidity) circadian rhythm‐adjusted (12‐h light–dark cycle) rooms and were allowed food and waterad libitum.
Mice were used in experiments after habituation for 1 week.
The total number of mice used was 12, with a mean body weight of 19.9 ± 0.58 g. Experiments (No. 22‐1010) were performed in compliance with the Guidelines for Animal Care and Use at the National Institute of Radiological Sciences and the National Institutes for Quantum Science and Technology (NIRS/QST) and were approved by the Animal Use Committee of the NIRS/QST.
Detailed information on animal handling and experiments was provided according to the ARRIVE guidelines [36].
Eight‐week‐old mice were anesthetized by 1.5%–2.0% isoflurane using air as the carrier gas.
Blood was collected from the abdominal artery 1 day before the experiment.
A portion of blood was centrifuged at 1000×gfor 10 min to obtain plasma and red blood cell (RBC) fractions.
Whole blood and fractions were kept on ice until MRI experiments.
O2solubility in corn oil used in the present study was assessed by EPR oximetry.
LiPc is a crystalized solid paramagnetic species, the EPR linewidth of which is broadened by a spin–spin interaction with O2[35,37].
LiPc crystals were placed into a 24‐cm piece of gas‐permeable polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tubing (i.d.
: 0.81 ± 0.025 mm, wall thickness: 0.051 ± 0.013 mm).
PTFE tubing was purchased from ZEUS (Orangeburg, SC).
An ~80‐μL aliquot of milli‐Q water or corn oil was carefully drawn into PTFE tubing, and LiPc crystals were immersed in the liquid inside.
The PTFE tubing was placed in a special quartz sample holder (FigureS1).
The gas line was connected to the bottom of the sample holder, which had a hole for gas flow.
The sample holder was set in the X‐band (9.4 GHz) EPR TE‐mode cavity, and the position of LiPc crystals was adjusted to the center of the sensitive region of the cavity.
The EPR cavity including the sample was warmed to ~30°C using an IR lamp and hot air flow.
The EPR linewidth of LiPc was measured under N2, air, or 100% O2gas flow (1 L/min).
EPR data acquisition was performed using an X‐band EPR spectrometer (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan), which was controlled by the WIN‐RAD ESR Data Analyzer System (Radical Research Inc., Hino, Tokyo).
The singlet EPR spectrum of LiPc was scanned under the following conditions: microwave frequency, 9.45 GHz; microwave power, 1 mW; center magnetic field, 337.3 mT; field sweep width, ±0.25 mT; field sweep resolution, 4096 points; sweep time, 1 min; time constant, 0.01 s; field modulation frequency, 100 kHz; field modulation width, 0.0063 mT.
The EPR spectra acquired were analyzed using an in‐house line‐fitting program [38], and the mixed Gaussian/Lorentzian line shape was fit with the best suited mixing rate.
The linewidth of the line shape was measured.
As a simple model of T1components in the aqueous and lipidic phases of a cell, the T1relaxivity of O2was estimated in water and corn oil.
Linoleic acid‐rich corn oil was selected as a model environment of the lipidic phase.
The T1‐weighted signal enhancements induced were dependent on O2concentrations in these solvents (pseudo‐TOLD signal).
An ~80‐μL aliquot of milli‐Q water was drawn into a 24‐cm piece of PTFE tubing, which was folded at the center to hold the water inside.
PTFE tubing was placed in a quartz tube (i.d.
= 3.6 mm), which was connected to the gas line at one end.
The quartz tube was set in the 7 T MRI scanner.
The sample temperature during the scan was maintained at ~30°C using hot air flow.
Figure shows a schematic of the experimental setting.
A T1map of a cross‐section of the phantom was measured under nitrogen (N2), air, carbogen, or 100% O2gas flow (400 mL/min) conditions.
T1‐weighted images of the phantom were repeatedly scanned for 21 min, during which air was flowed for the initial 5 min, and the gas was then switched to carbogen, 100% O2, or N2for the remaining 16 min.
The same experiment was repeated using corn oil, 5 mM Hb aqueous solution, or 5 mM Mb aqueous solution instead of milli‐Q water.
Using mouse whole blood, blood plasma, and the RBC fraction, the pseudo‐TOLD signal induced by switching gas from N2to air was observed.
Instrument details and scanning parameters are described below.
To confirm the quantitative estimations of oxygenation and O2consumption in brain tissue, changes in T1relaxation rates (R1= 1/T1) and T1‐weighted signal enhancements in the brain tissue of mice breathing gas with a high O2concentration as the carrier of anesthesia were measured.
The settings of mice, instrument details, and scanning parameters are described below.
The left panel in FigureS3shows a flow diagram of this experiment.
A T1map was generated under air breathing.
T1‐weighted images of the corresponding mouse head region were repeatedly scanned, during which the mouse inhaled air for the initial 5 min and carbogen for the next 16 min.
A T1map was then generated under carbogen breathing.
The breathing gas was subsequently switched back to air, and after a 5‐min interval, a T1map was obtained under air breathing.
Repeated T1‐weighted scanning was started, during which mice breathed air for 5 min and then 100% O2for the next 16 min.
A T1map was obtained under 100% O2breathing.
The settings of mice, instrument details, and scanning parameters are described below.
To examine oxygenation and O2consumption in the mouse brain, carbogen‐induced TOLD scanning was performed on mice.
A mouse was set on the MRI scanner, and repeated T1‐weighted scanning was initiated under air breathing.
The mouse breathed air for the initial 5 min followed by carbogen for the next 5 min.
The carrier gas was then switched back to air for the last 5 min.
The settings of mice, instrument details, and scanning parameters are described below.
An experimental flow diagram is shown in the right panel of FigureS3.
A mouse was anesthetized by 1.5%–2.0% isoflurane using air as the carrier gas.
The mouse was placed in the prone position on a custom‐built body cradle and immobilized using adhesive tape.
The respiration rate was monitored using a respiration sensor (MP150, Biopac System Inc., Goleta, CA, USA) and regulated at 60–80 breaths per minute.
Body temperature was monitored with a rectal probe (FOT‐L‐SD‐CI‐FI‐MI‐R2‐ST, FISO Technologies Inc., Germany) and regulated at 36.0 ± 2.0°C using a water‐circulating pad and warm air circulation system.
MRI data were acquired using a horizontal 7.0‐T MRI system (BioSpec 70/20 USR, Bruker Biospin, Ettlingen, Germany) with a cryogenic RF coil (cryo‐probe, Bruker Biospin) for transmission and reception in MRI.
All MRI data were acquired and reconstructed using ParaVision software (Ver.
7, Bruker Biospin).
Following standard adjustment routines, scout scans were used for accurate positioning inside the magnet.
T1mapping of the brain was performed using Rapid Acquisition with Refocused Echoes and variable TR sequencing with 12 steps of TR (15,000, 8000, 5500, 4000, 3000, 2000, 1600, 1200, 800, 500, 200, and 100 ms).
TE was 40 ms, FA was 180°, and slice thickness was 1 mm.
MRI images were reconstructed using ParaVision‐7 software, exported in the DICOM format, and converted to the NIfTI format using dcm2niix software (https://github.com/rordenlab/dcm2niix).
T1maps were generated using the MRI Analysis Calculator plugin (produced by Karl Schmidt in HypX Laboratory, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA) worked on the ImageJ software package (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/).
T1maps were converted to corresponding R1maps, that is, maps of the reciprocal values of T1.
In the phantom experiment and in vivo experiment 1, T1‐weighted images of the corresponding region were repeatedly scanned by multiple‐slice fast low angle shot (FLASH) sequencing (TR = 164.0 ms, TE = 2.3 ms, FA = 45°, Nex = 2) under anesthesia with 1.5%–2% isoflurane.
The number of slices was 7.
Slice thickness was 1 mm and the slice interval was 1 mm.
The scan time for each frame was 43 s, and a dataset comprising 29 frames was obtained.
In in vivo experiment 2, TOLD imaging was performed using the FLASH sequence.
The parameters for FLASH scanning in experiment 2 were as follows: TR = 125.0 ms, TE = 1.6 ms, FA = 45°, Nex = 2, number of slices = 7, slice thickness of 1 mm, and a slice interval of 1 mm.
The scan time for each frame was 20 s and a dataset comprising 45 frames was obtained.
where Mx,yis the image intensity of the pixel in the slice at the (x, y) coordinate.
The shift inΔM% induced by the oxygenation treatment was called the TOLD signal.
In comparisons between two factors, for example, when two values before and after a task were compared, the significance of differences was estimated by thet‐test using the TTEST function in Microsoft Excel 2010.
The “tail” was 1 (one‐tailed distribution) when increasing or decreasing values caused by the task were predictable, and T1changes by the O2task were compared.
The “tail” was 2 (two‐tailed distribution) when the difference in values caused by the task was expected.
The “type” was 2 (equal variance) or 3 (unequal variance), which was estimated using the FTEST function.
The “type” was 1 for paired datasets when changes in an identical image were compared.
Significance estimated by thet‐test was accepted when thepvalue was < 0.05.
The significance of differences in comparisons among multiple factors, for example, when differences among the effects of N2, air, carbogen, and 100% O2were compared, was estimated by the Tukey–Kramer test with α = 0.05.
The Tukey–Kramer test was conducted using a self‐built Excel spreadsheet.
Tukey–Kramer tables were downloaded from a website (https://imnstir.blogspot.com/2012/03/exceltukey.html).
To calculate the shift in tissue pO2,ΔO2, the r1values of O2in water and corn oil were observed as estimates of the r1values of the aqueous and lipidic phases in tissue.
O2solubility in water and corn oil was initially estimated.
The EPR linewidth of LiPc in corn oil under N2gas flow was 0.0092 ± 0.0002 mT, which was similar to that in water under N2gas flow (0.0094 ± 0.0002 mT).
Corn oil did not physically affect the EPR linewidth of LiPc.
FigureS4A,Bshows the relationships between EPR linewidths and pO2in water and corn oil, respectively.
Because both plots were similar, O2solubility in water and corn oil was equivalent.
Figure1shows the relationship between O2concentrations and quantitative longitudinal relaxation rates (R1) in water samples.
R1maps of cross‐sections of water samples were generated under different gas conditions (Figure1A).
R1values in water were obtained and plotted versus pO2of the corresponding gas (Figure1B).
T1and R1values in water and corn oil samples under several gas conditions are shown in Table1.
The T1relaxivity of O2in water at 7 T was estimated as 1.71 × 10−4(mmHg)−1s−1, which corresponded to 0.118 mM−1s−1with the assumption that the water sample was saturated with the gas at 30°C.
Estimation of T1relaxivity, the r1value, of O2in water at 7 T.
(A) R1maps observed under N2, air, carbogen, and 100% O2gas flow.
(B) Relationship between R1of water and pO2of gas dissolved in water.
O2concentrations at 30°C were calculated with the assumption that the water sample was saturated with the gas.
Values are indicated as the average ± SD.
The r1value was estimated from the slope of the regression line.
T1and R1values of water and corn oil at 7 T under several different gas flow conditions.
Note:Values indicate the average ± SD of three experiments.
R1maps of corn oil samples were obtained under different gas conditions (Figure2A).
Figure2Bshows the relationship between the R1values of corn oil and pO2of the gas.
The r1of O2in corn oil at 7 T was estimated as 8.20 × 10−4(mmHg)−1s−1, which corresponded to 0.569 mM−1s−1at 30°C with the assumption that O2solubility was similar in corn oil and water.
Estimation of T1relaxivity, the r1value, of O2in corn oil at 7 T.
(A) R1maps observed under N2, air, carbogen, and 100% O2gas flow.
(B) Relationship between R1of corn oil and pO2of gas dissolved in corn oil.
O2concentrations in corn oil at 30°C were experimentally observed.
Values are indicated as the average ± SD.
The r1value was estimated from the slope of the regression line.
Figure3A–Cshows the time courses of T1‐weighted signal enhancement/diminishment in the phantom, that is, a pseudo‐TOLD signal, induced by a rapid change in the dissolved O2concentration in water samples during repeated FLASH scanning.
The pseudo‐TOLD signal rapidly increased when the gas was switched from air to carbogen or 100% O2(Figure3A,B).
On the other hand, the pseudo‐TOLD signal rapidly decreased when the gas was switched from air to N2(Figure3C).
Time courses of the TOLD signal, that is, T1‐weighted signal enhancement/diminishment induced by pO2changes, in the water sample.
TheΔM% values observed were plotted versus time.
(A) TOLD signal enhancement in the water sample induced by switching gas flow from air to 100% O2.
(B) TOLD signal enhancement in the water sample induced by switching gas flow from air to carbogen.
(C) TOLD signal diminishment in the water sample induced by switching gas flow from air to N2.
The indices of oxygenation, that is,kox(= 1/Tox) and Smax, were observed by fitting Equation (2) to the increasing phase of the plot.
(D) Relationship between Smaxvalues and pO2of gases.
The time course of the pseudo‐TOLD signal in the phantom was manipulated by fitting Equation (4). Figure3Dshows a plot of Smaxvalues versus the pO2of the corresponding gases.
In this plot, the Smaxvalue for air was 0, that is, the baseline.
The relationship between Smaxand O2concentrations was almost linear.koxvalues observed under 100% O2, carbogen, and N2flow were 1.06 ± 0.045, 0.96 ± 0.026, and 0.63 ± 0.012 min−1, respectively.
Figure4A–Cshows the time courses of the pseudo‐TOLD signal induced by abrupt changes in pO2in corn oil samples during repeated FLASH scanning.
The pseudo‐TOLD signal in corn oil increased when the gas was switched from air to carbogen or 100% O2(Figure4A,B) and decreased when the gas was switched from air to N2(Figure4C).
Smaxlevels were smaller than those in water samples.koxvalues were 0.41 ± 0.019, 0.41 ± 0.018, and 0.26 ± 0.029 min−1for 100% O2, carbogen, and N2, respectively.
Figure4Dshows a plot of Smaxvalues in corn oil versus pO2of the corresponding gas.
The slope of Figure4Dwas smaller than that of water (Figure2D).
Time courses of the TOLD signal induced by pO2changes in corn oil.ΔM% values, the enhancement ratio of the T1‐weighted signal, were plotted versus time.
(A) TOLD signal enhancement in the corn oil sample induced by switching gas flow from air to 100% O2.
(B) TOLD signal enhancement in the corn oil sample induced by switching gas flow from air to carbogen.
(C) TOLD signal diminishment in the corn oil sample induced by switching gas flow from air to N2.
The indices of oxygenation, that is,kox(= 1/Tox) and Smax, were observed by fitting Equation (2) to the increasing phase of the plots.
(D) Relationship between Smaxvalues observed in corn oil and pO2of gases.
In vivo experiment 1 was performed to confirm the shortening of T1and the appearance of a positive TOLD signal in the brains of mice breathing a high O2concentration gas.
Figure5Ashows a scout image selected from the T1‐mapping dataset and several ROIs selected on the brain.
The intensity of R1maps of the brains from mice breathing different gases increased and decreased with changes in the O2concentration in the breathing gas (Figure5B–E).
R1values in the cortex were significantly increased by breathing carbogen and 100% O2(Figure5F).
Other regions in the brain, namely, the ventricles (Figure5G) and caudate nucleus (Figure5H), showed a similar pattern to that in the cortex.
T1and R1values in mouse brain tissue at 7 T under different gas‐breathing conditions are summarized in Table2.
R1maps observed in the brain when the mouse was breathing air, carbogen, or 100% O2and a comparison of R1values in brain regions.
(A) T1‐weighted image and position of ROI.
(B) R1map observed under air‐breathing period 1.
(C) R1map observed under the carbogen‐breathing period.
(D) R1map observed under air‐breathing period 2.
(E) R1map observed under the 100% O2‐breathing period.
(F) R1values observed in the cortex.
(G) R1values observed in the ventricles.
(H) R1values observed in the caudate nucleus.
Values are indicated as the average ± SD The number of animals used was 3.
The asterisk (*) indicates a significant difference (p< 0.05) between before and after the gas treatment observed by thet‐test with the “tail” was 1 and the “type” was 1.
T1and R1values observed at 7 T in mouse brain regions under several different gas breathing conditions.
Note:Values indicate the average ± SD of three mice.
Regarding air conditions, the average of the Air 1 and Air 2 periods were again averaged in three mice.
Asterisks (*) indicate a significant difference estimated by the Tukey–Kramer test with α < 0.05, when the value was compared with that under air breathing.
Figure6A,Bshows TOLD imaging results.
Positive and negative variations in the TOLD signal were observed in the mouse head when the carrier gas for anesthesia was switched from air to carbogen or 100% O2.
Negative TOLD signals were mainly detected in the lower jaw, which includes muscles and the submandibular gland; however, only a positive TOLD signal was noted in the brain.
Distribution of the O2‐induced T1‐weighted signal, that is, the TOLD signal, in the brain of a mouse and the time course of the TOLD signal in ROIs set on brain regions.
Positive and negative TOLD signals were induced by switching the carrier gas (A) from air to carbogen and (B) from air to 100% O2.
The left image is a TOLD signal map observed under air, that is, baseline image, which is the average of the initial 5 frames of 24 frames scanned during 21 min.
The right image is the TOLD signal map observed under high concentration O2treatments, and is the average of the last 5 frames of 24 frames.
Green and red colors indicate positive and negative TOLD signals.
No negative signals were observed in the brain region.
Time course of the carbogen‐induced TOLD signal enhancement in the (C) cortex, (D) ventricle, and (E) caudate nucleus regions.
Time course of the 100% O2‐induced TOLD signal enhancement in the (F) cortex, (G) ventricle, and (H) caudate nucleus regions.
Marks with error bars indicate the average ± SD observed in each ROI at each time point.
Small marks connected with a line are a simulation of the exponential profile (Equation5) fit on the experimental values.
The signal‐increasing rate,kox, and maximum signal level, Smax, were obtained from the best‐fitting simulation.
Figure6C–Hshows the time courses of TOLD signals in several brain regions.
The TOLD signal rapidly increased when the gas was switched from air to carbogen (Figure6C–E), but more slowly increased when the gas was switched from air to 100% O2(Figure6F–H).
The exponential function (Equation5) was fit on the increasing phase of the TOLD signal, and the parameters Toxand Smaxwere obtained in the cortex, ventricles, and caudate nucleus under carbogen and 100% O2breathing (Table3).koxin the cortex was significantly faster under carbogen breathing than under 100% O2breathing.
No significant differences were observed inkoxin other regions.
Comparison of oxygenation‐related parameters observed in the carbogen‐ or 100% O2‐induced TOLD experiment.
Note:Values indicate the average ± SD of thre mice.
Asterisks (*) indicate a significant difference between carbogen and 100% O2estimated by thet‐test withp< 0.05 with the “tail” was 2 and the “type” was 1 (for paired samples).
R1and R2values in blood samples and solution samples were measured under N2gas flow and also under air flow.
A difference in the R1value between N2and air conditions,ΔR1= R1A− R1N, was obtained, where R1Aand R1Nare R1values observed under air and under N2flow, respectively.
Similarly,ΔR2values were obtained.
Figure7A,Bshows a comparison ofΔR1andΔR2obtained in aqueous samples.
Positive and negativeΔR1andΔR2values indicate the shortening and extension of T1and T2values, respectively.
R1values in milli‐Q water, blood, plasma, and 5 mM Mb solution were increased, that is, T1were shortened, by a small elevation in the concentration of O2by switching gas flow in the sample tube from N2to air.
However, R1values in the RBC fraction and 5 mM Hb solution decreased, that is, T1were extended, by increasing the concentration of O2.
T2values were almost stable with small O2increases, except for T2in blood, which was extended.
T1, R1, T2, and R2values are summarized in TableS1.
Differences in R1and R2values of aqueous samples between N2and air conditions.
Comparison of (A)ΔR1and (B)ΔR2values obtained in milli‐Q water, whole blood, plasma, the RBC fraction, 5 mM hemoglobin solution, and 5 mM myoglobin solution.
The R1and R2values observed under the N2condition were subtracted from the values observed under the air condition.ΔR1andΔR2values were obtained for each sample and then averaged.
Values indicate the average ± SD of four experiments, while values for water were calculated from six experiments.
Figure8shows pseudo‐TOLD signal profiles observed in several samples.
When the gas flowing inside the sample tube was switched from N2to air, a positive pseudo‐TOLD signal was observed in milli‐Q water (Figure8A).
In blood, no signal shift or a very slight positive shift was observed (Figure8B).
Plasma also showed a clear positive pseudo‐TOLD signal (Figure8C).
However, a negative pseudo‐TOLD signal was observed in the RBC fraction (Figure8D).
Figure8E–Hshows pseudo‐TOLD signal profiles observed in aqueous solutions of 5 mM Hb and 5 mM Mb.
In the 5 mM Hb solution, a negative pseudo‐TOLD signal was observed when gas flow was switched from N2to air (Figure8E).
A larger negative pseudo‐TOLD signal was noted in the 5 mM Hb solution when gas flow was switched from air to O2(Figure8F).
In the 5 mM Mb solution, a positive pseudo‐TOLD signal was observed when gas flow was switched from N2to air (Figure8G); however, a clear negative pseudo‐TOLD signal was detected in 5 mM Mb (Figure8H).
The pseudo‐TOLD signal observed in aqueous samples.
The time course of T1‐weighted signal enhancement/diminishment (ΔM%) was observed in (A) milli‐Q water, (B) mouse whole blood, (C) blood plasma, and (D) the RBC fraction when gas flow in the sample tube was switched from N2to air.
The time course of the TOLD signal was also observed in (E, F) 5 mM hemoglobin solution and (G, H) 5 mM myoglobin solution.
Experiments in (F) and (H) were performed with air for the initial 7 min followed by a switch to 100% O2gas.
Marks with error bars indicate the average ± SD observed at each time point.
In vivo experiment 2 attempted to estimate the oxygenation rate,kox, oxygenation level, Smax, and O2consumption rate,kocin the mouse brain cortex.
Figure9Ashows an example of the TOLD response observed in the cortex by carbogen breathing.
The TOLD signal increased when the breathing gas was switched from air to carbogen and decreased when the gas was switched back to air.koxand Smaxwere estimated by fitting Equation (5) on the increasing phase of the TOLD signal.
Figure9Bshows a semi‐logarithmic plot of the decreasing phase of the TOLD signal, andkocwas estimated from the slope.kox, Smax, andkocestimated for healthy 8‐week‐old female C3H/HeSlc mice were 1.69 ± 0.44 min−1(n= 8), 5.18 ± 1.04% (n= 8), and 1.55 ± 0.33 min−1(n= 9), respectively.
An example of the TOLD response in the brain cortex induced by the carbogen treatment.
(A) A TOLD signal response in the brain cortex induced by the carbogen treatment.
Equation (5) was fit on the increasing phase of the TOLD signal, and the oxygenation rate,koxand oxygenation level, Smaxwere obtained.
Marks and error bars indicate the average ± SD in a ROI.
(B) A semi‐logarithmic plot of the decreasing phase of the TOLD signal, and the O2consumption ratekocwas obtained from its slope.
The slope was estimated using five data points indicated by solid circles.
With the assumption that normal tissue pO2under physiological conditions is 40 mmHg, the R1values of water and corn oil at 40 mmHg pO2were estimated to be 0.220 and 1.546 s−1from the plots shown in Figures1Band2B, respectively.
Based on the combination ratio of R1values at 40 mmHg in water and corn oil, rough estimations of the aqueous/lipidic ratio of T1components in brain tissue were calculated as 0.76/0.24 in the cortex, 0.88/0.12 in the ventricles, and 0.72/0.28 in the caudate nucleus.
The difference R1values,ΔR1, in the cortex between air and carbogen breathing was 0.041 s−1, while that between air and 100% O2breathing was 0.038 s−1.
Shifts in pO2,ΔO2, in the cortex induced by carbogen and 100% O2were estimated as 0.28 and 0.26 mmol/L, respectively, when the r1values observed in water and corn oil were used with the ratio of aqueous and lipidic components.
Estimated pO2changes in brain regions are summarized in Table4.
Comparison ofΔR1 values in several brain regions in experimental animals breathing carbogen or 100% oxygen.
Note: ΔR1values indicate the average ± SD The number of animals used was 3.
Other values are calculated with the average values ofΔR1.
To calculate pO2changes, r1values observed in water, 1.71 × 10−4mmHg−1s−1and 0.118 mM−1s−1, and in corn oil, 8.20 × 10−4mmHg−1s−1and 0.569 mM−1s−1, were used with the ratio of aqueous and lipidic components in the corresponding brain region.
As shown in Equation (1), a tissue T1value estimated by T1mapping is a compression of several T1components.
When tissue pO2increases, O2itself may shorten tissue T1due to the stable unpaired electron on it.
At the same time, transformation from deoxy‐Hb to oxy‐Hb may extend T1in blood due to the loss of paramagnetism.
Similarly, in muscle, transformation from deoxy‐Mb to oxy‐Mb exerts similar effects.
Samples with negativeΔR1changes in Figure7, that is, the RBC fraction and 5 mM Hb solution, showed a negative pseudo‐TOLD signal in Figure8.
The 5 mM Mb solution did not show a negative TOLD signal by small O2increases, that is, a shift from N2to air (Figure8G); however, larger O2increases, that is, a shift from air to O2, induced a negative TOLD signal in the 5 mM Mb solution (Figure8H).
Mb, which has only one heme, showed smaller effects than Hb, which has four hemes, at the same concentration.
Similarly, whole blood showed smaller effects than the RBC fraction.
The brain parenchyma is tightly separated from blood components by the blood–brain barrier.
The content of heme iron, a component related to T1extensions under oxygenation, in the physiological state is almost zero in the brain parenchyma.
Heme iron is exclusively presented to circulating blood, and the BOLD effect may be detected in circulating blood containing a large amount of O2bound to Hb.
On the other hand, the TOLD effect may be observed by transmitted free O2molecules in the brain parenchyma.
ΔR1values in brain tissue increased and decreased in synchrony with oxygenation tasks (Figure5F–H).ΔR1values in brain tissue were similar under carbogen and 100% O2breathing.
The TOLD signal in brain tissue also synchronized with oxygenation tasks (Figures6and9A).
The oxygenation phase and O2consumption phase in the brain may be assessed (Figure9).
Furthermore, Smaxvalues in brain tissue showed similar increases under carbogen and 100% O2breathing (Figure6C–Hand Table3).
These results suggest that a positive TOLD signal in the brain reflects increasing pO2in brain tissue.
In in vivo experiment 1, the levels of enhancement in the R1and T1‐weighted signals, that is,ΔR1and Smax, induced by carbogen and 100% O2were measured.
Observations of differences in oxygenation rates,kox, between carbogen breathing and 100% O2breathing provided the parameters for in vivo experiment 2, which involved a kinetic analysis of tissue O2levels.
Breathing carbogen was selected for the oxygenation task in in vivo experiment 2 because breathing 100% O2delayed the distribution of O2.
O2molecules easily permeate the brain–blood barrier and are quickly distributed throughout brain tissue.
However, breathing carbogen results in the faster distribution of O2throughout brain tissue than breathing 100% O2.
Thekoxvalue, that is, the enhancement rate of the TOLD signal, was faster under breathing carbogen than under breathing 100% O2, with a significant increase being observed in the cortex (Table3).
Breathing 100% O2has been shown to induce vascular constriction, while breathing 5% carbon dioxide in carbogen gas caused vasodilatation, which increased blood flow [39].
Therefore, the O2distribution rate may be reduced under breathing 100% O2and increased under breathing carbogen.
The decay rate of the TOLD signal, observed when the breathing gas was switched from carbogen to air, reflects O2consumption by brain tissue.
Excess O2in the brain was quickly consumed (Figure9B).
The O2consumption rate observed in the brain in the present study was 1.55 ± 0.33 min−1, which was markedly faster than that observed in muscle, even when the O2supply to the brain remained.
pO2in the mouse leg muscle rapidly decreased to less than 2 mmHg within 5 min when the O2supply was disrupted [40].
O2consumption rates in muscle were recalculated based on the data shown in fig. 6 of [40] as 0.46 or 0.83 min−1.
When the gas that the experimental animal was breathing was switched from air to carbogen during a repeating T1‐weighted scan, it was possible to observe the time course of increases in the TOLD signal and quantify the tissue oxygenation rate,kox.
Similarly, when the gas was switched from carbogen to air, it was possible to observe the time course of decreases in the TOLD signal and quantify the O2consumption rate,koc.
Although this method requires further improvements for the more accurate estimation of O2consumption rates, the parameters observed in the TOLD experiment, namely,koc,kox, and Smax, are useful for digitizing biological effects in the tissues of living experimental animals.
This is the first study to perform a kinetic analysis of O2levels in normal healthy mouse brains based on variations in the T1‐weighted signal, that is, the TOLD signal, induced by an oxygen challenge.
In mice breathing carbogen or 100% O2, the R1value and TOLD signal increased in brain tissue.
A negative TOLD signal was not observed in the brain.
Similar changes in R1values and the TOLD signal were noted in mice breathing carbogen and 100% O2.
A positive TOLD signal in the brain reflects the rapid uptake and distribution of O2.
A method for a time course analysis of the TOLD signal was herein proposed.
The results obtained indicate that the negative shift in the TOLD MRI signal in mouse muscle tissues under O2breathing was due to a shift in paramagnetic deoxy‐Hb to diamagnetic oxy‐Hb.
In the present study, estimations of the O2consumption rate in the mouse brain were performed by analyzing the time course of the TOLD signal.
The TOLD signal in the brain was increased by carbogen breathing and decreased to the baseline level when the breathing gas was switched back to air.
An increase in the rate of the TOLD signal, that is, the oxygenation ratekoxand the maximum signal intensity, Smax, may be obtained by fitting an exponential curve to the increasing phase of the TOLD signal.
The O2consumption rate,koc, was estimated as the slope of a semilogarithmic plot of the decreasing phase of the TOLD signal.
A method to quantify oxygenation and O2consumption rates based on TOLD imaging is proposed as a diagnostic tool for estimating the distribution and consumption of O2in brain tissue.