The current paper intends to focus on healthcare professional values, specifically on a scarcely referred to or mentioned value in the nursing literature of love, which is often crucial when it comes to genuine and humane interactions.
Our aim was to investigate the role of humanitarian love and its psychosocial impact on health professionals, aiming to establish it as a core value in values‐based practice.
We conducted a database search in Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature, PubMed Central, and Elsevier/Scopus, specifically targeting studies published in English up to 8 September 2024.
Two independent reviewers conducted screening, data extraction, and bias assessment.
Sixteen articles met the inclusion criteria, comprising 2045 participants.
We found that the literature on humanitarian love lacks a clear and consistent definition, often conflating it with concepts such as compassion, emotional support, and empathy.
Humanitarian love involves helping others, alleviating suffering, and promoting growth.
When healthcare professional's direct humanitarian love towards themselves, it fosters positive emotions, enhancing their ability to provide high‐quality care and effectively support patient's needs.
Additionally, humanitarian love towards patients helps reduce feelings of burnout, emotional exhaustion, and compassion fatigue among healthcare professionals.
The number of qualifying studies was limited due to the scarcity of publications, and no randomised controlled trials were identified, which affects the assessment of efficacy.
The inclusion of only 16 studies may restrict the review's conclusiveness.
Additionally, the sample size and mean age of health professionals do not adequately represent all sectors, and some studies were of moderate quality.
Heterogeneity among the studies and the absence of a meta‐analysis further complicate the findings.
Humanitarian love has the potential to enhance healthcare professionals' psychosocial well‐being, emphasising its role as a core value in values‐based practice.
Universally felt by humankind, “love” is a human motivation, and a natural characteristic transmitted through emotions and actions.
Its main objective is the promotion of well‐being and a longer lifespan, as well as the contribution to healing family members, relatives, and non‐relatives (e.g., patients) [1,2,3,4,5].
In the national bibliography, love is strongly associated with health benefits (e.g., reduction of suffering, minimisation of complaints, increase of self‐efficacy, etc.) [6,7], but regardless of its beneficial role, the value of love is a neglected area in the healthcare community [8].
Focusing on the importance of the value of love for caring sciences and the limited number of studies on this topic, we undertook a systematic literature review with the objective of addressing the identified gap.
The evolution of healthcare professions has given rise to the adoption of frameworks aimed at enhancing research effectiveness and managing complex professional practices [9].
There is a growing recognition that nurses play a central role in developing and employing comprehensive frameworks to deliver high‐quality care and uphold healthcare services as a primary nursing principle [10,11,12].
Among these frameworks, evidence‐based practice (EBP) has stood out as the predominant model for nurses striving to provide high‐quality nursing care over the past two decades [10,13].
However, the term “evidence” has acquired diverse definitions, making the practical implementation of evidence in daily care a complex and ever‐evolving process regarding credibility [14,15].
For instance, there has been a shift towards embracing more interpretative and narrative evidence, emphasising the credibility of subjective approaches over rigidly focusing on objective explanatory evidence [16].
Additionally, some authors have challenged the acceptance of randomised control trials (RCTs) as the gold standard of EBP, advocating for a levelling of artificial hierarchies in defining the best evidence and recognising the value of evidence gathered from patients, families, and practitioners [15,17,18,19].
In the past decade, there has been a notable shift towards incorporating the experiences and values of practitioners or patients into developing and implementing evidence in practice, giving rise to the term “value‐based practice” (VBP).
VBP is considered a sister framework to EBP, enhancing the use of evidence by integrating the perceived values of service users and healthcare professionals with other types of evidence to provide quality care in complex and conflicting situations [20,21].
The term value refers to the belief upon which a person preferably acts, and values can be positive or negative, such as principles, beliefs, morality, standards, conscience, etc. [22].
However, introducing the new term VBP alongside the already complex and contentious EBP requires clarification.
VBP is defined as a process that involves engaging with the experiences, principles, and moral beliefs of service users, families, and carers [21,23].
It recognises that cultural, socioeconomic, and social conditions shape these experiences and values [24] and that human values are diverse and influenced by numerous cultural and historical factors [20,23].
Furthermore, contextual influences and situational variables can complicate the understanding and utility of VBP.
In the United States (US), VBP is primarily associated with numerical values, emphasising better patient outcomes per dollar spent on patient care [25,26,27].
In the European context, VBP is more aligned with a philosophical orientation, focusing on an individual's ethical, aesthetic, and prudential qualities [20,21].
Even within the European context, confusion may arise regarding whose values take precedence—those of the patient's, the practitioner's, the organisation's, or the profession's [21,23].
Considering caregiving's values, the objective is to provide compassionate care [22].
The current paper intends to focus on healthcare professional values, specifically on a scarcely referred to or mentioned value in the nursing literature of love, which is often crucial when it comes to genuine and humane interactions.
Fulford and Wallcraft [20] identify the value of love as one of the essential components of human interaction.
Similarly, nursing literature conceives altruistic, non‐erotic, humanitarian love as the basis for caring professions that enable individual patients' inner healing and self‐realisation [8,28,29].
However, the expression of love as a value for developing therapeutic interactions is either overlooked in the literature of value‐based practice or treated with a taboo‐like approach, considering it inappropriate or transgressional of professional boundaries, and often referred to in the nursing literature as the “L” word [29,30].
To avoid confusion, this systematic literature review characterises “the value of love in healthcare” as “humanitarian love” [31].
The current systematic literature review was conducted with emphasis on the importance of humanitarian love to explore the empirical research areas related to the value of humanitarian love, delving into the psychosocial impact it has on health professionals and elucidating its role as a core value within VBP.
From an international perspective, this paper aims to contribute to the advancement of understanding the concept of humanitarian love, thereby improving health professionals' well‐being and fulfilling patients' most important needs.
Furthermore, integrating humanitarian love rooted in fundamental human values is expected to enhance the quality of care within daily healthcare settings.
This will be achieved by developing tailored interventions aligned with the VBP framework.
The systematic literature review was guided by the EQUATOR Network using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses Search extension (PRISMA‐S) checklist (seeSupporting Information, checklist 1.
PRISMA‐S).
PRISMA‐S offers comprehensive guidance on a broad range of information sources and search methods, many of which are not thoroughly addressed in other reporting guidelines.
This includes detailed instructions on study registry searches, web searches, multi‐database searches, and updates, ultimately aiding authors in fully reporting their search processes and simplifying the reporting task [32].
This systematic literature review followed an a priori protocol (OSF;https://osf.io/xr87n).
We systematically searched three databases, namely Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), PubMed Central (PMC), and Elsevier/Scopus, from the earliest records to 8th September 2024.
The search strategy consisted of terms that were based on PEO elements [health professionals (P), humanitarian love (E), psychosocial impact (Ο)].
The main review question was: “What is the impact of humanitarian love on the psychosocial state of health professionals?”.
The search strategy used both text and index terms, synonyms, and similar terms to correspondent to each of the PEO elements.
Also, the review used Boolean Operators “AND” to combine the search terms.
We did not apply any limits (e.g., time period, language, study design) to the search strategy.
The full search strategy per database was presented in TableS1.
Apart from the authors, no other experts participated in the review process.
One author conducted the whole process, which was verified independently by another author.
In cases of discrepancies at any stage, two authors were consulted until a consensus was reached.
We included observational research studies with quantitative data, using cross‐sectional, case–control, and cohort (prospective and retrospective) designs, as well as qualitative studies (e.g., exploratory studies, grounded theory studies, and phenomenology studies) that examined the role of humanitarian love in various clinical care settings (e.g., clinics, hospitals, households, and communities).
Eligible studies for inclusion were articles written in English with full‐text availability and included health professional groups (i.e., nurses, doctors, physicians, physical therapists, psychological counsellors, psychiatrists, etc.).
Duplicate studies were filtered, and in this case, we included the more recent study or the one with the larger sample size of participants.
We did not use systematic reviews because their primary objective was to synthesise original research or primary studies.
Including systematic reviews could have led to duplication of evidence, potentially introducing bias and distorting results due to the over‐representation of certain studies.
If systematic reviews had been included, the overlap could have complicated interpretation and diluted the clarity of the findings [37,38].
The articles that were not retrieved were excluded from our review for several reasons.
Ten of these articles lacked international relevance, as they were published in local‐based journals that did not contribute to a broader academic discourse.
Additionally, one particular article was a phenomenological study that specifically focused on the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit.
This study did not align with the primary focus of our research and presented humanitarian love as a secondary concept.
Initially, we identified 2686 articles from the three databases and 11 articles from hand searching.
After removing duplicates (520), 2166 articles were examined for eligibility.
We further excluded 2012 articles based on the title and the abstract, leaving a total of 154 articles that were read in full text.
Eleven articles were not retrieved (TableS3); hence, 143 articles were scrutinised for eligibility, and finally, a total of 16 articles met our inclusion criteria and were included in this review.
The selection process is presented in Figure1.
The reasons for exclusion are described in TableS2.
To assess the methodological quality of the quantitative studies, we used the NOS scale for cohort, case–control, and cross‐sectional studies.
The NOS scale consisted of 12 questions and three topics: (1) selection of the study group, (2) comparability, and (3) assessment of the outcome.
A scoring system of 9 points was used to assess the quality, with 7–9 points signifyinghigh quality, 5–6 pointsmoderate quality, and 0–4 pointslow quality[39].
To evaluate the methodological quality of the qualitative studies, we employed the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) checklists.
The CASP tool comprises 10 questions organised into the following components: (1) aim, (2) method, (3) design, (4) recruitment, (5) data collection, (6) relationships, (7) ethical issues, (8) analysis, (9) findings, and (10) value of research.
A scoring system was applied to assess each question, with responses categorised as “Yes,” “No,” or “Can't tell” [40,41].
One author assessed the quality of the included studies, which was verified independently by another author.
Data including author, year, country, study design, sample size, the sample mean age, target population (i.e., health professionals), research tools (i.e., Compassionate Love Scale, etc.), the study quality, the definition of humanitarian love, and the main findings per study were recorded from the eligible studies.
The same author extracted data into a pre‐defined Excel spreadsheet.
Another independent investigator checked and evaluated the final data.
Due to expected methodological and conceptual diversity, quantitative data synthesis was not feasible (i.e., meta‐analysis).
Hence, we used a narrative synthesis approach specifying key study characteristics (e.g., study design, risk of bias, etc.) and main findings [42].
The characteristics of the studies are summarised in Table1.
Eligible studies were published between 1995 and 2023.
Concerning study design, 8 were quantitative studies, and 8 were qualitative studies.
With respect to the quality assessment, 14 had high quality, and 2 had moderate quality.
Also, 7 of the studies were conducted in Europe, followed by 3 in the Americas, 3 in Asia, and 3 in Australia.
CL was a comprehensive concept that included feelings and thoughts such as helping, caring, interest and affection for all humanity.
It was linked with elements such as self‐sacrifice and empathy.
CL included valuing others, respecting others' decisions, internalising others' uniqueness, acting sincerely, and being motivated to understand feelings and emotions.
The origins of CL revealed that it is the sum of all a person's genetic, emotional experiences, physiological reactions, and behaviours.
CL was a love that made sense and provided a mutual feeling of satisfaction among those who gave and received love.
There was a weak, yet positive correlation between the patience scale and the compassionate love scale (r= 0.25;p< 0.05).
A mere positive association was determined between the compassionate love scale and the acceptance of diversity scale (r= 0.16;p< 0.05).
Female had higher scores both in CL and in acceptance of diverse appearances (p< 0.05) than male.
Love was the ability to respond to the courageous self‐disclosures and requests of others in a way that conveyed safety, expressed emotional validation, and sensitively provided a response.
Love skills might be seen as specifications of valued actions (vulnerable behaviours).
The awareness, courage, and love (ACL) model was correlated with the burnout measures at univariate analysis with Pearson r (allp< 0.00).
Multivariate linear regression analysis showed that love was associated with decreased emotional exhaustion (β= −0.13;p= 0.07) and depersonalization levels (β= −0.18;p= 0.01).
Love was also associated with increased levels of personal achievements (β= 0.15;p= 0.03).
CL was an other‐oriented attitude directed towards close others and all humanity that encompassed feelings, cognitions, and behaviours.
CL was focused on caring, concern, tenderness, supporting, helping, and understanding others, when they are suffering or in need.
Love was a meaningful interaction or relationship between two or more persons, where the goals of a person were shared and helped to achieve by the other person.
CL included efforts to promote others' human flourishing and growth.
There was a negative relationship between the secure attachment style and CL for close others (r= −0.19;p= 0.02), as well as for a specific close other (r= −0.27;p= 0.001).
No relationship was found between secure attachment and CL for strangers and humanity (r= 0.00;p= 0.99).
There was a significant correlation between spirituality and expressing CL to a certain close other (r= 0.17;p= 0.03).
Spirituality was not significantly related to CL for close others and to CL for strangers and humanity (r= 0.12;r= −0.02; bothp> 0.05).
Multivariate linear regression analysis showed that the insecure attachment style (β= −0.27;p< 0.001) and spirituality (β= 0.18;p< 0.05) were significant predictors of CL for a specific other.
Secure attachment was also significant predictor of CL for close others (β= −0.20;p< 0.05).
CL as ‘other‐centered’ love was referred to as altruistic love, unconditional love, and unreciprocated love.
CL was a longer‐lasting, prosocial emotion towards others and had been associated with altruistic behaviours and led to more positive attitudes.
A significantly negative correlation was between CL and burnout dimensions (r= −0.19;p≤ 0.05).
The compassionate love scale scores were significantly and positively associated with professional commitment (NPCS) (r= 0.36;p≤ 0.05).
Nurses' CL had a positive, yet weak connection with the willingness to show effort and the belief in goals and values (r= 0.39,r= 0.33; bothp≤ 0.05), and a negative correlation with the maintenance of professional membership (r= −0.20;p≤ 0.05).
Compassion and self‐compassion represented positive emotions that contributed to psychological flexibility and emotional resilience to support one's own health and wellbeing as well as others.
Compassion could be understood as a positive emotion involved in the recognition of and therapeutic response to others' needs and suffering.
There was a positive correlation between self‐compassion and self‐care.
These findings were observed in women (r= 0.38;p= 0 ≤ 0.001), men (r= 0.49;p= 0 ≤ 0.001) and overall, in both sexes (r= 0.41;p= 0 ≤ 0.001).
Linear regression analysis showed that self‐compassion was associated with increased self‐care ability (β= 0.40;p= 0 ≤ 0.001).
Compassion was recognising one another's distress and trying to alleviate it.
The key attributes of compassion and self‐compassion were empathy, distress tolerance, and kindness.
The midwifery students’ self‐compassion was associated with low burnout levels (r= −0.31;p< 0.01), high professional well‐being (r= 0.38;p< 0.01), high self‐kindness (r= 0.58;p< 0.01), and low self‐judgement (r= −0.61;p< 0.01).
Compassion for others was not related to professional well‐being (r= 0.17;p> 0.05), burnout (r= −0.14;p> 0.05), self‐kindness (r= 0.19;p> 0.05) but it was related to low compassion fatigue (r= −0.23:p< 0.05) and low self‐judgement (r= −0.22;p< 0.05).
Compassion was an integral part of any healthcare profession.
Compassion could help nurses understand patient suffering through recognition of a shared unity of pain.
Self‐compassion can enhance nurses to deliver authentic compassion for others.
There was a statistical association between self‐compassion and low burnout (r= −0.37;p< 0.05), high self‐kindness (r= 0.63;p< 0.01), and low self‐judgement (r= −0.68;p< 0.01), but it was not related to low compassion fatigue (r= −0.18;p> 0.05) and professional wellbeing (r= 0.12;p> 0.05).
Compassion for others was not significantly associated with burnout (r= 0.04;p> 0.05), compassion fatigue (r= 0.19;p> 0.05), self‐kindness (r= 0.03;p> 0.05), self‐judgement (r= 0.13;p> 0.05), and professional wellbeing (r= 0.07;p> 0.05).
By acknowledging the uniqueness of each patient, we could cultivate empathy for their situations.
Engaging in unrequested actions and comprehending different emotions could lead us to experience joy and a sense of fulfilment.
The act of listening and speaking while meeting the deeper needs and aspirations of patients relieved nurses' burdens and, in turn, elevated the quality of nursing care.
Love was communicated through touch, which was essential for individuals to feel “whole.” Physical touch provided significant benefits for overall health and well‐being.
The absence of love was necessary for people to fully comprehend its presence, as its lack gave rise to detrimental effects, including heightened stress, anxiety, and postpartum depression.
Love was manifested through receptiveness and meticulous care towards the patient, facilitating healing and fostering an environment of security and repose.
Love constituted a deliberate choice and an ethical commitment, predicated upon collaborative synergy between patients and healthcare professionals, as well as among colleagues.
The parameters of love were delineated by the imperative not to inflict harm upon the patient.
Love was the force that enabled one to show genuine concern and establish a commitment to the individual behind the addiction.
It lay in the ability to understand the depth of suffering concealed behind the addiction.
Nurses' belief that individuals struggling with addiction could live without drugs, had the potential to bring patients closer to recovery.
Care was provided without expectation of reciprocation.
The reasons for pursuing a particular profession were varied, including inspiration, motivation, and passion.
The advantages of professional loving care lie in its ability to foster an atmosphere of trust and security, to offer more without monetary compensation, to bring humour into care, and to place the patient at the center of attention.
It also enabled the sharing of responsibilities among colleagues, the utilisation of individual talents, and, collectively, the creation of a supportive work environment.
However, obstacles to the implementation of professional loving care arose when self‐interest prevailed, wages were reduced, bureaucracy became overwhelming, and care was commodified.
Abbreviations: CL, compassionate love; NR, not reported; RCT, randomised controlled trial; SD, standard deviation.
The total sample size consisted of 2045 participants, including 923 students (45.1%; e.g., nursing and midwifery), 542 nurses (26.5%; e.g., palliative care, community, detoxification unit, and dementia care unit), 432 mental health professionals (21.1%; e.g., psychologists, psychiatrists, and social therapist), 122 doctors (6%; e.g., palliative care), 14 direct care staff members (0.7%), and 12 paramedics (0.6%; e.g., assistant members and ambulatory care members).
All selected studies describe the value of love in the caring process.
However, there is no emergent single or explicit definition of humanitarian love, often conflating humanitarian love with compassion, emotional support, or empathy.
A set of studies uses the terms compassion and humanitarian love interchangeably, asserting that humanitarian love overlaps with compassion for others as both include responses to suffering that involve sensitivity, understanding, kindness, unselfishness, emotional resonance, empathic concern, and distress tolerance [48,49,50,53,54,55,57].
Moreover, the reviewed literature conceives humanitarian love as a positive emotion and a motivating factor for health professionals (e.g., nurses) to act respectfully to individual needs, acknowledging their uniqueness and recognising the centrality of emotions in caring, linking care to altruistic activities and positive professional attitudes [8,43,44,46,47,51,52,54,55,56].
This literature asserts that care guided by humanitarian love allows for meaningful connections and high‐quality interpersonal relationships that can lead to a greater level of satisfaction for both patient and health professional, alleviate suffering, offer emotional support, and foster empathy [8,45,47,52,53,57].
In summation, the literature on humanitarian love lacks a definitional consensus and conflates it with terms such as compassion, emotional support, or empathy.
It acknowledges that humanitarian love creates a positive disposition to caring and motivates health professionals to respect the individuality and uniqueness of the people they care for, making emotions an integral part of clinical practice and knowledge.
Humanitarian love leads to greater patient and health professional satisfaction, alleviates patient suffering, and fosters emotional support and empathy in caring activities.
This study identifies that the reviewed articles assert that one of the core features of humanitarian love is other‐centred, with the reciprocal expression of acceptance and respect to others that is context and relationship‐specific [44,46,47,51,52].
Humanitarian love, motivated by the desire to value, help, and alleviate the suffering of others, is recognised as a form of sacrifice that underpins person‐centred care and reinforces compassion across various clinical conditions [46,47,51,52].
It includes feelings, cognition and behaviours characterised by respect for and value of others' decisions, uniqueness, emotions and feelings, by displaying high levels of tolerance for others' needs, experiences and sense of well‐being, and by promoting others' growth and self‐actualisation [44,46].
This sense of helping others appears to be highly consistent with, and appropriately suited to, healthcare—specifically nursing—from an epistemological point of view, as nursing is defined as a helping profession; from a historical (stereotypical) angle as nursing has from its inception typified as volunteering in helping those in need, and from a cognitive related standpoint as nurses are conceived as attachment figures of security for those in need of help [46,47].
What further emerges from the reviewed studies is the contention that the built‐in respecting of otherness in humanitarian love is a learned behaviour, socially and culturally constructed and affected not merely by formal nursing training and education but also by the very lifestyle and characteristics of the nurse professional, such as their religiosity or spirituality [44,46,47].
A further extrapolation from the reviewed studies is that formative nursing knowledge, emerging from formal training and informative nursing knowledge, emerging from informal life experiences concerning otherness may not translate into performative knowledge of enacting humanitarian love in practice.
Issues such as lack of time to allocate sufficient attention and patience to understand others and their lives, the financial gains related to health care professions, the fear of being taken advantage of or perceived as weak, and the non‐predictive nature of performing caring in a humanitarian nature may impede the focus on the other and instead prioritise the needs of the health professional [46,47,48].
In summation, the literature asserts that a core feature of humanitarian love is helping, alleviating suffering, respecting feelings, cognition and well‐being, and promoting the growth and self‐actualisation of others.
Epistemologically, historically, and cognitively, using humanitarian love to care for the other is consistent, suited, and appropriate for the clinical practice, and it is learned and developed by individuals.
However, time restraints, financial calculations, misapprehensions about professionalisation or strong individuality, and the performative nature of humanitarian love can all adversely impact the potential to develop and implement humanitarian love in practice contexts and cases.
The reviewed articles suggest that health professionals looking inward to one's self with kindness or being exposed to love in the immediate environment, such as their family or social environment, can trigger positive emotions that significantly contribute to developing their emotional resilience, health and well‐being [8,43,46,48,53,54,55,56,57].
The reviewed papers suggest that self‐compassion, self‐kindness, and self‐love are crucial for self‐care and emotional intelligence, serving as effective tools for fostering individual resilience and delivering high‐quality patient care.
These attributes enable nurses to meet patients' needs with empathy, authenticity, openness, and humour, while also promoting their own well‐being, thus reinforcing the importance of love in the healing process [8,46,48,50,53,54,55,56,57].
Despite this acknowledgement, reviewed articles argue that the limited available research identifies that healthcare professionals are limited in or incapable of implementing and maintaining effective self‐care strategies and, in the demands of daily working life, often lose sight of their own self‐care needs [48,49].
In part, this is due to the social and professional expectation that may perceive healthcare professionals seeking a humanitarian type of love as selfish or an indication of performance underachievement, and in part due to the stressful hospital environment and the lack of relevant training [48,49,50].
In summation, humanitarian love directed from healthcare professionals to themselves can trigger positive emotions that can significantly contribute to providing adequate and quality patient care, attending to others' needs and offering comfort and security to individuals in need of care.
However, the lack of relevant training, the stressful working environment, and the social and professional expectations that perceive humanitarian love directed to healthcare professionals as selfish are indicators of performance underachievement, ergo inhibiting humanitarian love directed to the self.
Studies reviewed correlate humanitarian love with increased professional commitment and decreased burnout sentiments.
The greater the humanitarian love health professionals display towards the people they care for and towards themselves, the lower the levels of fatigue, burnout, and emotional exhaustion they exhibit [45,47].
Conversely, nurses and midwives exhibiting increased levels of fatigue, burnout, and emotional exhaustion adversely affect their potential to concentrate on their caring activities, effectively communicate with people in need of care, and adequately display professional commitment [47,49,50].
Consequently, these studies interpret the lack of concentration, effective communication, and professional commitment as predictive factors for depersonalised care and for diminished levels of humanitarian love expressed to people in need of care and towards themselves [45,47].
Moreover, humanitarian love relates to personal and professional satisfaction, higher feelings of accomplishment, and a sustained state of wellness and well‐being that frequently lead to exhibiting even greater levels of humanitarian love and decreased levels of burnout sentiments and job fatigue [45,47,49,50].
In summation, the literature links the lack or diminished levels of humanitarian love towards individuals requiring care to burnout sentiments, emotional exhaustion, and compassion fatigue for health professionals.
In contrast, increased levels of humanitarian love towards individuals needing care create the preconditions of effective communication, professional commitment and satisfaction, and sustained wellness and well‐being.
Finally, lack or decreased humanitarian love levels in care provision can be predictive of professional burnout and depersonalised care.
This study aimed to explore the importance of humanitarian love and its psychosocial impact on health professionals and comprehend its role as a core value in the VBP framework.
The existing international literature lacks studies focusing specifically on humanitarian love in healthcare.
Therefore, our review synthesised narrative data from 16 quantitative and qualitative studies that analysed the definition of humanitarian love and its impact on the psychosocial state of healthcare professionals to recognise and introduce it as a core value of VBP.
The primary findings of our research have underscored the various interpretations surrounding humanitarian love.
The current review asserts that humanitarian love lacks a definitional consensus, something acknowledged already within scientific and philosophical writings.
Hren [58] identified, among others, the definitional conflict concerning the notion of sacrifice in humanitarian love, suggesting that humanitarian love requires a degree of contingent sacrifice.
This sacrifice unavoidably includes concepts of selflessness and altruism that go beyond care done in exchange for material goods [59].
However, parts of the literature question the notion of sacrifice, selflessness, and altruism that are woven into the fabric of humanitarian love and, as an extension, in nursing.
Liaschenko and Peters [60] consider, if not anything else, the very fact that nursing claims to be a profession unavoidably includes a struggle for claiming occupational turf through power and potentially through class, gender, and race, ergo diluting any argument of value‐based practice.
Furthermore, Lipscomb [61] argues that traits or values such as caring, compassion, and empathy, and, by extension, argued in this paper, humanitarian love are misapprehensively and unwarrantedly passed as collective traits somehow ingrained in each nurse by merely being part of the profession, rather than being a mere record of hope and opinion or even imagined and doxastic fantasy traits perpetuated by professional propaganda.
It appears from our analysis that definitional disparities concerning humanitarian love cannot simply be put down to linguistic disagreement or that we have not yet agreed on the terms to express it but are more fundamentally related to the character of the profession, to a potential agenda put forward by nurses in their push for professionalisation, and to the potential conflicts between values inert in humanitarian love and the division of labour included in professionalisation.
While there may be more at play regarding semantic and glossary confusion concerning humanitarian love, our analysis identifies humanitarian love as a motive and positive factor for caring and an integral component of patient‐centred care, patient satisfaction and alleviation of suffering.
Adib‐Hajbaghery and Bolandian Bafghi [1] make the case for “humanitarian” love as a motivating factor that enables nurses to examine their values and beliefs and determine how to best interact with patients.
Similarly, Hatzikiriakidis et al. [62] make a case for patient‐centred and value‐based care through interpersonal healthcare interactions that inextricably include compassion and (what we define in this review) humanitarian love.
Loughlin [64] views value‐based caring that may include humanitarian love in the context of the current care system as unrealistic as it does not allow for a plurality of values in the caring process.
Moreover, Loughlin [64] argues that even if the current care system allowed for a plurality of values, this would remain problematic as this will enable diverse and potentially contradictory values or definitions of values to emerge and propose the need for new skill development from health professionals to confront the ethical challenges and paradoxes inherent in value‐based practice.
The current review concurs with the above literature that identifies organisational, epistemological, practical, and ethical challenges in implementing value‐based practice and humanitarian love in the daily care provision.
We accept that humanitarian love is a skill and competence that needs fostering and development and necessitates reforming current organisational structures of care to enable practice based on humanitarian love.
Moreover, the current review identifies that humanitarian love is a well‐suited concept and ideal for the nursing profession and practice as it enables a shift from mechanistic and positivistic ways of practising to more interpretational and interpersonal approaches, but as well caution as did Maidan [65] for ethics that humanitarian love may run the risk of becoming a way of knowledge instead of a way of professional life for nurses.
Indeed, Mitala [66] concurs with the view that the sciences, like psychology (or nursing in our case), by imposing scientific reductionism on the concept of humanitarian love make it a highly prescriptive and ineffective practice strategy.
Interestingly, and in a slightly different context, Fulford [67] makes the point that value‐based practice is well‐being practice and Mitala [66], citing Kierkegaard, asserts that love one's neighbour is not to be sung about—it is to be fulfilled in reality.
In simpler terms, humanitarian love requires performative‐based nursing and a way for nurses to live their (professional) life, or as Brown et al. [68] identify, it is embodied and lived that includes outlook, physical disposition and the manner of navigating the social (and clinical) work.
Making humanitarian love integral to the individual's professional life requires changing the individual health professional's mindset and simultaneously changing the context of practice.
The literature identifies such change as a learning journey that nursing students and nursing professionals need to embark upon and define such practice as embodied and performative, akin to learning a new language [69,70].
While such a radical reform of practice is demanding, at the same time, the current study's findings suggest that the benefits will extend beyond the provision of patient care to include a positive effect on health professionals' sense of well‐being and alleviation of burnout sentiments.
The literature concurs that humanitarian love creates the preconditions of professional satisfaction and a sustained state of wellness that can mitigate burnout sentiments and compassion fatigue [47,71,72].
Finally, declaring the importance of humanitarian love and its positive effects on health professionals, our last aim is to recognise it as a core value of VBP framework.
It is widely known that humanitarian love is a significant source for developing a loving, caring and peaceful community.
In bibliography, there was mentioned the humanitarian love scale which encompasses altruism, philanthropy, caring, tolerance, shared values, love of kindness, moderation, obeying law, empathy and social responsibility [31].
According to Adib‐Hajbaghery and BolandianBafghi [1], when care is connected with humanitarian love, it becomes a universal value.
In nurse–patient relationships, for example, humanitarian love forms the basis of human care as it means showing the feeling of kindness, support, goodness, and self‐esteem which are leading to complete care [1,73,74].
At the same time, values are considered precious guiding factors.
In VBP, values enhance clinical decision‐making, improve patient and caregiver satisfaction, and boost treatment adherence [67,75].
Humanitarian love, as we've discovered, is a significant value for healthcare professionals with positive psychosocial effects.
Therefore, it can be recognised as a core value within VBP, contributing to health professionals' resilience, job satisfaction, and overall fulfilment.
In addition, the consideration of human values stands as a significant imperative within the realm of healthcare.
However, it is notable that the VBP framework may not uniformly align with all clinical settings, exemplified by its potential limitations within environments such as emergency rooms.
Regarding research endeavours, while it holds promise in broadening the knowledge base of healthcare professionals, the elucidation of the concept of humanitarian love may introduce intricacies in its adoption and presentation.
Lastly, within the domain of education, the integration of humanitarian love as a pedagogical principle presents an opportunity to imbue students with essential values for their future practice.
Nevertheless, prudent caution must be exercised to prevent any inadvertent escalation of risks associated with breaching professional boundaries.
This systematic literature review should be considered within the context of some limitations.
First, the number of studies that met the inclusion criteria was constrained by the limited availability of publications on the topic.
Furthermore, neither our search strategy nor the hand‐searching process yielded any randomised controlled trials (RCTs), which may undermine the assessment of the interventions' efficacy.
Specifically, 16 studies may impact on the review's conclusiveness and representativeness towards the meaning question and the general population.
Furthermore, we have to take into consideration the sample size and the mean age of health professionals, which cannot encompass the health community of all clinical sectors.
Some studies had moderate quality reviews, potentially affecting the results.
Moreover, several studies were not retrieved, potentially compromising the representativeness of the findings.
The studies had significant heterogeneity, and we did not conduct meta‐analysis.
Finally, our limited period of searching for the studies in the international literature and the ones written in English may negatively affect the results of our systematic literature review.
Last but not least, quantifying humanitarian love is challenging; future research efforts should prioritise conducting meta‐syntheses to consolidate and integrate findings from existing studies, providing a more comprehensive understanding of the topic.
We believe that this review provides a sufficient basis for even more empirical studies to be carried out in the future.
As a fundamental element, professional love facilitates the healing process, the ultimate goal of clinical care.
As a future goal, according to health professionals and students, a university project could be developed in the faculties of health and human sciences that will sensitise, educate, and mobilise students and professionals to enhance care networks around patients' values in any clinical sector.
Additionally, humanitarian love can be scientifically explored through the VBP framework, linked to vital aspects of healthcare relationships.
Finally, by promoting humanitarian love via the VBP framework, we can potentially mitigate the negative effects of stress and enhance the professional well‐being of healthcare providers.
The main ethical concern is that humanitarian love is seen as excessive and raises professional and scientific questions due to its lack of boundaries.
However, our review suggests that when health professionals permit humanitarian love within a framework, it can lead to positive outcomes in healthcare relationships, ultimately improving the quality of healthcare.
Our systematic literature review provides a better understanding of the term humanitarian love as referred to or implied in healthcare literature.
We found that the literature on humanitarian love lacks a clear and consistent definition, often conflating it with concepts such as compassion, emotional support, and empathy.
Humanitarian love, however, is distinct in that it encompasses helping others, alleviating suffering, respecting their emotions and well‐being, and promoting their growth and self‐actualisation.
When healthcare professional's direct humanitarian love towards themselves, it can evoke positive emotions that significantly enhance their ability to provide high‐quality care, attend to patients' needs, and offer comfort and security to those in need.
Additionally, humanitarian love towards patients can help minimise the feelings of burnout, emotional exhaustion, and compassion fatigue among healthcare professionals.
To our knowledge, this report is the first systematic literature review that identifies the role of humanitarian love in VBP framework and its impact on healthcare professionals.
As a result, we concluded that it is highly relevant and a priority to conduct more research on this uncharted area.
In summary, humanitarian love enhances the quality of the caring process, as it is a compassionate action based on human values, and it can neither be separated from the healthcare needs of patients nor the health professionals who provide care.
For future research, several scales can be used to measure humanitarian love.
Specifically, the Santa Clara Brief Compassion Scale [76] assesses compassion and emotional responsiveness towards others, particularly humanity.
In addition, the Compassionate Love Scale [77] measures compassionate love directed at both close and distant individuals.
Furthermore, the Humanitarian Love Scale [31] focuses specifically on love and compassion towards humanity.
Collectively, these validated tools are essential for understanding humanitarian love, thereby providing a foundation for promoting prosocial attitudes and interventions across different contexts.