Brassica carinatais considered an orphan crop, yet it is vital for understanding the evolution of the triangle of UBrassicaspecies.
The availability of a genome reference for this species has allowed for the interrogation of the genomic and genetic underpinnings of important traits, including disease resistance.
In this study, we report a comprehensive analysis of resistance gene analogs (RGAs) in the first genome assembly forB.
carinata(zd‐1).
A total of 2570 RGAs were predicted, of which 2020 were transmembrane leucine‐rich repeats and 550 were nucleotide‐binding site leucine‐rich repeats.
Gene duplication events affected 65.2% of the RGAs, which were classified as either intergenomic or intragenomic duplications.
The contrasting patterns of these gene duplication events between the two subgenomes (B and C) support previous findings indicating the presence of subgenome dominance in this species, a characteristic that is shared with the other allopolyploidBrassicas.
Comparative analysis with its diploid progenitors,B.
nigraandB.oleracea, revealed conservation of genomic features among these species, while phylogenetic analysis suggests thatB.
carinataRGAs have undergone extensive expansion.
This study is the first to analyze the complete set of RGAs within theB.
carinatagenome, presenting a comprehensive view of the disease resistance landscape in this species.
Significant number of resistance genes analogs (RGAs) were predicted in theBrassica carinatazd‐1 genome assembly.
The RGAs were highly duplicated and unevenly distributed in theB.
carinatagenome.
Subgenome dominance was evident based on the duplication patterns of RGAs.
Dynamic evolution was observed inB.
carinataRGAs relative to the progenitor species.
Brassica carinata(BBCC,n= 17) is one of the allotetraploid species in theBrassicatriangle of U and was formed from the natural hybridization ofB.
nigra(BB) andB.
oleracea(CC) (U,1935).
This species is thought to have originated in Ethiopia and parts of East Africa extending toward the Mediterranean coast, where it is mainly grown as a vegetable and condiment.
It is also used in traditional medicine for treating common tropical diseases (Seepaul et al.,2021).
Beyond Africa,B.
carinataexhibits a wide range of agroecological adaptation, including in drought‐prone and temperate areas (Kumar et al.,2020).
It has also been found well‐suited for crop rotation with major staples including maize and soybean (Karami et al.,2022).
Furthermore, when planted as a break crop, it can enhance weed management strategies in major crop production systems due to its ability to compete and eventually reduce the density of noxious weeds (Tiwari et al.,2021).
Brassica carinatarecently gained attention as a potential source of renewable energy that can replace fossil‐based fuels because of its chemical properties (Roslinsky et al.,2021).
Its seeds contain high levels of erucic and linoleic acids, which can be processed into a high‐quality biofuel (Redda et al.,2022).
There is also potential for doubling the fuel output from its oil as one molecule of erucic acid can be cleaved into two biofuel hydrocarbons (Seepaul et al.,2021).
The suitability modeling of Alam and Dwivedi (2019) projected a production potential between 980 and 2045 million L of jet fuel fromB.
carinata, which is enough to replace 1.4%–2.33% of petroleum‐based jet fuel usage in the United States.
The cultivation ofB.
carinatafor renewable energy production indeed offers a sustainable solution for potentially decreasing carbon emissions without displacing feed and food crops (Iboyi et al.,2023).
Besides its industrial use,B.
carinatahas been known to be a rich source of useful agronomic traits for crop breeding including resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses (Thakur et al.,2019).
Limbalkar et al. (2021) successfully developedB.
juncealines derived from interspecific hybridization withB.
carinata, which showed high drought tolerance and potential for hybrid development.
In another study,B.
carinatawas shown to display higher frost tolerance resulting in greater yield compared with other plants species including rapeseed (B. napus) and pennycress (Thlaspi arvense) (Tiwari et al.,2021).
Tonguç and Griffiths (2004) reported the successful transfer of powdery mildew resistance fromB.
carinatatoB.
oleraceawith the aid of the embryo rescue technique.
Genetic mapping also identified a locus on chromosome B07 underlying resistance to the black rot pathogen,Xanthomonas campestrispv.campestris, enabling molecular breeding for resistance against this disease (Sharma et al.,2016).
Furthermore, theB.
carinataline, ATC94129P, was identified as resistant toPseudocercosporella capsellae, the causal pathogen of white leaf spot disease inBrassicaspecies (Gunasinghe et al.,2016).
These studies demonstrate the potential use ofB.
carinatafor stress tolerance breeding inBrassicacrops.
Compared with otherBrassicaspecies, genomic studies inB.
carinatahave been scarce mainly due to the lack of genome resources available for this species.
The first genome reference was only made available in 2021, which was considered a milestone inBrassicagenomics as it completed the genome information for all the six species in triangle of U (Song et al.,2021).
This genome reference was based on an advanced inbred line, zd‐1, spanning a total genome size of 1.1 Gbp with 97,149 predicted genes, which is more thanB.
juncea(79,593) but less compared toB.
napus(101,040).
The availability of this reference enables the estimation of the time of formation ofB.
carinata, which was deduced to be slightly earlier thanB.
napusbut later thanB.
Thus, this resource provides important insights into evolutionary relationship ofBrassicaspecies in the triangle of U.
Furthermore, theB.
carinata(zd‐1) genome reference shows great potential for advancing genomic studies, including characterizing the disease resistance landscape in this crop, which will assist breeding for improved disease resistance inBrassicacrops.
This can be facilitated by identifying disease resistance genes or resistance gene analogs (RGAs) in this reference.
RGAs can be generally classified as either nucleotide binding‐site leucine‐rich repeats (NBS‐LRRs/NLRs) or transmembrane leucine‐rich repeats (TM‐LRRs) (Li et al.,2016).
Within the NLR group, two subclasses are identified: regular NLRs, which carry either the toll/interleukin‐1 receptor (TIR) or coiled‐coil (CC) domains at the amino terminus; thus, they are classified as TIR‐NBS‐LRR (TNLs) and CC‐NBS‐LRR (CNLs), respectively.
Some NLRs may lack one or more domains and are categorized as non‐regular NLRs; for example, CN and TN lack the LRR domain, NL does not possess the amino terminus domains (CC or TIR), TX has a TIR domain linked to an unknown domain, and “Other” NLRs contain only TIR and CC domains.
On the other hand, TM‐LRRs can be divided into three subclasses, including receptor‐like kinases (RLKs) and receptor‐like proteins (RLPs), which are well‐known types of genes.
The last subclass, TM‐CC, is an atypical RGA with a transmembrane domain similar to RLKs and RLPs but with an additional CC domain that is typically observed in NLRs (Li et al.,2016).
While Song et al. (2021) have initially identified RGAs in zd‐1 assembly, this was only limited to some NLR subclasses, and no information was presented for TM‐LRRs.
Thus, there is still an incomplete understanding of the RGA repertoire in this species, which will be crucial for utilizing this species in disease‐resistance breeding.
This study aims to bridge the knowledge gap in this research area by characterizing all the RGAs in this species.
We predicted all the known RGA families in this reference, including NLRs and TM‐LRRs, to analyze their genome‐wide distribution and organization.
Comparative analysis betweenB.
carinata’s diploid progenitor species,B.
nigraandB.
oleracea, was also performed, providing key insights into the evolution of RGAs in these species.
This study is the first to comprehensively perform a genome‐wide assessment of the RGAs inB.
carinata, presenting the overall picture of the resistance gene landscape in this species.
The first genome assembly forB.
carinata(zd‐1) was downloaded from theBrassicadatabase (http://brassicadb.bio2db.com) and used for RGA mining (TableS1).
The RGAugury pipeline (Li et al.,2016) was implemented to identify the putative RGAs in this genome.
The pipeline identifies genes based on their conserved motifs and divides them into two main classes, which can either be a TM‐LRR or an NLR.
The TM‐LRRs were further classified into RLPs, RLKs, and TM‐CCs, while the NLRs were subdivided into several groups depending on the presence or absence of specific domains, namely, NBS, CNL, TNL, CN, NL, TX, and Other.
RGAs predicted in the progenitor speciesB.
nigra(NI100v2) (Perumal et al.,2020) andB.
oleracea(JZSv1) (Liu et al.,2014) were also retrieved for comparative analysis.
Significant number of resistance genes analogs (RGAs) were predicted in theBrassica carinatazd‐1 genome assembly.
The RGAs were highly duplicated and unevenly distributed in theB.
carinatagenome.
Subgenome dominance was evident based on the duplication patterns of RGAs.
Dynamic evolution was observed inB.
carinataRGAs relative to the progenitor species.
The analysis of gene duplication was performed through basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) comparison of all the RGA protein sequences against each other.
A custom database of the protein sequences of all the RGAs was first created and converted to FASTA format, which was then uploaded in Geneious Prime.
Genes were considered duplicates when there was at least 70% coverage and identity with ane‐value of 20 in the BLAST hits.
carinatais an allotetraploid species, duplication events located in the same genome were classified as intragenomic, while those detected between the B and C subgenomes were considered as intergenomic.
Furthermore, paralogs or duplicated genes located within 5 Mb from each other on the same chromosome were classified as tandemly duplicated, while those located beyond 5 Mb, including other chromosomes in the same genome, were considered as segmentally duplicated (Agarwal et al.,2016).
The RGAs predicted in unplaced contigs were not included in the analysis as they do not have genomic coordinates on the 17 chromosomes.
The method described by Bayer et al. (2019) was employed for the physical clustering analysis.
This utilized a custom Python 3 script (makeRGeneClusterAnalysis), which merges RGAs into RGA‐gene‐rich clusters when there is at least one RGA within 10 upstream or 10 downstream genes.
The clusters were then classified as homogeneous (those containing the same type of RGA class i.e., all NLRs or TM‐LRRs) or heterogeneous (those having both NLRs and TM‐LRRs regardless of the number).
The same method was applied forB.
nigraandB.
oleraceaRGAs to compare their physical clustering patterns withB.
The best‐matching homologs ofB.
carinataRGAs in theB.
nigraandB.
oleraceagenomes were identified using BLAST.
Similar to the gene duplication analysis mentioned above, a custom database forB.
nigraandB.
oleraceaRGAs was created and converted to FASTA files, which were then uploaded in Geneious Prime.
Only significant hits with ane‐value of 40 were considered as conserved genes (Alamery et al.,2018).
The protein sequences of the RGAs were aligned using the multiple alignment using fast Fourier transform algorithm.
The alignment file was then utilized as input for building maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic trees using the FastTree program (Katoh et al.,2009) implemented in Geneious Prime.
The trees were then visualized using the FigTree program (Rambaut,2010).
Separate trees were constructed for NLRs and TM‐LRRs.
Similarly, phylogenetic trees were constructed forB.
carinataRGAs with their homologs in the progenitor species to analyze the evolutionary trajectory of these genes in these species.
All the statistical analyses were performed using the Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR version 2.0.1,2014).
The chromosome ideograms for plotting the genome‐wide distribution of the RGAs were created using PhenoGram program (Wolfe et al.,2013).
The homolog pair plot was created using the RIdeogram package (Hao et al.,2020) and the bar graphs using the ggplot2 package, implemented in R (R Core Team,2021).
A total of 2570 RGAs were identified using RGAugury, accounting for 2.65% of the total genes predicted in theB.
carinatazd‐1 genome assembly.
The majority of these RGAs were classified as TM‐LRRs (2020), while 550 were predicted as NLRs.
Among the TM‐LRRs, RLKs (1352) were the most abundant, followed by TM‐CCs (425) and RLPs (243). Of the predicted NLR genes, TNLs were the most abundant (168), followed by NLs (96), TXs (82), CNLs (76), NBSs (47), TNs (35), and subclass Other (34), while CNs (12) were the least abundant NLR subclass (Table1).
The total number of RGAs predicted inBrassica carinatain comparison to its progenitor genomes.
Abbreviations: CC, coiled‐coil; CNL, CC‐NBS‐LRR; LRR, leucine‐rich repeat; NBS, nucleotide‐binding site; NLR, nucleotide‐binding site leucine‐rich repeat; RGA, resistance gene analog; RLK, receptor‐like kinase; RLP, receptor‐like protein; TIR, toll/interleukin‐1 receptor; TNL, TIR‐NBS‐LRR; TM, transmembrane.
There were more RGAs predicted in the C subgenome (1330) compared with the B subgenome (1036), and a further 204 RGAs were predicted on unplaced contigs.
The RGAs were unevenly distributed among the chromosomes with the B subgenome chromosomes containing an average of 130 RGAs, ranging from 90 to 196 per chromosome, while the C subgenome chromosomes contained an average of 148 RGAs and ranged from 120 to 197 per chromosome.
Chromosomes B01 (196) and B08 (90) carried the most and the least number of RGAs within the B subgenome, respectively.
In the C subgenome, chromosome C06 harbored the greatest number of RGAs (197), while C09 (120) contained the least number of RGAs (Figures1and2).
Chromosome distribution of nucleotide‐binding site leucine‐rich repeat (NLR) genes in the B and C subgenomes ofBrassica carinata.
CC, coiled‐coil; CNL, CC‐NBS‐LRR; LRR, leucine‐rich repeat; NBS, nucleotide‐binding site; TIR, toll/interleukin‐1 receptor; TNL, TIR‐NBS‐LRR.
Chromosome distribution of transmembrane (TM)‐leucine‐rich repeat (LRR) genes in B and C subgenomes ofBrassica carinata.
CC, coiled‐coil; RLK, receptor‐like kinase; RLP, receptor‐like protein; TM, transmembrane.
The two main RGA classes differed in genome distribution.
TM‐LRRs were mostly found on chromosome B01 (163) followed by C01 (149), while they were least abundant on B08 (73). The NLR genes were most abundant on B07 (69) followed by chromosomes B03 and C04 (both 47), while B02 harbored the least number of NLR genes.
There were more TM‐LRR genes (172) predicted in the unplaced contigs than NLRs (32) (Table2).
The number of RGAs in the B and C subgenomes ofBrassica carinata.
Abbreviations: CC, coiled‐coil; CNL, CC‐NBS‐LRR; LRR, leucine‐rich repeat; NBS, nucleotide‐binding site; NLR, nucleotide‐binding site leucine‐rich repeat; RGA, resistance gene analog; RLK, receptor‐like kinase; RLP, receptor‐like protein; TIR, toll/interleukin‐1 receptor; TNL, TIR‐NBS‐LRR; TM, transmembrane.
The TM‐LRR subclasses were found in all the chromosomes, with RLKs being most abundant on chromosome B01 (115) and least abundant on B08 (51). RLPs were mostly located on C07 (20), while TM‐CCs were most abundant on C06 (47). In contrast to TM‐LRRs, not all NLR subclasses were present in all 17 chromosomes.
For instance, CN genes were only present on seven chromosomes (B02, B07, C03, C04, C07, C08, and C09).
Subclass Other was absent on six chromosomes (B04, B06, B07, C04, C05, and C09), and TN genes were not found on five chromosomes (B02, B04, C01, C06, and C09).
NBS genes were absent on two chromosomes (B08 and C01), while CNL, NL, and TX genes were absent on chromosomes B05, B03, and B06, respectively (Table2).
A total of 1675 RGAs, accounting for 65.2% of the total number, were duplicated in theB.
carinatagenome (Table3).
Of these, 1133 (67.6%) exhibited intergenomic duplications, while 542 (32.4%) were duplicated within the same genome (intragenomic duplication).
In general, there were more TM‐LRRs (1361 or 81.3% of the total duplicated RGAs) than NLRs (314 or 18.7%) that were affected by the two duplication events.
Within the TM‐LRR class, RLK genes showed the greatest number of duplicated genes with 1003 (59.9%), followed by TM‐CCs with 237 (14.1%) and RLPs with 121 (7.2%).
Among the NLRs, TNLs showed the greatest number of duplicated genes with 79 (4.7%) members, followed by NLs with 64 (3.8%), while CN genes were the least affected with nine (0.5%) duplicated gene members.
The number ofBrassica carinataRGAs showing intergenomic and intragenomic duplications.
Abbreviations: CC, coiled‐coil; CNL, CC‐NBS‐LRR; LRR, leucine‐rich repeat; NBS, nucleotide‐binding site; NLR, nucleotide‐binding site leucine‐rich repeat; RGA, resistance gene analog; RLK, receptor‐like kinase; RLP, receptor‐like protein; TIR, toll/interleukin‐1 receptor; TNL, TIR‐NBS‐LRR; TM, transmembrane.
The C subgenome contained a higher total and average number of duplicated RGAs (911 total and 101 average per chromosome) compared to the B subgenome (764 total and 96 average per chromosome) (TableS2).
Similarly, the C subgenome had a higher average number of RGAs (37) per chromosome affected by intragenomic duplication than the B subgenome (26). However, the B subgenome had a higher average number of RGAs (70) per chromosome affected by intergenomic duplication compared to the C subgenome (64). Within the B subgenome, chromosome B03 contained the greatest number of RGAs affected by intergenomic duplication with 99, followed by B01 with 83, while B06 had the least with 51.
Chromosome C01 (110) contained the greatest number of intergenomic RGA duplicates in the C subgenome, followed by C04 (105), while C09 had the least number with 21.
Thus, there is greater range in the number of intergenomic RGA duplicates along the C subgenome (21‐110 RGAs) than in the B subgenome (51‐99 RGAs).
The RGAs exhibiting intragenomic duplication were further classified as either tandem or segmentally duplicated (TableS3).
Of the 542 genes showing intragenomic duplications, 283 (or 16.9% of the total duplicated genes) were tandemly duplicated and 259 (15.5%) were segmentally duplicated.
There were twice as many segmentally duplicated RGAs on the C subgenome (179 total; 20 on average per chromosome) than the B subgenome (80 total; 10 on average).
This difference was less pronounced for tandemly duplicated genes with the C subgenome containing 155 members (17 on average per chromosome) and the B subgenome with 128 (16 on average per chromosome).
Among the chromosomes, C06 contained the greatest number of segmentally duplicated RGAs (62), followed by C07 (25) and B01 (23), while B02 harbored the least number (3). Chromosome B01 contained the highest number (43) of tandemly duplicated genes, followed by C05 (34) and C07 (26), while B02 exhibited the smallest number with only one tandemly duplicated RGA.
Most of the chromosomes contained more TM‐LRRs compared with NLRs that were affected by intragenomic duplications.
However, there were no significant differences in the number of tandem versus segmentally duplicated RGAs for both the NLR (t(28) = −1.5,p= 0.07) and TM‐LRR (t(30) = 0.13,p= 0.44) classes.
This suggests that both duplication events affect the RGAs regardless of their classification.
Resistance genes are often arranged in clusters; thus, this genomic organization was also examined inB.
The clustering analysis revealed that 184 RGAs inB.
carinata, representing 7.2% of the total RGAs, were distributed in 57 physical clusters (Figure3).
Of these, 19 were homogeneous TM‐LRR clusters and 14 were homogeneous NLR clusters.
The remaining 24 clusters were heterogeneous, consisting of both TM‐LRRs and NLRs.
Distribution of the physical clusters of the resistance gene analogs (RGAs) in the B and C subgenomes ofBrassica carinata.
Abbreviations: CC, coiled‐coil; CNL, CC‐NBS‐LRR; LRR, leucine‐rich repeat; NBS, nucleotide‐binding site; NLR, nucleotide‐binding site leucine‐rich repeat; RLK, receptor‐like kinase; RLP, receptor‐like protein; TIR, toll/interleukin‐1 receptor; TNL, TIR‐NBS‐LRR; TM, transmembrane.
The C subgenome contained a higher number of physical clusters (34) and clustered RGAs (97) compared with the B subgenome, which had 23 clusters harboring 87 RGAs.
However, chromosomes B03 and B07 contained the greatest number of physical clusters (six each) and clustered RGAs (22 each).
In the C subgenome, chromosome C07 contained the greatest number of clustered RGAs (17), which were found on five clusters.
Of the clustered RGAs, 85 were NLRs including 20 NLs, 16 NBS and TNLs, 11 TNs, 10 TXs, five CNLs, four Other, and three CNs.
There were 99 clustered TM‐LRRs, of which 83 were RLKs, 11 were RLKs, and five were TM‐CCs.
Chromosome B07 (14) harbored the greatest number of clustered NLRs, while B03 and C09 contained the greatest number of clustered TM‐LRRs.
The physical clustering and the gene duplication status of the RGAs were also compared.
There were 139 physically clustered RGAs affected by gene duplication events.
Of these, 64 were affected by intergenomic duplications, while 75 showed intragenomic duplication.
Of the clustered genes affected by intragenomic duplications, 61 were tandemly duplicated and 14 were segmentally duplicated.
There were 57 physically clustered NLRs that exhibited duplication, of which 30 experienced intragenomic duplication (26 tandem and four segmental) and 27 were affected by intergenomic duplication.
There were 82 physically clustered TM‐LRRs affected by gene duplication events, 37 of which exhibited intergenomic duplication, while 45 showed intragenomic duplication events (35 tandem and 10 segmental).
The evolutionary relationship of the RGAs was examined by constructing maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees presented as cladograms in Figures4and5.
Separate trees were constructed for TM‐LRRs (RLKs, RLPs, and TM‐CCs) and NLR genes.
The 2020 TM‐LRRs were divided into ten distinct clades, with the largest clade (X) consisting of 771 gene members, followed by clade IX with 450 members and clade II with 262 members, while the smallest clade (III) only contained six members (Figure4).
The different TM‐LRR RGA subclasses were generally found in the same clade.
The RLKs were the most dominant subclass in clades X, VIII, VII, VI, V, and IV, while the TM‐CCs were prominently found on clade IX.
The majority of the RLPs were found on clade II but this clade also included a similar number of RLKs.
Clade I contained a mixture of RLPs, RLKs, and TM‐CCs in almost equal number.
Other RGA classes can also be found in clades dominated by one type of RGA class.
For instance, clade X, which consisted mostly of RLKs, also included several TM‐CCs (15) and RLPs (11) in some of its subclades.
Similarly, the TM‐CC clade (IX) included 48 RLKs and 34 RLPs.
Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of transmembrane (TM)‐leucine‐rich repeat (LRR) resistance gene analogs (RGAs) (receptor‐like kinase [RLK], receptor‐like protein [RLP], and TM‐coiled‐coil [CC]).
The cladogram was inferred based on alignment of 2020 protein sequences.
The branches are colored to distinguish the different clades (I–X).
The outer ring colors indicate the RGA type.
Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of nucleotide‐binding site leucine‐rich repeat (NLR) resistance gene analogs (RGAs).
The cladogram was inferred based on alignment of 550 protein sequences.
The branches are colored to distinguish the different clades (I–XIV).
The outer ring colors indicate the RGA type.
CC, coiled‐coil; CNL, CC‐NBS‐LRR; LRR, leucine‐rich repeat; NBS, nucleotide‐binding site; TIR, toll/interleukin‐1 receptor; TNL, TIR‐NBS‐LRR.
The 550 NLR genes formed 14 distinct clades (Figure5), which was higher compared to TM‐LRRs.
Notably, the first nine clades (I–IX) were very divergent and formed small clades containing a maximum of seven members.
Most of the gene members in these small clades were RGAs with TIR domains.
In one extreme case, a TNL gene (BcaB07g3090) was very distinct and separated from the rest of the clades.
Clade XIV was the largest with 190 gene members, of which majority contained the CC domain (CNL and CN).
This was followed by clade X with 127 gene members, which were mostly TIR‐containing RGAs (TNL, TN, and TX).
Clades XI and XII each had 79 gene members belonging to different NLR subclasses.
For example, although more than half of the gene members in clade XI were TIR‐carrying RGAs, the majority of the NBS genes were also located in this clade.
Similarly, within clade XII, several NLs (14) and Other (12) subclass were found along with TIR‐containing genes.
In general, theB.
carinatagenome contained more predicted RGAs compared to its diploid progenitor species.
However, considering each subgenome,B.
nigracontained more RGAs (1607) compared to the B subgenome ofB.
carinata(1036). In contrast, theB.
carinataC subgenome contained more RGAs (1330) compared toB.
oleracea(851). There was also an overall increase in the average length of RGAs inB.
carinata(5724 bp) versusB.
nigra(3650 bp) andB.
oleracea(2920 bp).
This is equivalent to 1.6x and 2x increase in gene length relative toB.
nigraandB.
oleracea, respectively.
On average, the NLR genes inB.
carinatawere 1.9x and 2.3x longer (6283 bp) compared withB.
nigra(3346 bp) andB.
oleracea(2745 bp), respectively.
The TM‐LRRs inB.
carinata(5827) were 1.5x and 2x longer compared toB.
nigra(3800) andB.
oleracea(2891), respectively.
However, while there was a marked difference in the number of RGAs among species, the proportion of the two main RGA classes was the same for each of the species (approximately 79% TM‐LRR and 21% NLRs).
The distribution of the different RGA classes was compared between the B and C subgenomes ofB.
carinatarelative to its progenitors (FigureS1).
A total of 337 NLRs and 1270 TM‐LRRs were identified inB.
nigra, which was higher than in the B subgenome ofB.
carinata(226 NLRs and 810 TM‐LRRs).
Similarly, all theB.
nigrachromosomes had higher numbers of NLRs and TM‐LRRs compared with theB.
carinataB subgenome, except for B01 and B07, which displayed the opposite pattern.
The chromosomes with the greatest number of NLRs and TM‐LRRs also differed between the species.
The NLRs were most abundant on B04 (107) inB.
nigra, while inB.
carinatathey were mostly located on B07 (69). In terms of the TM‐LRRs, chromosomes B02 (227) and B01 (163) contained the highest count inB.
nigraandB.
carinata, respectively.
There were 183 NLRs and 668 TM‐LRR genes identified inB.
oleracea, which were less than those predicted inB.
carinataC subgenome with 292 NLRs and 1038 TM‐LRRs.
Generally, there were more TM‐LRRs in all the C chromosomes ofB.
carinatathan inB.
A similar pattern was also noted for NLRs, except for chromosome C02 ofB.
oleracea, which had more NLRs (29) than inB.
carinata(13). The two species also differed in the chromosomes that carried the greatest number of NLRs and TM‐LRRs in the C subgenome.
The highest number of NLRs inB.
carinataC subgenome was found on C04 with 47, while this was on C07 inB.
oleraceawith 40.
The highest number of TM‐LRRs inB.
carinatawas found on C06 with 152, while inB.
oleraceathis was exhibited by C03 with 110.
Overall, the number of physically clustered RGAs was the same inB.
carinataandB.
nigrawith both species having 183.
However, when considering the B genome only,B.
nigracontained a significantly greater number of clustered RGAs compared with the B subgenome ofB.
carinata(87). In contrast, theB.
carinataC subgenome harbored higher number of clustered RGAs (97) compared withB.
oleracea(55). The proportion of clustered TM‐LRR and NLRs in each species was the same at 55% and 45%, respectively.
Identification of conserved genes was performed betweenB.
carinataand its progenitor genomes by comparing the protein sequences of the RGAs using BLAST.
The analysis revealed that 1515 of the 1607 total RGAs inB.
nigrawere conserved in theB.
carinatagenome (Table4; Figure6).
Among theB.
nigraTM‐LRRs, the RLKs were the most conserved RGA class with 800 of the total 808 RLKs found with a significant homolog match withB.
carinataRGAs.
nigraTM‐CCs, on the other hand, showed the lowest conservation percentage among the RGA class with only 236 of the 299 (78.9%)B. nigraTM‐CCs with a homolog match withB.
carinataRGAs.
The RLPs showed 92.64% (151/163) conservation betweenB.
nigraandB.
Of the 337B.
nigraNLRs, 328 or 97.33% were retained inB.
Number of conserved RGAs betweenBrassicacarinata and its progenitor genomes,Brassicanigra, andBrassicaoleracea.
Abbreviations: CC, coiled‐coil; NLR, nucleotide‐binding site leucine‐rich repeat; RGA, resistance gene analog; RLK, receptor‐like kinase; RLP, receptor‐like protein; TM, transmembrane.
Distribution of conserved transmembrane (TM)‐leucine‐rich repeats (LRRs) (TM‐coiled‐coil [CC], receptor‐like kinase [RLK], and receptor‐like protein [RLP]) and nucleotide‐binding site leucine‐rich repeat (NLR) genes between the B and C subgenomes ofBrassica carinataand its progenitor genomes,Brassica nigraandBrassica oleracea.
Significant RGA conservation was also observed betweenB.
oleraceaand the C subgenome ofB.
There were 808B.
oleraceaRGAs out of the total 851 (94.95%) that had a significant homolog match withB.
carinataRGAs.
Similar to the B subgenome, RLKs showed the greatest number of conserved genes with 436 of the 438 (99.54%) significantly matched to a homolog inB.
Out of the 183B.
oleraceaNLR genes, 176 or 96.17% were found to be retained inB.
There were 53 out of the 58 (91.38%)B. oleraceaRLPs that were matched to aB.
carinatahomolog.
The TM‐CCs showed 83.14% (143 out of 172 RGAs) gene conservation betweenB.
oleraceaandB.
Maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees were constructed for theB.
carinataRGAs along withB.
nigraandB.
oleraceaRGAs to study their evolutionary trajectories.
Separate trees were built for each of the NLR, RLK, RLP, and TM‐CC RGA classes.
The analysis revealed at least five patterns of evolution in the RGAs (FiguresS2–S5).
The first and most common pattern suggests a significant expansion ofB.
carinataRGAs fromB.
nigraandB.
oleracea, which was consistent to the overall ratio of the RGAs among these species.
This was observed in clusters whereB.
carinataRGAs were overrepresented compared toB.
nigraandB.
There were 95 RLK clusters that displayed this pattern, 24 in NLRs, 25 in TM‐CCs, and 11 in RLPs.
In the NLRs, for example, one cluster contained 12 RGAs fromB.
carinata, six fromB.
nigraand only one fromB.
oleracea(FigureS2B1).
Thus, in this cluster, theB.
carinataRGA number doubled from its progenitor species.
Another example in the TM‐CC class is a cluster that included nineB.
carinataRGAs, four fromB.
nigra, and only one fromB.
oleracea(FigureS3B1).
In the RLK class, one cluster harbored 10B.
carinataRGAs, along with five fromB.
nigra, andB.
oleracea(FigureS4B1).
The second pattern indicates a straightforward inheritance of RGAs fromB.
nigraandB.
This is depicted in clusters where there is an equal or almost equal number of RGAs fromB.
oleracea, andB.
There were 33 clusters showing this pattern within the RLK group and 21 in the NLR, while this was significantly lower in the TM‐CC and RLP groups with 10 and three clusters, respectively.
One NLR group with this pattern included six RGAs fromB.
carinataandB.
nigraand four fromB.
oleracea(FigureS2B2).
A cluster within the TM‐CC group contained seven RGAs fromB.carinataandB.
nigraand five fromB.
oleracea(FigureS3B2).
An RLK cluster displaying this trajectory included 11B.
carinata, 10B.
nigra, and nineB.
oleraceaRGAs (FigureS4B2).
In the RLP group, a cluster showing this pattern included fiveB.
carinataand fourB.
nigraandB.
oleraceaRGAs (FigureS5B2).
The third evolutionary pattern is represented in clusters where the members were skewed toward one of the progenitors, eitherB.
This suggests that the RGAs were preferentially inherited from one of the progenitor species.
Within NLRs, there were 11 groups that were skewed towardB.
nigraand six groups towardB.
oleracea(FigureS2B3).
Within the TM‐CC class, six groups were skewed forB.
nigra, while five were forB.
Among the RLKs, 21 clusters were skewed forB.
nigraand only five clusters forB.
oleracea; however, these were generally small groups.
Among the RLPs, ten and three groups were skewed towardB.
nigraandB.
oleracea, respectively.
An example of a cluster that is skewed towardB.
nigracan be found on FigureS4B3where eight RLKs fromB.
carinatawere grouped with seven RLKs fromB.
nigrabut none fromB.
In the RLP group, a cluster that is skewed towardB.
oleraceacontained fiveB.
oleracea, fourB.
carinata, and only three fromB.
nigra(FigureS5B3).
The fourth pattern suggests loss ofB.
carinataRGAs from the two progenitor species.
This is shown in groups where there were a smaller number ofB.
carinataRGAs compared to either of the progenitor species.
This pattern is not generally common among the different RGA classes and was mainly observed in the TM‐CC group with nine clusters exhibiting this pattern (FigureS3B4).
For example, one TM‐CC cluster included 10B.
nigra, oneB.
carinata, and noB.
oleraceaRGAs.
In NLRs, there were only three groups that showed this pattern.
For instance, one group included five RGAs fromB.
nigra, three fromB.
oleraceaand only one fromB.
carinata(FigureS2B4).
Only one RLP group exhibited this pattern, which included fiveB.
carinataalong with eightB.
nigraRGAs (FigureS5B4).
Similarly, this pattern was not common among the RLKs with only three groups showing this pattern (FigureS4B4).
In one of these clusters, oneB.
carinataRGA was grouped with five and two RGAs fromB.
nigraandB.
oleracea, respectively.
Brassica carinatawas the last species to be sequenced in the triangle of U, marking a significant milestone inBrassicagenomics as it completed the genome information for all the six species in triangle of U. In this study, we utilized the first reference genome developed forB.
carinata(zd‐1) (Song et al.,2021) to identify and characterize the RGAs in this species.
A total of 2570 RGAs were predicted, of which 2366 were anchored on the 17 chromosomes ofB.
carinataand an additional 204 on unplaced contigs.
This number of RGAs is the greatest recorded to date among the triangle of UBrassicaspecies, including the other two allotetraploid species,B.
napus(1749) (Dolatabadian et al.,2020) andB.
juncea(1591) (Tirnaz et al.,2020).
Similar to the otherBrassicaspecies, the TM‐LRRs constitute the majority of the RGAs inB.
carinata, which are four times more abundant than NLRs.
We also predicted a higher number of NLR genes (an additional of 101 NLRs) compared to Song et al. (2021). Moreover, we included the TM‐CC genes and classified them under the TM‐LRR class.
This R gene class has been neglected in previous genome‐wide identification studies; thus, this study is the first to comprehensively analyze all the known RGA classes in aBrassicaspecies.
Not only did we identify a greater number of RGAs inB.
carinata, but we also observed an overall increase in the gene size across all the RGA classes relative to its progenitor species,B.
nigraandB.
This is different from the findings inB.
napus, where the gene length of NLRs was generally decreased when compared with their diploid progenitor (B. rapaandB.
oleracea) homologs (Fu et al.,2019).
The same observation was made in our previous investigation comparing RGAs inB.
napusandB.
rapapangenomes (Amas et al.,2023).
The increase in RGA gene size inB.
carinatais due to bigger introns and exons as compared to the progenitor species (Song et al.,2021).
This might be explained by the significant amount of repetitive sequence, accounting for 58% ofB.
carinata’s genome (Song et al.,2021).
In most plant species, a burst in transposable element (TE) activity has been observed after interspecific hybridization resulting in genome size expansion (Parisod et al.,2010).
Consequently, insertion of TEs in genes can introduce new introns and exons resulting in bigger genes (Cai et al.,2022).
After expansion, selection pressure is often relaxed, facilitating the retention of the expanded genome (Parisod et al.,2010).
Additionally, the retention of these big genes inB.
carinatais likely promoted by the constrained selection and breeding activities in this species (Yim et al.,2022).
This is consistent to the findings of a recent study (Khedikar et al.,2020) utilizing 620 global collections that revealed the low genetic diversity inB.
carinata, which was attributed to the very limited hybridization events in this species (Khedikar et al.,2020).
Fixation of alleles in this species is further enhanced by geographical isolation and high inbreeding rates (Khedikar et al.,2020).
In general,B.
carinatahas undergone dynamic genomic changes following the initial hybridization of the two progenitor species.
Yim et al. (2022) found fewer syntenic blocks betweenB.
carinatasubgenomes and its progenitor species than between the other allotetraploids,B.
junceaandB.
napus, and their respective progenitor genomes.
This finding corroborates with the comparative analysis of Song et al. (2021), which showed thatB.
carinatasubgenomes exhibit lower degrees of collinearity with their progenitor species compared withB.
junceaandB.
napusand their progenitor species.
Song et al. (2021) attributed this to the heightened chromosomal rearrangements and conversion between the B and C subgenomes ofB.
These genomic alterations ultimately resulted in uneven size and compositions ofB.
carinata'ssubgenomes in comparison to its progenitor species.
This further explains the variation in the number and organization of RGAs inB.
carinatacompared with its progenitor species.
Thus, the current genomic landscape of RGAs inB.
carinatahas been significantly influenced by the genome‐wide changes in both the B and C subgenomes following polyploidization.
carinataRGAs were unevenly distributed along the B and C subgenomes with some of the chromosomes showing contrasting RGA abundance patterns when compared toB.
nigraandB.
However, the results from the homology analysis suggest that the RGAs between these species were significantly conserved.
This concurs with the findings of Yim et al. (2022), which showed thatB.
carinataretained the greatest number of whole‐genome duplication‐derived genes and experienced the least gene loss among the members of theBrassicatriangle of U (1935). Estimates of the formation ofB.
carinatadiffer among studies, but it is generally agreed that this species was formed earlier thanB.
napusbut later thanB.
juncea(Song et al.,2021; Yim et al.,2022).
However, compared to the other two allotetraploid species,B.
carinatais considered an orphan crop and has experienced minimal selection (Thakur et al.,2019).
Thus, it is expected thatB.
carinatahas retained most of the genomic features from its diploid progenitors.
Genomic studies have long established that gene duplication is ubiquitous inBrassicagenomes due to their redundant evolution.
carinatagenome is no exception as 65% of the RGAs were found to be duplicated.
This is higher than inB.
napus(50%) (Alamery et al.,2018) but lower compared toB.
juncea(78%) (Yang et al.,2021).
We observed a disparity in the patterns of RGA duplication between the two subgenomes.
The C subgenome contained more RGAs per chromosome affected by intragenomic duplications compared to the B subgenome.
In contrast, the B subgenome contained a higher number of RGAs showing intergenomic duplications despite having fewer RGAs per chromosome compared with the C subgenome.
TheBrassicaC genome has experienced more genomic rearrangements compared with the B genome (Song et al.,2021), which likely contributes to the creation of more intragenomic duplication events that affected the RGAs in this subgenome.
Conversely, the B genome is more stable than the C genome, which was attributed to its earlier divergence from their common ancestor (Paritosh et al.,2014).
However, gene copies from the B genome are more retained compared to those coming from the C genome after homoeologous transfer following homoeologous exchanges (HEs) (Yim et al.,2022).
This preferential retention of homoeologous gene copies has been linked to subgenome dominance and likely explains why there were more RGAs detected as intergenomic duplicates in the B than the C subgenome.
Subgenome dominance has also been previously reported in the other two allopolyploidBrassicaspecies.
The B subgenome ofB.
junceashowed dominance over its A subgenome in terms of genome size, gene and TE content, and degree of genetic recombination (Paritosh et al.,2021), while inB.
napus, the A subgenome exhibits dominance over its C subgenome in terms of the number of stress tolerance genes (Lu et al.,2019).
Hence, subgenome dominance seems to be a hallmark in allopolyploidBrassicaspecies, which can serve as a genomic signature for certain traits including disease resistance.
carinataRGAs formed physical clusters, which were distributed asymmetrically across the genome.
Among the chromosomes, B03 and B07 contained the most physical clusters and clustered genes.
Interestingly, a quantitative trait locus (QTL) for black rot (Xanthomonas campestrispv.campestris, race 1) has also been identified on chromosome B07 but the causal gene has not been identified (Sharma et al.,2016).
Genes conferring resistance against several bacterial pathogens, including the related speciesXanthomonas oryzae, affecting rice, are known to be organized in gene clusters; thus, it will be interesting to further examine if this gene clustering pattern on chromosome B07 is associated with black rot resistance inB.
This will potentially facilitate the identification of the causal gene for this QTL.
Furthermore, we found that there were more TM‐LRRs found in clusters than NLRs.
This could be due to the prevalence of TM‐LRRs among theB.
carinataRGAs.
However, increasing genomic data suggests that this feature is also common among TM‐LRRs in theBrassicafamily (Amas et al.,2023; Dolatabadian et al.,2020; Yang et al.,2021).
carinatahas been shown to be an excellent source of genetic resistance, a follow‐up investigation will be needed to understand how this RGA clustering pattern is contributing to this valuable trait in this species.
Consistent with the results of the gene conservation analysis, the proportion of the two RGA classes inB.
carinatawas also maintained from its progenitor diploid species,B.
nigraandB.
oleracea, at an 8:2 TM‐LRR to NLR ratio.
This is also close to the figure reported for the Brassicaceae family wherein 75% of the RGAs were TM‐LRRs and only 25% were NLRs (Tirnaz et al.,2020).
Thus, in the Brassicaceae, this proportion of TM‐LRRs to NLRs seems to be preserved among its member species.
The different TM‐LRR RGA subclasses were generally found intact within the same cluster, indicating conservation of gene sequence within the subclasses.
Among the TM‐LRRs, the RLKs contained the greatest number of distinct clades, suggesting this subclass has experienced greater gene expansion compared to RLPs and TM‐CCs.
RLKs have been shown to exhibit functional plasticity, presumably due to their roles that extend beyond disease resistance, which may also contribute to their diversification (Man et al.,2020).
Aside from leucine‐rich repeats, other extracellular domains also exist in this gene family including lectin, lysine motif, or wall‐associated kinases (Yan et al.,2023).
Advances in genomics are helping uncover the different RLK domains that play important functions in disease resistance.
carinataRLPs were found in one clade that was shared with RLKs, suggesting a common origin for these RGA classes.
Compared to RLKs, RLPs lack a kinase domain and are thought to be more ancient than RLKs.
It has been hypothesized that RLKs possibly evolved from RLPs with the integration of the kinase domain as an adaptive strategy shaped by environmental pressure and selection (Ngou et al.,2023).
InBrassicaspecies, the number of RLPs is typically lower compared to RLKs (Tirnaz et al.,2020), which is consistent with the results of a comprehensive survey across 350 plants species that found RLPs only constitute 19% of the total cell‐surface receptors (Ngou et al.,2023).
This suggests that the evolution of RLPs is more constrained compared to RLKs, yet they remain important genes for breeding disease‐resistant crops (Larkan et al.,2015).
In this study, we classified the TM‐CC genes under the TM‐LRR class due to the presence of a transmembrane domain, a feature shared among RLPs and RLKs.
The phylogenetic analysis revealed that this group also formed a distinct clade from the majority of the RLKs and RLPs, although a few of RLKs and RLPs were found in the TM‐CC clade.
TM‐CCs are considered atypical resistance genes owing to their structure and understanding of their disease resistance mechanisms is not well established.
Cantila et al. (2023) identified several TM‐CC genes that were co‐localized with disease resistance regions in the Brassicaceae, of which 70 were genetically related to cloned resistance genes in this family.
This underscores the possible involvement of this RGA class in disease resistance.
This study is the first to include the TM‐CC class in a genome‐wide assessment of RGAs in anyBrassicaspecies, providing a key resource for understanding the relationship of this gene type with other known RGAs in theBrassicaspecies.
Compared to TM‐LRRs, the NLRs formed more clades, suggesting higher diversity within this RGA class.
This is consistent with previous studies that demonstrated greater tendency of NLRs to diversify, likely due to the different subdomains they can harbor (Barragan & Weigel,2021; Dolatabadian et al.,2020; Tirnaz et al.,2020).
Furthermore, the TNL subclass formed a significantly greater number of clades compared with CNLs, suggesting that TNLs are more diverse than CNLs inB.
This result is similar to that in the basal speciesArabidopsis thaliana, suggesting that TNLs were more retained compared to CNLs in this lineage despite the CNLs being more ancient compared to TNLs (Jacob et al.,2013).
This further supports previous findings indicating that TNLs have recently undergone lineage‐specific expansions in some plant families, including theBrassicaspecies (Tamborski & Krasileva,2020).
The non‐regular NLRs that lacked the TIR and CC domains were dispersed in the different TNL and CNL clusters.
This was also observed inB.
napus, suggesting that the origin of these non‐regular NLR genes is diverse rather than monophyletic (Alamery et al.,2018).
Non‐regular NLR genes are likely produced from partial domain deletion of duplicated NLR genes.
However, while they may be lacking the typical NLR domains, several studies have shown that these truncated NLRs still contribute to pathogen recognition and downstream signaling for mounting an effective disease resistance response in plants (Adachi et al.,2023; Wang et al.,2021).
The phylogenetic analysis of the different RGA classes amongB.
carinata,B.
nigra, andB.
oleracearevealed several trajectories that helped explain the evolution of RGAs among these species.
The most common pattern suggests expansion of RGAs, which can be seen in clusters whereB.
carinataRGAs were overrepresented compared to their diploid progenitor species.
Resistance genes often show greater rates of expansion, presumably due to continuous exposure to pathogens and other associated stresses (Hofberger et al.,2014; Macqueen & Bergelson,2016).
This gene expansion is further promoted by mechanisms such as gene duplication and acquisition of other domains, possibly through recombination, chromosomal rearrangements and conversion, and insertion of TEs as discussed in previous sections.
Along with expansion, some genes also exhibited contraction, shown in clusters where there was a loss ofB.
carinataRGAs relative toB.
nigraandB.
However, the number of genes showing this pattern is relatively lower compared to genes undergoing expansion.
Thus, inB.
carinata, RGAs are undergoing more gene expansion than contraction, which fits with the overall ratio ofB.
carinataRGAs relative to its progenitor species and the findings thatB.
carinataexperienced minimal gene loss among theBrassicaspecies (Yim et al.,2022).
Another common pattern described as straightforward inheritance of RGAs is shown in clusters where both progenitors contributed either an equal or unequal (skewed in favor of either of the progenitor species) number of RGAs.
This evolutionary trajectory is expected asB.
carinatais a relatively newly formed polyploid and has not been subjected to intensive selection (Khedikar et al.,2020; Yim et al.,2022).
Furthermore, this observation is reflective of our homology analysis, which suggests that the RGAs from the diploid parents are highly conserved inB.
The pattern showing some genes with extremely long branches suggests a rapid sequence divergence and represents birth and death of RGAs (Fu et al.,2019).
The birth and death process, along with divergent selection, are widely known mechanisms of resistance gene evolution, which facilitates generation of different resistance specificities to recognize virulent pathogens (Michelmore & Meyers,1998).
Overall, this study provided insights into the dynamic evolution that shaped the current RGA repertoire ofB.
In this study, we identified the complete set of RGAs within theB.
carinatagenome to describe their distribution, organization, and evolution.
We found that theB.
carinatagenome contained the greatest number of RGAs among theBrassicaspecies in the triangle of U. Comparative analysis with its diploid progenitor species,B.
nigraandB.
oleracea, showed that the RGAs were generally conserved among these species.
The majority of RGAs were duplicated, similar to mostBrassicaspecies.
However, there was a contrasting pattern of gene duplication between the two subgenomes in that the B genome contained more intergenomic RGA duplicates compared with the C genome, while the opposite was observed in terms of intragenomic duplications.
Moreover, the RGAs formed clusters with more TM‐LRRs than NLRs found in these clusters.
Lastly, the phylogenetic analysis revealed that there was significant gene expansion inB.
This study provides an important resource for genomics‐based exploration of disease resistance inB.
carinata, which can be useful for breeding improved cultivars expressing robust disease resistance.