Electrochemical hydrogenation (ECH) of unsaturated carbon-heteroatom bonds is essential for chemical transformations but is often limited by a barrier-intensive surface hydrogen transfer process.
The interfacial hydrogen bond (HB) network offers a promising pathway for proton transfer but requires addressing the challenge of nondirectional proton shuttling in three-dimensional space.
Here, we create hydrophilic CuOxislands on Cu foam (CF) and load electron-enriched Pd (Pdδ−) single atoms as proton traps (Pd1-CuOx/CF) to guide a fast proton transfer along a modified HB network to enhance ECH efficiency.
During ECH, hydrophilic CuOxislands dissociate H2O into protons and reconstruct the interfacial HB network for facile proton transfer, while the Pdδ−single atoms reorient H2O molecules to electrostatically attract and reduce protons to active hydrogen, enabling efficient substrate hydrogenation.
With guided proton transfer, Pd1-CuOx/CF achieves 99% hydrogenation efficiency for C─Cl bonds, outperforming Pd1-CF (69%) and CuOx/CF (57%), and demonstrates high selectivity and Faradaic efficiency in hydrogenating C═O and C≡N bonds to produce valuable chemicals.
Proton transfer is guided across a reconstructed interfacial hydrogen bond network for effective electrochemical hydrogenation.
Hydrogenation is at least one step in nearly 25% of chemical engineering processes and, thus, receives great attention in both academia and the industrial community (1,2).
Compared to fossil fuel–driven thermochemical hydrogenation with considerable carbon footprints, renewable electricity–driven electrochemical hydrogenation (ECH) with H2O as a green hydrogen source offers a near–zero carbon transformation of unsaturated compounds under ambient conditions (3–5).
The traditional hydrogen spillover–mediated ECH system (Fig. 1A), by incorporating active sites with efficient H2O dissociation ability to supply active hydrogen (H*) to the catalytic hydrogenation sites (6,7), seriously suffers from the thermodynamically unfavorable hydrogen transfer process, owing to the intrinsic large free-energy differences between H-enriched sites of strong H adsorption ability and H-deficient sites of weak H adsorption ability (8). Moreover, the interfacial charge accumulation at the metal/support interface also poses a substantial kinetics barrier to hinder the hydrogen transfer across the interface for hydrogenation (8–10).
Therefore, it is highly desirable to explore thermodynamically and kinetically favorable hydrogen transfer pathways independent of metal/support interfaces for more efficient ECH reactions.
(A) Traditional hydrogen spillover and potential interfacial HB network–mediated proton transfer.
(B) Random proton transfer in intrinsic interfacial HB network and guided proton transfer along the reconstructed interfacial HB network.
The hydrogen bond (HB) network at the electrode/electrolyte interface provides multidimensional channels for random hydrogen shuttling (11,12), where a hydrogen atom (proton) bridged by two hydrogen-bonded water molecules moves from one molecule to the next one through kicking out an existing hydrogen atom, thus triggering a proton transfer via the barrier-less Grotthuss mechanism (13–15).
In the present, the proton transfer between the electrode surface and the electrolyte solution has been well controlled through manipulating the formed interfacial HB network (16–19).
For instance, enhancing the connectivity of the HB network by introducing HB acceptors on the electrode or in the electrolyte could facilitate the proton transfer across the interface to reach or leave the electrode surface (20–22).
Despite these progresses in tuning the proton transfer between the electrode and bulk solution, few studies have focused on the proton transfer between active sites on the electrode through manipulating the interfacial HB network.
In particular, the guided transfer of protons from the H2O dissociation sites to the hydrogenation sites is of great significance in improving proton utilization and hydrogenation efficiency but remains a great challenge.
The challenge of guided proton transfer lies in the random proton transfer pathway within the three-dimensional space of the intrinsic interfacial HB network (23). Theoretically, two crucial aspects should be simultaneously considered to reconfigure the spatial structure of the intrinsic HB network to guide the proton transfer.
The first is to reconstruct the three-dimensional interfacial HB network into a two-dimensional one dominated by low-coordinated HB H2O molecules that favors a linear proton transfer between active sites (24–26).
In this regard, coupling hydrophilic units might disrupt the three-dimensional connectivity of HB network through strengthening surface units–H2O interactions to increase the availability of weakly bonded and low-coordinated H2O for the proton transfer along the interface (20). The second is to implant powerful hydrogenation sites on the electrode for guiding and trapping the transferred protons within the interfacial HB network (27). For instance, Pd stands out as a promising hydrogenation site for the proton trap and activation, given its high hydrogen affinity and superior efficiency in catalyzing the reduction of protons to generate H* for the subsequent hydrogenation (28–30).
The above analysis inspired this exploration to create hydrophilic CuOxon Cu foam (CF) to reform the interfacial HB network and load Pd single atoms as the proton traps, aiming to realize the guided proton transfer within the interfacial HB network for efficient ECH (Fig. 1B).
Comprehensive in situ electrochemical experiments and theoretical calculations were used to clarify the CuOx-H2O interaction and the contribution of hydrophilic CuOxin reconstructing the HB network, as well as the process where Pd electrostatically attracted and activated protons for the final ECH reactions.
This study can provide atomic-level insight into the guided proton transfer pathway through reconstructing the interfacial HB network and opens a promising avenue for H2O-based near–zero carbon ECH.
A two-step route was adopted to respectively create Pd single atoms and hydrophilic CuOxon CF (Pd1-CuOx/CF) (Fig. 2A).
First, Pd atoms were anchored on a monolithic CF (Pd1-CF) via the classical galvanic replacement between Cu0and Pd2+, serving as the proton traps (figs.
S1 and S2) (31). The formed Pd1-CF subsequently underwent an in situ electrochemical redox activation via scanning between −0.6 and 0.1 V (fig. S3), where the intermittent electrochemical oxidation-reduction cycles preferred the local oxidization of CF to form discrete CuOxnanoislands (32), rather than the full coverage of CuOxlayer in conventional thermal oxidation (33,34).
These discrete CuOxnanoislands could ensure the feasible accessibility of Pd sites for hydrogenation and also facilitate the guided proton transfer from CuOxto Pd sites.
In the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of Pd1-CuOx/CF (Fig. 2Band fig. S4), the observed lattice spacing of 0.24 nm on discrete nanoislands corresponded to the Cu2O (111) plane or the CuO (111) plane, confirming the formation of CuOxover CF, which was further evidenced by the appearance of peaks assigned to CuOxin both Raman spectra (Fig. 2D) and x-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (35) (fig. S5).
(A) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedures of the Pd1-CuOx/CF electrode.
(B) HRTEM image of Pd1-CuOx/CF.
(C) HAADF-STEM image of Pd1-CuOx/CF.
(D) Raman spectroscopy of Pd1-CuOx/CF, Pd1-CF, and CF.
(E) FT-EXAFS spectra of Pd1-CuOx/CF, Pd1-CF, and Pd foil at the Pd K-edge.
WT-EXAFS contour maps of (F) Pd1-CuOx/CF, (G) Pd1-CF, and (H) Pd foil.
Upon closer inspection of the atomic structure in the aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image (Fig. 2C), the individually scattered bright spots on the lattice of CF confirmed the atomic-level dispersion of most Pd atoms without being covered by CuOx.
Meanwhile, the energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) element mapping of Pd1-CuOx/CF demonstrated the uniform dispersion of Pd atoms throughout the entire surface of CF (fig. S6).
We also used x-ray absorption fine structure spectrometry (XAFS) to confirm the atomic structure of Pd atoms on CuOx/CF (Fig. 2E) and found a prominent peak at 2.22 Å assigned to Pd-Cu coordination in the Fourier-transformed Pd K-edge extended-XAFS (FT-EXAFS) spectra of Pd1-CuOx/CF and Pd1-CF, with the absence of Pd-Pd scattering path (2.45 Å).
These results ruled out the existence of metallic Pd before and after the construction of CuOxnanoislands.
The atomic isolation of Pd sites could be further validated by the wavelet-transform (WT)–EXAFS contour maps (Fig. 2, F to H), which exhibited a distinct peak at 9.7 Å−1corresponding to the Pd-Cu scattering path in contrast to Pd foil.
The EXAFS fitting result of Pd1-CuOx/CF suggested that the Pd single atom coordinated with approximately nine Cu atoms (fig. S7 and table S1).
Both Pd1-CuOx/CF and Pd1-CF had identical Pd K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra and WT-EXAFS contour map features, revealing that the incorporation of CuOxdid not affect the coordination structure of Pd single atoms anchored on CF.
We thus investigated the proton transfer along the reconstructed interfacial HB network by CuOxand the proton trapping effect of Pd single atoms.
First, we used operando electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to check the role of CuOxby comparing the H2O dissociation on Pd1-CuOx/CF and Pd1-CF.
The EIS-based Bode plot of Pd1-CuOx/CF exhibited a notable phase angle decrease in the low-frequency region when compared to that of Pd1-CF (Fig. 3A), indicating that CuOxconsiderably promoted the H2O dissociation to generate protons on the electrode (36). We then carried out in situ Raman spectroscopy to further understand the enhanced H2O dissociation by CuOx.
As evidenced inFig.
3B, an additional peak attributed to Cu-OH was observed in the Raman spectra of Pd1-CuOx/CF in the potential range of −0.2 to −1.2 V, in contrast to the silent signal in case of Pd1-CF (37) (fig. S8).
This difference indicated that oxyphilic Cun+in CuOxcould promote its binding with the OH group in H2O and thus facilitate the H2O dissociation to supply protons, as illustrated in fig. S9 (38). This Cu-OH signal disappeared as soon as the potential was withdrawn, suggesting that the Cu-OH was an electrochemically generated intermediate and would promptly desorb as OH−, along with the release of Cun+sites to realize sustainable catalysis of CuOx(38,39).
The peak at 293 cm−1attributed to CuO and the peaks at 618 and 689 cm−1corresponding to Cu2O remained stable during the reaction (35,40) and did not decline even under prolonged negative potential conditions (fig. S10), demonstrating the structural stability of the Pd1-CuOx/CF electrode.
(A) EIS Bode plots of Pd1-CF and Pd1-CuOx/CF.
In situ Raman spectra of (B) Pd1-CuOx/CF and (C) interfacial H2O on Pd1-CuOx/CF.
(D) Two groups of normalized Raman intensities of νO-Hat Pd1-CuOx/CF surfaces.
(E) The fitted Arrhenius plots based on two sets of temperature-dependent EIS measurements on Pd1-CuOx/CF.
(F) In situ Raman spectra of H3O+on Pd1-CuOx/CF.
(G) TOF-SIMS profiles of Pd1-CuOx/CF (red) and Pd1-CF (gray).
(H) XPS spectra of Pd 3d for Pd1-CuOx/CF, Pd1-CF, and commercial Pd/C.
(I) In situ FTIR spectra of Pd1-CuOx/CF.
Given that the high oxygen affinity of hydrophilic CuOxtoward H2O and the accelerated interfacial H2O consumption over CuOxwere expected to reconfigure the spatial structure of the intrinsic HB network for the promoted proton transfer (41,42), we then used in situ Raman spectroscopy to probe the structural evolution of the interfacial HB network (Fig. 3Cand figs.
S11 and S12).
A broad band in a range of 3000 to 3750 cm−1, belonging to the O─H stretching mode (νO-H) of H2O, was observed and fitted by three bands around 3300, 3500, and 3600 cm−1, which were attributed to four-coordinated hydrogen-bonded H2O (4-HB•H2O), two-coordinated hydrogen-bonded H2O (2-HB•H2O), and free H2O, respectively (20). Obviously, the initial areas of these three H2O peaks on Pd1-CuOx/CF were larger than those on Pd1-CF, suggesting the better H2O enrichment ability of hydrophilic CuOx(fig. S13) (41), which was also supported by the smaller water contact angle observed of Pd1-CuOx/CF (fig. S14).
As the potential shifted from 0 to −1.2 V, the proportion of 2-HB•H2O on Pd1-CuOx/CF increased markedly from an average of 35.3 to 67.3%, according to two independent Raman fitting results (Fig. 3, C and D, and fig. S11).
This increase was accompanied by a marked decrease in the 4-HB•H2O proportion, indicating a structural evolution of interfacial H2O from 4-HB•H2O to 2-HB•H2O (Fig. 3D).
To gain insight into this interfacial H2O structure conversion, we checked the frequency variations of different H2O peaks with respect to the electrode potential according to the vibrational Stark effect (fig. S15).
The Stark slope of 4-HB•H2O was much steeper than that of 2-HB•H2O and free H2O, revealing that hydrophilic CuOxcould drive 4-HB•H2O closer to the electrode surface under an electric field (43). Such a strong interfacial interaction substantially boosted the H2O consumption and weakened the H2O-H2O interactions in the interfacial HB network (44), thus reconstructing the HB network dominated by 4-HB•H2O into the flexible and weakly bound one dominated by 2-HB•H2O, as supported by the sharply increased proportion of 2-HB•H2O upon the potential shifts on Pd1-CuOx/CF.
The reconstructed HB network featuring two-dimensional connectivity offers a linear pathway for the transport of the protons generated on CuOxalong the interface.
In contrast, the interfacial HB network over Pd1-CF without the strong interface interaction between the electrode and interfacial H2O did not undergo the same potential-dependent structure evolution as that of Pd1-CuOx/CF, maintaining the 4-HB•H2O–dominated three-dimensional structure that was unfavorable for proton transfer between catalytic sites.
Such interfacial HB network differences of the two electrodes were further verified by the much more enhanced peak intensity of 2-HB•H2O in in situ Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy of Pd1-CuOx/CF than that of Pd1-CF (fig. S16).
Because the proton transfer along the interfacial HB network follows the Grotthuss mechanism, involving the transient formation of hydronium ions (H3O+) (45), we first performed two sets of temperature-dependent EIS measurements to investigate the proton conductivity of the interfacial HB network on Pd1-CuOx/CF (fig. S17).
Both fitted Arrhenius plots indicated that the proton transfer activation energy (Ea) on Pd1-CuOx/CF was below the empirical threshold of 0.4 eV, suggesting that proton transport on Pd1-CuOx/CF was predominantly governed by the Grotthuss mechanism (Fig. 3E) (46). We then used H3O+as the indicator to monitor the proton transfer along the reconstructed interfacial HB network on Pd1-CuOx/CF.
Notably, an additional peak at 1750 cm−1assigned to H3O+species appeared in the Raman spectra of Pd1-CuOx/CF when the applied potential was reduced to −0.8 V (27) (Fig. 3F), whereas this peak was not observed for either Pd1-CF or CuOx/CF (fig. S18).
This difference was attributed to the lack of suitable channels for the proton transfer in the 4-HB•H2O–dominated HB network on Pd1-CF with restricted H2O dissociation, as well as the absence of proton traps to drive and guide the proton transfer on CuOx/CF, demonstrating the indispensability of linear proton transfer channel and Pd single atoms in the guided proton transfer.
The appearance of H3O+over Pd1-CuOx/CF was further supported by the obvious signal ofm/z(mass/charge ratio) = 19 in time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS) inFig.
Furthermore, two-dimensional image analysis displayed a notable and widespread distribution of H3O+on Pd1-CuOx/CF, while such H3O+distribution was not observed on Pd1-CF (fig. S19), confirming the enhanced proton transfer within the CuOx-reconstructed interfacial HB network via the Grotthuss mechanism.
We subsequently used x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to reveal the essential role of Pd single atoms in this guided proton transfer and observed an emerging peak at a lower binding energy of 335.5 eV, besides the peak at 335.8 eV corresponding to the Pd0state in the Pd 3d XPS spectrum of Pd1-CuOx/CF, indicating the presence of negatively charged Pd (Pdδ−) in Pd1-CuOx/CF (Fig. 3H).
This change of Pd valence state within Pd1-CuOx/CF originated from the electron transfer from the CuOx/Cu substrate to Pd single atoms, as rationalized by the positive shift of Cu 2p XPS spectrum with respect to that of Pd1-CF (fig. S20).
These Pdδ−atoms could electrostatically attract positively charged protons from adjacent H2O molecules, inducing rapid proton exchange along the H2O chain via the Grotthuss mechanism, leading to the generation of H3O+, as revealed in Raman spectra (Fig. 3F) and TOF-SIMS analysis (Fig. 3G).
We then conducted FTIR spectroscopy measurements to verify the interaction between Pdδ−and protons.
An absorption band at 2150 cm−1of Pd-H stretching vibrations in the FTIR spectra of Pd1-CuOx/CF was progressively intensified upon the negative potential shifts (Fig. 3I), while no metal-H signal appeared on either Pd1-CF or CuOx/CF (fig. S21) because of sluggish proton generation and poor H adsorption ability.
The protons trapped at Pdδ−were then activated to H* for the subsequent hydrogenation reaction, benefiting from the excellent hydrogen affinity and H* generation ability of Pd (28).
We then conducted the DFT calculations and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations to gain insights into the molecular pictures of interfacial microenvironments and dynamic proton transfer processes.
As shown in the representative AIMD-simulated snapshots of the interfacial environment between Pd1-CuOx/CF and H2O (Fig. 4A), hydrophilic CuOxexhibited a high oxygen affinity of H2O, facilitating H2O adsorption and dissociation with the OH groups on the Cun+site of CuOx, consistent with the observed Cu-OH peak in the in situ Raman spectroscopy.
Meanwhile, the resulting protons rapidly adsorbed onto the O sites of CuOx, as the H adsorption energy on O was highly favorable at −1.06 eV (fig. S22).
Once the CuOxbecame hydroxylated, proton adsorption was weakened because the O sites were occupied, and the Cu sites were energetically unfavorable for the proton adsorption (0.36 eV).
As a result, the proton capture ability of CuOxdecreased, facilitating the departure of subsequently generated protons.
The rapid adsorption and dissociation of H2O, along with the hydroxylation of CuOx, were also observed on CuOx/CF (fig. S23), confirming the strong interaction between CuOxand interfacial H2O molecules.
As expected, both the H2O adsorption energy and the H2O adsorption free energy on CuOxwere more exergonic than those on Cu and Pd sites (figs.
S24 and S25); thus, H2O molecules preferred to adsorb on CuOxeven with increased water coverage (fig. S26).
Such strong interactions supported that CuOxplayed a pivotal role in reconstructing the interfacial HB network and promoting proton generation, consistent with the findings from our comprehensive analyses of EIS, in situ Raman, and in situ FTIR spectroscopy (Fig. 3, A to C, and fig. S16).
The H adsorption energy of CuOx(0.36 eV) was much more positive than that of Pd (−0.44 eV) (fig. S27), favoring the transfer of protons produced on the hydroxylated CuOxto the adjacent Pdδ−sites.
(A) AIMD simulated representative H2O dissociation snapshots on Pd1-CuOx/CF at 2.5, 2.8, and 3.0 ps, respectively.
Orange, blue, cyan, red, and white balls represent O in CuOx, Cu in CuOx, Cu in CF, and O and H atoms, respectively.
(B) Schematic diagram of H2O configuration at the interface of Pd1-CuOx/CF and CuOx/CF.
Distribution profiles of H and O concentrations along the surface normal direction on (C) Pd1-CuOx/CF and (D) CuOx/CF.
L1represented the first density peak of H atoms closest to the surface, while L2corresponded to the first density peak of O atoms.
(E) Distribution profiles of H2O dipole orientation along the surface normal direction.
The pink ball represents a Pd atom.
Energy profiles of proton transfer through (F) the HB network and (G) CF surface to the Pdδ−site along with the change of initial, transition, and final state structures.
The energy barriers depicted in [(G) and (F)] were corrected for the applied potential.
Detailed methodologies for the electric field correction are provided in Materials and Methods.
Given our experimental findings in EIS (Fig. 3E), in situ Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 3F), XPS (Fig. 3H), and in situ FTIR spectroscopy (Fig. 3I) analyses that the Pd single atoms could electrostatically guide the proton transfer, the interaction between Pd and protons in H2O was thoroughly investigated to uncover the mechanism accounting for this oriented proton transfer.
First, Bader charge and the difference of charge density calculations revealed that Pd exhibited a negative charge state by acquiring electrons from the coordinated Cu atoms after creating CuOx(fig. S28 and table S2), confirming the existence of the electron-enriched Pdδ−, consistent with the XPS analysis results inFig.
Subsequently, we investigated how electron-enriched Pdδ−traps protons from H2O by analyzing the orientation of H2O molecules on the Pd site (Fig. 4, B to D).
In the concentration distribution plots of H and O atoms along the surface normal on Pd1-CuOx/CF (Fig. 4C), obtained from AIMD simulations conducted for ~5 ps, the first peak of H atoms (labeled L1) appeared approximately 1 Å earlier than that of O atoms (labeled L2), and the density of H atoms was nearly double that of O atoms, suggesting an H-down configuration of predominant interfacial H2O induced by the electrostatic attraction from the electron-enriched Pdδ−to Hδ+atoms in H2O (Fig. 4B).
In contrast, the L1and L2peaks appeared at almost the same position and exhibited a broader distribution in the case of CuOx/CF (Fig. 4D), suggesting a disordered orientation of interfacial H2O with both H-down and H-up configurations.
Similar concentration distributions of H and O atoms were also observed when the simulations were extended to ~9 ps (figs.
S29 and S30).
Notably, even under applied potential, more H-down water molecules were present on Pd1-CuOx/CF than on CuOx/CF (figs.
S31 and S32), demonstrating the evident influence of Pd on interfacial water orientation.
These orientation differences were further confirmed by the dipole orientations of H2O molecules on Pd1-CuOx/CF and CuOx/CF inFig.
4E, where α represented the angle between the vector tangent to the electrode surface (n^) and the vector of H2O dipole (d^).
The nearest peak of statistically summed cos(α) along thezaxis on Pd1-CuOx/CF was noticeably higher than that on CuOx/CF, indicating that the most interfacial H2O molecules preferred to adopt an orderly H-down configuration on Pd1-CuOx/CF, while the widely existed H-up H2O on CuOx/CF resulted in negative cos(α) values, leading to a smaller overall sum.
We further analyzed the structural changes in H-down H2O induced by Pd and found that the O─H bond oriented to Pd was stretched by 0.028 to 0.105 Å compared to the O─H bond in other directions or in non–H-down H2O, indicating a weakening of the O─H bond (table S3).
Therefore, those H2O molecules in the H-down configuration were more prone to accepting protons, subsequently breaking the Pd-stretched O─H bonds and “dropping” the protons onto Pd.
To elucidate the guided proton transfer from CuOxto Pd single atoms on Pd1-CuOx/CF, we conducted slow-growth AIMD simulations through considering two possible proton transfer pathways including interfacial HB network–mediated transfer and surface-mediated transfer (hydrogen spillover).
In the interfacial HB–mediated pathway (Fig. 4F), a proton produced from H2O dissociation on CuOxswiftly jumped to an adjacent H2O and triggered a proton transfer within the interfacial H2O.
Benefiting from the H-down configuration of interfacial H2O and the weakening of the Pd-stretched O─H bond, the protons would directly transfer to Pd single atoms with a potential–corrected energy barrier of only 0.60 eV, much lower than the 0.91 eV required for the proton transfer to CF in the absence of Pd-guided sites (fig. S33).
Along with the guided proton transfer, the residual OH group on CuOxwould desorb from the Cun+site to capture a proton in solution, forming an interfacial H2O molecule with a low energy barrier of 0.69 eV (fig. S34).
After the desorption of OH group, another H2O molecule was then adsorbed onto CuOxto initiate the next cycle of H2O dissociation and proton transfer, ensuring a sufficient proton supply for efficient hydrogenation.
In contrast, the surface-mediated proton transfer pathway (Fig. 4G) necessitated a considerable potential-corrected energy barrier of 1.28 eV for protons to move across the interface between CuOxand CF, underscoring the superiority of our strategy in guiding proton transfer within the reconstructed interfacial HB network.
On the basis of the above experimental and theoretical results, we proposed a Pd-guided proton transfer mechanism on Pd1-CuOx/CF (fig. S35).
First, the hydrophilic CuOxpromoted H2O dissociation, generating protons and reconstructing a 2-HB•H2O–dominated interfacial HB network, which facilitated the proton transfer along the interface.
Owing to the lower proton transfer energy barrier and the electrostatic attraction between the negatively charged Pdδ−and positively charged protons, the protons generated on CuOxwould associate with nearby H2O, followed by a quick proton exchange via the HB rearrangement and the O─H bond reconstruction.
This process ultimately directed the proton transfer to the H-down H2O on Pd, leading to the cleavage of the Pd-stretched O─H bond and the proton capture of Pd.
We chose chloramphenicol (CAP), a typical antibiotic containing C─Cl bonds known for its biotoxicity (47,48), to evaluate the ECH performances of Pd1-CuOx/CF, Pd1-CF, CuOx/CF, and CF in converting C─Cl bonds to C─H bonds for pharmaceutical compounds detoxification.
The electrochemical measurements were carried out in a typical H-type cell with 0.2 M Na2SO4solution as the electrolyte at the optimal potential of −1.2 V (fig. S36).
As shown inFig.
5 (A and B), Pd1-CuOx/CF exhibited the highest hydrodechlorination ratio (99%) and hydrodechlorination Faradaic efficiency (FE) of CAP (17.5%) among all the four electrodes.
Moreover, the apparent rate constant (k) of Pd1-CuOx/CF was 1.2 and 1.76 times higher than those of Pd1-CF with restricted proton generation and transfer, and CuOx/CF without proton-guided sites, respectively (fig. S37), as well as surpassed those of previously reported CAP hydrogenation systems (Fig. 5Cand table S4), demonstrating the superior C─Cl bonds’ hydrogenation performance of Pd1-CuOx/CF via this interfacial HB network–mediated proton transfer strategy.
More impressively, Pd1-CuOx/CF still displayed a hydrodechlorination efficiency of more than 95% and a CAP degradation ratio of nearly 100% even after 10 runs of reaction (Fig. 5D), exhibiting the robust durability of Pd1-CuOx/CF, which was further confirmed by the negligible changes in EDS analysis and XPS spectra after long-term electrolysis (figs.
S38 and S39).
(A) CAP hydrodechlorination ratios on Pd1-CuOx/CF and other control samples.
(B) Faradaic efficiencies of CAP hydrodechlorination on Pd1-CuOx/CF and other control samples.
(C) Comparisons of CAP hydrogenation performance between Pd1-CuOx/CF, control samples, and other state-of-the-art catalysts previously reported.
(D) Hydrodechlorination ratios of CAP on Pd1-CuOx/CF for 10 rounds of electrolysis.
(E) In situ Raman spectra of H3O+on Pd1-CuOx/CF with ET.
(F) EPR spectra of H* on Pd1-CuOx/CF and other control samples.
(G) Faradaic efficiencies of AN hydrogenation and corresponding current densities on Pd1-CuOx/CF and other control samples.
(H) Faradaic efficiencies of FF hydrogenation and conversion ratio on Pd1-CuOx/CF and other control samples.
To elucidate the ECH mechanism of Pd1-CuOx/CF, we first examined the H/D kinetic isotope effect (KIE) to verify the accelerated proton transfer on Pd1-CuOx/CF (fig. S40).
The KIE value of Pd1-CuOx/CF remarkably decreased to 1.64 from 2.32 of Pd1-CF without CuOx, indicating that the CuOxenhanced the proton transfer through promoting the proton generation and reforming the interfacial HB network (7). To affirm the significance of this guided proton transfer from CuOxto Pd atoms in ECH, we introduced ectoine (ET) into the electrolyte to disrupt the proton transfer by inhibiting HB disruption/reconstruction during the CAP hydrodechlorination (49). The absence of H3O+signal in the Raman spectra and the notable decrease in the CAP hydrodechlorination ratio of Pd1-CuOx/CF revealed that the presence of ET hindered the proton transfer in the interfacial HB network, resulting in sluggish C─Cl bond hydrogenation on Pd atoms (Fig. 5Eand fig. S41).
The addition of ET slightly affected the CAP hydrogenation capacity of Pd1-CF, strongly confirming that ET could block the proton transfer during the CAP hydrodechlorination.
To verify the activation and utilization of protons on Pd single atoms for ECH, we performed electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), cyclic voltammetry (CV), and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements to check the H* generation on Pd sites (7,50).
The signals attributed to H* appeared on Pd1-CuOx/CF and Pd1-CF but not on CuOx/CF and CF in CAP-free electrolyte (Fig. 5F), confirming the reduction ability of Pd atoms in converting protons to H*.
The stronger H* signals on Pd1-CuOx/CF than those on Pd1-CF highlighted the role of guided proton transfer from CuOxto Pd atoms in generating more H*.
Given that the Pd sites on Pd1-CuOx/CF exhibited the strongest CAP adsorption energy (−1.50 eV) (fig. S42), the generated H* on Pd was promptly consumed by the hydrogenation of C─Cl bonds of CAP, as evidenced by the markedly weakening of H* signal and the H*-related peaks in CV curves of Pd1-CuOx/CF upon the addition of CAP (figs.
S43 and S44).
Pd1-CuOx/CF exhibited a higher current density at −1.2 V upon the addition of 50 parts per million (ppm) CAP compared to the CAP-free system (fig. S45).
This enhancement kinetically validated that the H* preferred the hydrogenation of C─Cl bonds to the H2evolution reaction (51), the primary competing reaction, thereby ensuring better hydrogenation selectivity.
Meanwhile, the C─Cl bond hydrogenation ratio of Pd1-CuOx/CF declined from 100 to 61.7% with the addition of 0.2 Mtert-butanol (TBA) as the H*-quenching reagent (fig. S46), verifying the vital role of H* generated on Pd atoms for ECH.
As the protons were consumed on the Pd sites, both the interfacial and bulk solution pH gradually increased (fig. S47).
Furthermore, we explored the ECH performance of Pd1-CuOx/CF toward unsaturated C≡N and C═O bonds with acetonitrile (AN) and furfural (FF) as the model reactants, which are typical for organic compound valorization.
First, the AN hydrogenation experiments were conducted at −1.52 V in 1 M KOH solution, and the LSV curves were recorded in the electrolytes with/without 8 wt % AN (fig. S48).
Among all the electrodes, Pd1-CuOx/CF exhibited the most notable increase in current density after introducing 8 wt % AN, demonstrating its superiority toward C≡N bond hydrogenation.
Quantification of the ethylamine (EA) product via1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy (fig. S49) revealed that Pd1-CuOx/CF had the highest EA FE of 78.9% with a total current density of 128.7 mA cm−2among all the electrodes (52) (Fig. 5G).
Subsequently, we evaluated the FF hydrogenation, a typical biomass conversion process, to verify the hydrogenation efficiency of Pd1-CuOx/CF toward the C═O bond.
Impressively, Pd1-CuOx/CF displayed a distinctly greater enhancement in the current density of the LSV curve in the presence of 5 mM FF than Pd1-CF, CuOx/CF, and CF (fig. S50), implying its superior FF hydrogenation kinetics.
While Pd1-CF, CuOx/CF, and CF primarily produced furfuryl alcohol (FAL) with all FEs below 25%, the Pd1-CuOx/CF achieved an impressively enhanced FE of 70.6% toward 2-methylfuran (MF) along with complete FF conversion within 1 hour at −1.32 V in 0.1 M KOH solution, a process that required more H* than the hydrogenation to FAL (Fig. 5H).
The enhanced FE toward MF was attributed to the more efficient generation, transfer, and utilization of H* on Pd1-CuOx/CF (53).
In summary, we developed a guided proton transfer in the interfacial HB network from CuOxto Pd single atoms over Pd1-CuOx/CF for efficient ECH.
The comprehensive operando experiments and AIMD simulations results confirmed that CuOxwith the enhanced CuOx-H2O interaction promoted H2O dissociation for the proton generation and simultaneously transformed the 4-HB•H2O–dominated interfacial HB network into the 2-HB•H2O–dominated HB network for accelerated proton transfer between active sites.
The electron-enriched Pdδ−single atoms could shift interfacial H2O into an H-down configuration and stretch the O─H bonds, thereby constructing a low–energy barrier proton transfer pathway.
Combined with Pd’s electrostatic attraction to protons, this mechanism guided proton transfer though the HB network from CuOxto Pd, where it has subsequently been reduced into H* for ECH.
Impressively, this guided proton transfer achieved superior hydrogenation performance toward typical C─Cl, C═O, and C≡N bonds, remarkably surpassing the Pd1-CF with restricted proton transfer and the CuOx/CF without proton traps.
This work presents a low barrier–guided proton transfer pathway through the reformed interfacial HB network for efficient ECH and deepens the understanding on the interfacial HB network manipulation and hydrogen transfer between catalytic sites.
Commercial CF was purchased from Kunshan Longshengbao Electronic Material Co. Ltd., China.
A commercial dimensionally stable anode (DSA) was purchased from Suzhou Shuertai Industrial Technology Co. Ltd. Palladium nitrate dihydrate [Pd(NO3)2·2H2O], sodium sulfate (Na2SO4), CAP (C11H12Cl2N2O5), AN (C2H3N), EA (C2H7N), FF (C5H4O2), FAL (C5H6O2), MF (C5H6O), ET (C6H10N2O2),tert-butanol (C4H10O), dimethyl sulfoxide–d6, potassium hydroxide (KOH), and ethanol were purchased from Shanghai Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co. Ltd., China.
All chemicals were used without further purification.
The synthesis route of the Pd1-CuOx/CF electrode was illustrated inFig.
First, a commercial CF with a size of 20 mm by 20 mm by 0.50 mm was thoroughly washed with alcohol to remove surface grease.
The cleaned foam was then dried under an infrared lamp for subsequent galvanic replacement.
A certain volume of Pd(NO3)2·2H2O (3 mg/ml) aqueous solution was dispensed on the surface of the cleaned CF several times by drop drying.
After evaporating the solvent under infrared lamp irradiation, the electrode was heated in a tube furnace to 400°C at a rate of 10°C/min, maintained for 3 hours under a flow of 5% H2/Ar mixture (100 ml/min), and then cooled to room temperature to obtain the Pd1-CF electrode.
The CF electrode was synthesized using a similar process but without adding the Pd(NO3)2·2H2O aqueous solution.
The as-prepared Pd1-CF and CF electrodes then underwent CV tests at a sweep rate of 10 mV/s from 0.10 to −0.60 V in 0.2 M Na2SO4solution.
After 35 CV cycles, the Pd1-CF and CF electrodes were reconstructed and washed several times with deionized water to obtain Pd1-CuOx/CF and CuOx/CF electrodes, respectively.
XRD patterns were obtained by using a Rigaku Miniflex-600 with a Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15406 nm).
HRTEM images and corresponding EDS elemental mapping images were observed on a Titan G2 60-300 electron microscope equipped with an energy-dispersive x-ray spectrometer.
HAADF-STEM images were obtained on a JEOL JEM-ARM200F TEM/STEM with a spherical aberration corrector working at 200 kV.
The x-ray absorption fine structure spectra of Pd K-edge were obtained at the TLS-01C beamline of the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center (NSRRC) in Taiwan.
The x-ray absorption fine structure spectra of Pd K-edge were obtained at the TLS-01C beamline of the NSRRC in Taiwan.
XPS analysis was carried out on a scanning x-ray microprobe (PHI 5000 Verasa, ULAC-PHI Inc.) with Al Ka radiation.
TOF-SIMS measurement was conducted on a TOF-SIMS 5-100 instrument (ION-TOF GmbH) using a 30-keV Bi3+as analysis beam for positive polarity measurements.
The analysis beam energy was 30 keV, the raster size was 50 × 50 μm2, and the incident angle was 45°.
Contact angle measurement was performed on a Chengde Dingsheng JY-82C device at room temperature using water as the probe fluid.
Proton conductivity of the Pd1-CuOx/CF was measured using a Solartron 1287 potentiostat and a 1260 A frequency response analyzer via the quasi–four-probe method.
Sample (1 g) was pressed in a pellet maker to obtain uniform pellets with a diameter of 15 mm and a thickness of 1 to 2 mm, which was subjected to an anhydrous chamber or humidification for 24 hours, and subsequently the conductivities were measured at different conditions.
In situ Raman measurements were performed on a Renishaw inVia Raman Spectrometer (laser wavelength = 532 nm).
An in situ Raman test cell was used to obtain better signal data with a built-in Pt wire and Hg/HgO electrode as the counter electrode and the reference electrode, respectively.
In situ FTIR spectra was obtained on a Nicolet 6700 FTIR spectrometer equipping an ATR accessory with a diamond window.
The experimental details were reported in our previous work (54). The electrode was cut into discs of about 3 mm in diameter and tightly pressed against the diamond window as the working electrode.
The Pt sheet and Hg/HgO electrode were used as the counter electrode and the reference electrode, respectively.
EPR was performed on a Bruker EMX micro-6/1.
All electrochemical performance tests were performed on an electrochemical workstation (CHI 760E, CH Instrument, Shanghai Chenhua, China).
A three-electrode configuration was used with DSA as the counter electrode, Hg/HgO electrode as the reference electrode, and catalysts as the working electrode.
All potentials were referred to Hg/HgO unless otherwise stated.
All electrochemical measurements were conducted under an H-cell system separated by a Nafion 117 membrane at room temperature (~25°C).
CV curves were recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV/s.
EIS measurements were measured in the frequency range of 0.1 to 105Hz.
LSV curves were recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV/s.
in whichtrefers to reaction time.c(t)refers to the CAP concentration at reaction timet.krefers to the CAP degradation rate constant.c0refers to the initial CAP concentration.
in whicha(t)refers to the dechlorination ratio at reaction timet.b(t)refers to the CAP degradation ratio at reaction timet.
4 and 6 represent the number of electrons required in the reduction reaction.caandcbrepresent the concentration of Cl−and -NO2in the solution after 100% reduction.vrepresents the volume of electrolyte.Fis the Faraday constant.Q(t)is the charge amount.
whereeis the number of electrons transferred,Fis the Faraday constant,nis the amount of product in moles, andQ(t)is the charge amount.
whereeis the number of electrons transferred (e= 4 for MF and 2 for FAL),Fis the Faraday constant,nis the amount of product in moles, andQ(t)is the charge amount.
DFT calculations were conducted using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (55,56).
The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (57) exchange-correlation functional was used.
The projector-augmented wave method (58) was used to describe the interactions between electron and ion with the kinetic cutoff energy of 400 eV for the plane-wave basis.
The Grimme DFT-D3 method was used to describe the van der Waals interaction (59). Cu (111) was modeled using a four-layer slab model with(23×2)super cells.
The Cu3O3cluster was anchored on the Cu (111) to model the CuOx/CF surface structure.
To model Pd1-CuOx/CF, a Cu atom located approximately 6 Å away from the Cu3O3cluster was replaced by a Pd atom.
A vacuum of 16 Å was added along thezaxis to prohibit the spurious periodic interactions, and 68 H2O molecules were filled with a density of ~1 g cm−3to model the explicit water solvent.
AIMD simulations were conducted via the Nose-Hoover thermostat using the canonical ensemble (NVT) at 300 K with 1 fs time step to describe the interfacial microenvironment between the catalyst surface and water film (60,61).
For each simulation, 5- to 10 ps of MD trajectory was used to relatively equilibrate the system.
Unless otherwise specified, all AIMD simulations in this work were performed under the NVT ensemble.
For simulations conducted under the constant-potential ensemble, we introduced additional electrons into the computational model by adjusting the NELECT parameter during the simulation (62). Specifically, an extra 1.0 e−was added to the Pd1-CuOx/CF and CuOx/CF systems to simulate electrochemical conditions corresponding to −0.61 V versus RHE and −0.59 V versus RHE, respectively.
Constrained AIMD simulations with a slow-growth sampling approach were performed to evaluate the kinetic barriers of H2O dissociation, proton transfer, and OH desorption (63,64).
In all AIMD and DFT calculations, the bottom two layers of Cu atoms were fixed to mimic the bulk properties, while all other atoms, including water molecules, were allowed to relax freely.
The concentration profiles of O and H atoms were obtained from the equilibrated AIMD structure.
The atomic positions were extracted, and thezaxis (surface normal direction) was divided into 1-Å bins.
The number of O and H atoms in each bin was counted and then normalized by the bin volume (cross-sectional area by bin width) in terms of atoms per cubic angstrom.
These density distributions were saved as data files and used to generate the distribution profiles of H and O concentrations.
whereE(∗M),E(∗), andE(M)represent the total energies of the surface with adsorbed moleculeM(H2O,CAP), the clean surface, and gas-phase moleculeM, respectively.
whereE(∗H),E(∗), andE(H)correspond to the total energies of the surface with adsorbed H, the clean surface, and an H2molecule, respectively.
E,EZPE, andSrespectively represent the electronic energy calculated for specified geometrical structures, zero-point energy, and entropy caused by the adsorption of intermediate or gaseous molecule.
The adsorption free energy,ΔGads, was calculated using the same method as described forEads, with the exception that the DFT energyEwas replaced by the Gibbs free energyGunder conditions of 300 K and 1 bar.
whereEa(0)is the activation barrier for the chemical step,nis the number of electrons transferred in the elementary step, andαis the transfer coefficient, typically taken as 0.5 in electrochemical systems.∆Vrepresents the applied negative potential.
Here, we adopt −0.7 V versus RHE according to the experimental potential.
We acknowledge the support from the Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, the Instrumental Analysis Center of the School of Environmental Science and Engineering, and Shiyanjia Lab; eceshi for help in characterizations and experimental measurements; and the Supercomputing Center of Wuhan University for help in numerical calculations.
Funding:This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFA1201701 and 2022YFA1205601 to Y.Y.
), the Key Research and Development Program of Hainan Province (ZDYF2025SHFZ030 to Y.Y.
), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22476126 and 22102100 to Y.Y., U22A20402 to L. Zhang, 22206121 to J.D., and 22273068 and U22A20394 to X.G.
), the Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (JCYJ20220818095601002 to L. Zhang), and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (22ZR1431700 to Y.Y.
Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.