to understand nurses’ experiences regarding presenteeist behaviors in the hospital.
a single holistic descriptive case study with a qualitative approach, with 32 nurses.
Data were collected in three stages, through vignettes and in-depth individual interviews, audio-recorded and submitted to thematic analysis.
The theoretical framework adopted was Christophe Dejours’ Psychodynamics of Work.
three topics emerged, revealing that the concept of presenteeism was not known among participants, but they recognized themselves experiencing presenteeist behaviors due to physical or psychological problems that, in some way, affected quality of work.
The main reasons for presenteeist behavior were professional commitment and financial issues.
presenteeism manifested itself through physical distress, such as musculoskeletal pain, and psychological distress, such as burnout, arising from hospital work organization, seen as exhausting, marked by excessive demands, which can affect task performance, worker health and the quality of care provided.
Descriptors:Nurses, Presenteeism, Nursing Staff Hospital, Nursing, Qualitative Research.
comprender las experiencias de enfermeros sobre conductas de presentismo en el hospital.
estudio descriptivo holístico de caso único, con enfoque cualitativo, con 32 enfermeros.
Los datos fueron recolectados en tres etapas, a través de viñetas y entrevistas individuales en profundidad, grabadas en audio y sometidas a análisis temático.
Se adoptó como marco teórico la Psicodinámica del Trabajo de Christophe Dejours.
emergieron tres temas, revelando que el concepto de presentismo no era conocido entre los participantes, pero reconocían experimentar conductas de presentismo, debido a problemas físicos o psicológicos que, de alguna manera, afectaban la calidad del trabajo.
Las principales razones del comportamiento presentista fueron el compromiso profesional y las cuestiones financieras.
el presentismo se manifiesta por sufrimiento físico, como dolor musculoesquelético, y sufrimiento psicológico, como fatiga, resultante de la organización del trabajo hospitalario, visto como agotador, marcado por exigencias excesivas, que pueden afectar el desempeño de las tareas, la salud del trabajador y la calidad de la atención brindada.
Descriptores:Enfermeros, Presentismo, Personal de Enfermería en Hospital, Enfermería, Investigación Cualitativa.
Presenteeism is a behavior in which professionals are physically present at work, but are unable to fully perform their work activities, due to their own physical or psychological problems.
This behavior leads to a decrease in productivity and can have a major effect on work, even greater than absenteeism, when workers are absent from the workplace(1). Presenteeism in nursing comes from the fact that the profession is particularly associated with care, a culture of teamwork, loyalty to co-workers and also professional identity, which gives nurses a sense of obligation to be present at work(2).
However, nursing and healthcare professionals who work in hospital environments face daily situations of stress, pressure, work overload, exhaustion, lack of materials and equipment(3), emotional exhaustion, frustration, dissatisfaction with the results of their work, lack of recognition, and conflicts(4). In this context, health workers are susceptible to physical and mental illness, and the incidence of occupational stress is predominant among professionals with higher education(3).
Mental health at work is therefore associated with the way professionals perceive aspects related to their work activity(5). At the same time, presenteeism is a multidimensional phenomenon that is highly prevalent among healthcare workers(6,7), and its difficult detection may be justified by the lack of information about this occupational disease, which leads to impaired performance, leading to possible distractions and serious errors in professional practice(7).
Therefore, presenteeism may have intersections with distress at work, studied by Christophe Dejours, a French psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, whose research addresses topics in psychopathology, with his object of study being the psychic life at work.
His studies and professional experience led him to the construction of a theoretical-methodological model called “Psychodynamics of Work”, which encompasses distress at work and mental pathologies related to it, as well as conditions in which work is a source of pleasure, and can play a role in health construction(8).
Thus, the relevance of this study lies in the fact that the main causes of presenteeism refer to factors that compromise healthcare professionals’ mental health, especially nursing professionals, in hospital environments, such as stress, emotional exhaustion or depression(9-13).
Furthermore, presenteeism can aggravate existing health problems and increase the risk of subsequent illness and absenteeism as well as impair work capacity(14-16)and cause serious harm to professionals’ physical, emotional and work lives(15).
To understand nurses’ experiences regarding presenteeist behaviors in the hospital.
The research was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of theUniversidade Federal de Pelotas(UFPel) School of Nursing, and complied with the ethical aspects established by Resolution 466/2012 of the Brazilian National Health Council.
The Informed Consent Form was obtained from all individuals involved in the study in writing.
They were identified by Arabic numerals, followed by the letters “V” for the Vignette data collection technique, or “I” for the Interview data collection technique.
Since there are two situations in the vignettes, they were represented as VI and VII, the same occurring with the interviews, II and III.
Thus, the codes are 1VI, 1VII, 1II, 2VI, 4VII, 7III, etc.
The Theory of Psychodynamics of Work was adopted as the theoretical framework for this research, as it is a suitable approach for understanding the dynamics of work situations and possible harm to workers’ health(8).
This is a single holistic descriptive case study with a qualitative approach(19). In order to qualify the study production writing, the COnsolidated criteria for REporting Qualitative research (COREQ) guidelines were adopted(20).
This study was developed at the UFPel Teaching Hospital (TH), which has been managed by theEmpresa Brasileira de Serviços Hospitalares(EBSERH) since 2014.
Most TH workers are linked to the EBSERH network; however, there are still employees of the Single Legal Regime (RJU) working at the hospital.
Nurses assigned to the inpatient wards that make up the Nursing Management Support Unit (In Portuguese,Unidade de Apoio a Gestão de Enfermagem- UAGENF) of UFPel/TH, such as the medical clinic, emergency and urgency network II and emergency and urgency network III, were invited to participate in the study.
The selection criterion was to work at UFPel/TH, as a nurse, assigned to UAGENF for at least six months.
Thus, 33 nurses were approached, and all agreed to participate in the study.
However, there was one withdrawal after completing stage I of data collection (vignettes), leaving 32 participants.
Stage I - Vignettes: participants were given an instrument containing two vignettes (plots) and questions to identify their perceptions about such plots, which were answered in writing by participants and returned on the same day, or later, depending on workers’ availability.
A vignette consists of a brief description of a situation, real or fictitious, structured in such a way as to attract attention, produce sensations and obtain information about respondents’ perceptions, attitudes or knowledge about a given phenomenon(22). The vignettes were prepared by the authors themselves, based on their professional experiences.
Stage II - Interview I: an in-depth individual interview was conducted to identify socio-professional characteristics and aspects related to the work context(23). This occurred after the instrument completed in stage I was returned.
It was audio-recorded and lasted an average of 45 minutes.
Stage III - Interview II: a second individual interview was scheduled in order to deepen the discussion on the research topic, since in interview I there was not enough significant content regarding presenteeism.
It took place a few days (three to seven days) after participants had had contact with the subject, providing time for the mobilization of feelings, doubts and reflections that could then be addressed in greater depth(24). The interview, at this stage, was also audio-recorded and lasted an average of 25 minutes.
After transcribing the vignettes and interviews in full, the collected data were treated according to the thematic analysis proposal, consisting of six phases: familiarizing with the data; generating initial codes; searching for topics; reviewing topics; defining and naming the topics; and producing the report(25). Thus, three topics resulted: (Re)cognizing presenteeism and distress at work by nurses; Nurses’ experiences of physical and psychological distress and consequent presenteeist behavior; Motivations for nurses’ presenteeist behavior.
Of the 32 nurses who participated in all stages of data collection, 28 were female.
Regarding their employment status, 29 nurses were employed by EBSERH; three nurses were employed by RJU, with an average of 30 years of work at the institution, while 15 participants had worked at the hospital for less than five years and the other 14 had between five and ten years of work at the study site; 27 nurses had only one employment contract, while five had two contracts; their ages ranged from 26 to 56 years (average of 39 years).
Concerning skin color, 24 declared themselves to be white, one was black, and the others were brown.
Regarding marital status, ten were in a stable union; ten were married; ten were single; two were divorced; 18 participants had no children; 11 had only one child; two had two children; and one had three children.
In relation to their own health, ten nurses denied any illness, but hypertension was reported by five nurses; hypothyroidism was reported by four nurses; obesity was also mentioned by four nurses; and depression, diabetes, asthma, arrhythmia, gastritis, migraine, osteoarthritis, varicose veins, cervical hernia, bronchiectasis, pituitary microadenoma, saphenous vein insufficiency, retinal detachment, facet syndrome and stroke sequels were mentioned once.
Half of nurses reported some limitation in the performance of their work activities, such as pain, loss of strength, limited movement, difficulty walking, fatigue, edema and discomfort.
Other justifications frequently given by participants for such behavior are “avoiding overload” from co-workers, “fear of punishment and insecurity”, in addition to maintaining “patient care”.
This study revealed that the concept of presenteeism was not yet known among participants.
However, after being introduced to the term, nurses recognized that they had experienced situations in which they were present in work environments, unable to fully perform their work activities due to physical or psychological problems.
They even admitted that this behavior somehow affected the quality of their work.
The results of this research converge with the concept that presenteeism is considered an occupational and psychosocial phenomenon that affects professionals in their work environment, compromising their productivity, harming their health condition(7)and also impacting negative results for patients, nurses and health organizations(12).
The nurses in the study explained that there is a close relationship between work and the process of illness among professionals.
Dejour’s theoretical framework allowed us to understand the experiences of distress reported, considering that the subjective relationship with work plays an important role in the processes involved, both in health construction and in workers’ psychiatric and psychosomatic decompensations(8).
Specific working conditions were shown to be intertwined with nurses’ illness, in which, in the present study, hypertension was reported by five nurses, hypothyroidism and obesity, each by four nurses, as well as the lack of adequate staff, resulting in presenteeist behaviors.
Regarding the organization of nursing work in hospital environments, it is clear that this involves exhausting and stressful activities, among which are intense work rhythms, working for long periods in the same position or in inadequate positions, performing the same task repeatedly, the high emotional burden resulting from direct contact with patients (and family members), the process of illness, death/dying, etc. Such activities require manual and psychosocial skills, such as the ability to maintain attention and concentration to avoid iatrogenic events, relationships with the multidisciplinary team and patients/family members, in addition to exposure of workers to occupational, ergonomic, biological, chemical and physical risks(26). Another point highlighted in this research is that presenteeism was exacerbated during the most critical period of the COVID-19 pandemic, given that nursing profession characteristics require these professionals to spend more time with patients, placing them as the “front line” in the fight against COVID-19(27,28).
Thus, working conditions, relationships between managers and workers, the degree of accessibility to dialogue with managers, staffing, among others, are crucial factors in the emergence of presenteeist behavior(15). In view of this, presenteeism is considered a complex and multifactorial issue, resulting from both physical and psychological problems, with stress and emotional exhaustion being among the main causes of presenteeism, which compromise professionals’ health(9-12).
Participants in this investigation expressed experiencing fatigue, stress and emotional overload associated with working conditions, imposed rhythms, demands, among others.
Absenteeism was sometimes identified by participants as a consequence of presenteeism, attributing to it a role as a trigger for absence from work.
Indeed, presenteeism can aggravate existing health problems and increase the risk of subsequent illness and absenteeism as well as impair work ability(16).
It is also worth noting, in participants’ statements, the fact that absence from work seems to be justified only in the case of an aggravated health condition and of an organic/physical dimension, because when distress was associated with psychological issues, it was not valid/recognized as a reason to be absent from work.
In the same direction, it is made clear in the theoretical framework that only physical distress is recognized by work organization, while mental distress (especially anxiety) is not accepted in the workplace(29). Therefore, for an individual to achieve disability status, they must have a characterized mental illness, which leads to the medicalization process(29).
There are several reasons why presenteeist behavior may manifest itself.
The main ones, according to this research, are due to professionals’ commitment to their duty, or their sense of responsibility, and due to financial issues, in order to avoid salary deductions and reduction in family income.
Other justifications are: avoiding overloading co-workers; fear of punishment from superiors and insecurity; maintaining the quality of patient care; not wanting to stay at home; receiving support from co-workers even when not feeling well; difficulty in obtaining medical certificate; and avoiding judgment from others.
Presenteeism may be related to musculoskeletal symptoms, type of employment relationship(15,30), work shift and location, and health conditions(15). Professionals may adopt presenteeist behavior due to commitment to the team and because they believe that they will contribute to patients’ improvement(30); to appear more committed to work; to be better seen and have a greater chance of progressing; for fear of being fired; for encouragement from superiors; to meet demanding objectives; to show illness and justify absence later; because they have been absent before; or for fear of being more limited in the future(31).
Such situations are very characteristic of the purpose of work organization, since this is an aspect of the subjective dimension of work that is fundamental to the Psychodynamics of Work for understanding workers’ health and illness processes and through which the division of tasks and people in work environments is established(32,33).
Work organization causes certain imbalances; one of them refers to the increase in work rhythms and the demand for better performance(29), thus causing an important influence on individuals’ mental health, since, regardless of the organizational model adopted in the production process, this has implications for workers’ health.
From the moment workers are unable to adjust the task according to their needs and desires, mental distress begins(29). Under these circumstances, the desire for production overcomes the desire for man, giving rise to a feeling of displeasure and tension(33).
This experience of distress and struggle against the factors that push workers towards mental illness is intrinsic to presenteeist behavior, and each worker can manifest it in different ways, depending on their level of commitment to the institution and team, sense of belonging, sense of responsibility, their own personal and professional education, and also according to other professionals’ behavior based on the history of construction of the profession and organization of nursing work, according to the statements of the nurses in this study.
It is noteworthy, however, that the motivation for presenteeist behavior was the fact that they did not want to stay at home and receive support from co-workers when they were not feeling well, which encourages us to reflect on whether work environments, in these cases, are preferable to domestic ones so that going to work serves as an escape from stressful family situations and whether co-workers actually provide well-being and support.
In view of this, presenteeism constitutes a challenge, being considered a multifactorial, subjective and complex issue, in addition to a non-palpable condition that requires professionals to acknowledge its occurrence(34), despite the pressures of nursing work organization, which expects professionals to attend work, except if they present physical manifestations, acute or aggravated health conditions.
Thus, as noted in normalized statements, nurses attend work because they feel that their absence will overload their co-workers, who would blame them for work overload, in a relationship of interdependence of the team that demands the presence of workers, regardless of how much they are under distress.
Therefore, it is important to highlight the importance of raising awareness among workers about presenteeism, given that this is still a hidden occupational condition.
Otherwise, a continuous cycle of illness and distress at work will continue, due to work organization itself, which does not always have enough people on leave to replace absent employees, which also points to the co-responsibility of healthcare institutions in the event of presenteeism.
Furthermore, due to the particularity of nursing work, presenteeism can adversely affect patients’ health safety, as it compromises quality of care, being associated with the possibility of errors, patient falls and a decrease in professionals’ attention in the development of work activities(1,12,13,35).
The research refers to the experiences of 32 nurses regarding their health and illness situations in hospital environments.
Therefore, the results presented here do not seek generalizations or effective solutions, since work organization may differ according to the healthcare institution and individuals dynamically experience new situations in their workplaces.
The data collected showed that the organization of nurses’ work influences these professionals’ illness process, who experience presenteeism in various forms.
However, presenteeism is a phenomenon that is difficult to detect, possibly due to its multidimensional nature and the lack of information about this occupational condition.
Moreover, the social, professional, and organizational perspective of the relevance of nursing in direct and continuous patient care reinforces, as expressed by nurses in this study, that the duty to patients are placed above workers’ distress, regardless of the safety and quality conditions under which this professional will provide care to patients and family members.
In view of this, we sought to expand knowledge about nurses’ presenteeism and its manifestations, in addition to highlighting the need for administrative bodies of healthcare institutions to pay attention to its existence and implement measures that minimize or eliminate the occurrence of this phenomenon in nurses’ work.
After the concept of presenteeism was presented to nurses, they began to report experiences of this behavior, which manifested itself through physical distress, such as musculoskeletal pain, mainly, and psychological distress, such as fatigue, anxiety, overload, demotivation, dissatisfaction, arising from the inherent characteristics of nursing profession work dynamics and the way in which hospital work is organized, seen as exhausting, marked by intense work rhythms and excessive demands, which can affect task performance, lead to harm to workers’ health and a reduction in the quality of care provided.
The research data are available within the article.