3D phase‐resolved functional lung (PREFUL) MRI offers lung ventilation assessment without contrast and in free breathing.
However, there are limited data on its repeatability and intercenter consistency.
This study aimed to assess the repeatability and intercenter consistency of 3D PREFUL MRI at two centers using both 3‐ and 1.5‐T field strengths.
Fifty healthy volunteers (35 female, 70%; median age 25.5 [interquartile range 22.3–29.0 years]) participated in this prospective study.
A golden‐angle stack‐of‐stars spoiled gradient echo acquisition was used for 3D PREFUL MRI.
To assess for repeatability, 3D PREFUL MRI was performed twice with a short interval between scans at each center.
At Center 1, scans were performed at 3 and 1.5 T. At Center 2, scans were performed at 3 T. Intercenter consistency of 3D PREFUL MRI was assessed between centers at 3 T. Performance of 3D PREFUL MRI at 3 and 1.5 T was compared at Center 1.
Bland–Altman analysis, coefficient of variation, intraclass correlation coefficient, and Cohen'sdwere used for the repeatability assessment.
Similarly, interfield strength and intercenter differences were quantified by Bland–Altman analysis.
In all comparisons, paired Wilcoxon signed‐rank test was used to examine differences.
3D PREFUL MRI parameters showed no significant differences between repeated measurements across three scanners, except for mean regional ventilation (RVent) at Center 2 (p= 0.0046).
Apart from mean RVent during the second measurement (p= 0.03) and tidal volume during both measurements (bothp< 0.02), no significant differences were found between 3D PREFUL MRI parameters at 3 T across both centers.
Output parameters were significantly different when images were acquired using 3 T compared to 1.5 T (allp< 0.0093).
3D PREFUL MRI ventilation‐weighted parameters showed fair to excellent repeatability and consistent intercenter results.
Given the significant differences in outputs acquired using scanners of different field strengths, multicenter studies should be conducted with scanners of the same field strength.
3D PREFUL MRI offers a ventilation‐weighted assessment without contrast and during free breathing.
This study evaluated its repeatability and consistency across 1.5‐ and 3‐T scanners at two centers.
Results showed high repeatability and consistency, but significant differences between 1.5 and 3 T emphasize the need for consistent field strengths in multicenter studies.
These findings support 3D PREFUL MRI as a reliable, noninvasive tool for lung ventilation assessment.
In recent years, several free‐breathing pulmonary imaging techniques based on Fourier decomposition (FD) [1,2] have gained interest for functional assessment of the lung.
FD MRI enables assessment of ventilation and perfusion‐weighted maps by analyzing the temporal evolution of dynamic pulmonary MRI timeseries acquired without contrast agents or breath‐holding.
Compared to nuclear medicine methods or CT, FD MRI‐based methods avoid harmful ionizing radiation, and unlike hyperpolarized gas MRI techniques, they do not require inhalation of a contrast agent or specialized equipment.
To date, most FD MRI research has focused on 2D sequences [3,4,5], as they provide analysis of both perfusion and ventilation.
However, recent advancements have led to the development of 3D techniques aimed at improving lung coverage [6,7,8,9].
Currently, 3D methods are primarily limited to ventilation‐weighted information due to technical constraints, as the blood inflow effect is eliminated by the use of nonselective hard RF pulses in the MR sequence design.
One of these methods, 3D phase‐resolved functional lung (PREFUL) MRI, offers functional ventilation assessment of the whole lung using a pseudo‐3D stack‐of‐stars acquisition [10].
Comparison of 3D PREFUL MRI to direct measurements of ventilation using19F imaging [11], as well as129Xe [12,13] imaging, has showed promising results, particularly in terms of global agreement.
Ventilation parameters derived by 3D PREFUL MRI have also demonstrated good repeatability in a study involving 53 healthy subjects and 13 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at 1.5 T [14].
As all of these studies were conducted at a single center, the intercenter consistency of 3D PREFUL MRI remains unclear.
Additionally, there is limited evidence comparing the performance of 3D PREFUL MRI between 1.5‐ and 3‐T systems, with the latter commonly used in clinical settings.
When compared to 1.5 T, the higher field strength of 3 T offers a higher achievable signal‐to‐noise ratio and faster imaging in many clinical applications [15].
However, in the lung, the theoretical advantage of 3 T might be outweighed by the increased effect of magnetic susceptibility, which decreases the short T2* relaxation time even further [16].
Understanding the variability between scanners at different institutions and field strengths is an essential step prior to the wider dissemination of 3D PREFUL MRI to other research centers.
Therefore, in this study, we aim to (i) assess the repeatability and intercenter consistency of 3D PREFUL MRI across two centers and (ii) evaluate its performance at 3 T compared to 1.5 T at a single center.
A total of 50 healthy volunteers were recruited across both centers, including 24 (10 male, 14 female, median age: 25.5 years; interquartile range [IQR]: 23.8–28.0) from Center 1 and 26 (5 male, 21 female, median age: 25.5 years; IQR: 22.0–33.0) from Center 2 (Table1a).
(a) Study demographics and pulmonary function testing data for all study subjects at both included centers.
(b) Parameter details of the stack‐of‐stars sequence with the golden‐angle increment for all scanners included.
Note:Unless otherwise stated, values are medians with interquartile ranges in parentheses.
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; F, female; FER, forced expiratory ratio; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FOV, field of view; FVC, forced vital capacity; M, male; TA, acquisition time; TE, echo time; TR, repetition time.
Wilcoxon rank‐sum test was used for all comparisons, except for sex, where a chi‐square test was applied.pvalue < 0.05 was considered significant.
Eligible subjects had to be aged 18 years and above, have no pre‐existing medical history, and be nonsmokers.
Subjects aged less than 18 years, or who were unable to undergo MRI scanning, or provide written informed consent were excluded.
The study was approved by the institutional review board of each center.
All subjects provided written informed consent.
At both centers, MR images were acquired using a 3D spoiled gradient echo sequence with stack‐of‐stars trajectory over 8 min with subjects free breathing.
Detailed sequence parameters are listed in Table1b.
Imaging was performed on a 1.5‐ (MAGNETOM Aera, Siemens Healthineers, Forchheim, Germany) and 3‐T scanner (MAGNETOM Vida, Siemens Healthineers, Forchheim, Germany) at Center 1 and only on a 3‐T scanner (MAGNETOM Skyra, Siemens Healthineers, Forchheim, Germany) at Center 2.
For each scanner, two MR acquisitions (first and second measurements) were performed after a minimum of 10 min outside the scanner.
During the break, subjects were instructed to relax, without inducing any physiological changes.
No additional preparation was required between scans.
All acquisitions were performed with the same scan parameters, positioning protocol, and coil setup to ensure consistency across repeated measurements.
Repeatability was assessed for all three scanners.
Intercenter consistency was evaluated at 3 T between both centers.
Field strength comparison between 3 and 1.5 T was performed at Center 1.
The MR exams for the field strength comparison were performed on the same day whenever scanner availability permitted.
A flow chart of the study protocol is shown in Figure1.
Study flowchart.
At each MR scanner 3D PREFUL MRI measurements were repeated.
M, 3D PREFUL MRI measurement.
Image reconstruction and postprocessing were performed at Center 1 using the 3D PREFUL pipeline as previously described [17].
Raw data acquired at Center 2 were transferred to Center 1 for this purpose.
Briefly, all data were gradient delay corrected using a radial intersection gradient delay estimation method [18] implemented in the Berkeley Advanced Reconstruction Toolbox (BART) [19].
For each subject and measurement, the gradient delay–corrected acquisitions were sorted into respiratory bins (Nbin range: 27–51), with each bin containing at least 100 radial projections and incorporating 20% view sharing from neighboring bins.
The number of respiratory bins varied between subjects due to anatomical differences that led to different numbers of acquired slices.
Given the same acquisition time for all study subjects, varying amounts of radial projections per slice were available for image reconstruction.
The parallel imaging and compressed sensing image reconstruction was performed using BART [19], leveraging sparsity in both the image and temporal domains by applying L2 norm (λ= 0.1) and total variation (λ= 0.0001) in the spatial domain and total variation regularization (λ= 0.01) in the temporal domain.
To enable voxel‐wise functional analysis of the temporally resolved data, a group‐oriented registration approach [20] was applied using the Forsberg toolbox [21] to align all respiratory phases to the end‐inspiratory phase image.
Additionally, the morphological images of the second measurement were spatially registered to the end‐inspiratory image used for the spatial alignment of the first measurement.
For all 3D PREFUL MRI measurements, regional ventilation (RVent) maps were computed for each respiratory phase [22], and the RVent cycle was analyzed by flow‐volume loops (FVLs) [23].
FVL cross‐correlation metric (FVL‐CM) maps, which depict the homogeneity of RVent dynamics throughout the whole ventilation cycle, were also derived by cross‐correlating voxel‐wise FVL to a reference FVL [24].
To account for any potential bias caused by differences in tidal volumes across 3D PREFUL measurements, the tidal volume of each measurement was estimated using deep learning–based lung parenchyma segmentation [25] as the difference in lung volume between end‐inspiratory and end‐expiratory morphological images.
Breathing frequency (in breaths per minute) was calculated from the low spatial‐resolution images (matrix size: 32 × 32, nominal temporal resolution: 100 ms) which were used to extract the gating signal for the image reconstruction.
For the image analysis, the lung parenchyma mask was segmented in the end‐inspiratory image using a deep‐learning algorithm [25] with large vessels extracted using the vessel recognition algorithm proposed by Wernz et al. [26].
All subjects performed spirometry at their respective centers.
All tests were conducted in accordance with European Respiratory Society/American Thoracic Society standards [27].
Reference values for spirometry were taken from the 2012 Global Lung Initiative equations [28].
The means and coefficients of variation (CoVs) for RVent within the lung parenchyma mask, as well as the means of FVL‐CM within the same mask, were calculated.
Subsequently, the ventilated volume percentage (VVPRVentand VVPFVL‐CM) values were calculated using published thresholds [24,29].
An overview of all 3D PREFUL MRI‐derived parameters and their clinical rationale is provided in Table2.
Overview of 3D PREFUL MRI‐derived ventilation parameters.
Abbreviations: CoV, coefficient of variation (assessing the heterogeneity of the ventilation maps); FVL‐CM, flow‐volume loop cross‐correlation metric; ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; Mean bias, mean difference derived from Bland–Altman analysis; RVent, regional ventilation;SExp, MR signal of expiratory phase;SInsp, MR signal of inspiratory phase;SRef, MR signal of reference phase used for image registration; VVPFVL‐CM, ventilated volume percentage based on FVL‐CM; VVPRVent, ventilated volume percentage based on RVent.
Here,nvvis the number of voxels labeled as ventilated in both maps (healthy), andnddis the number labeled as nonventilated (defect) in both maps.
The termsnv1andnv2refer to the number of voxels labeled as ventilated in VV Map 1 and VV Map 2, respectively, whilend1andnd2denote the number of voxels labeled as nonventilated (defect) in VV Map 1 and VV Map 2.
In assessing consistency between centers, subjects were age‐matched and ventilation parameters derived at 3 T were tested for differences using paired Wilcoxon signed‐rank test.
In the field strength comparison at Center 1, ventilation parameters derived at 3 T were compared to parameters derived at 1.5 T using similar tests as described in the repeatability comparison above.
In addition to Bland–Altman analysis, the mean differences were also quantified by percentage change.
All the statistical tests were performed using MATLAB (R2022b, The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) and results were deemed significant whenp< 0.05.
All study subjects successfully completed both MRI sessions and pulmonary function tests without any reported issues.
All subjects had normal spirometry.
No significant differences were observed between subjects at the two centers in terms of age, sex, body mass index, or spirometry (allp≥ 0.08, Table1a).
Medians and IQR of 3D PREFUL ventilation parameters and calculated tidal volumes derived for all measurements are presented in Table3.
Repeatability comparison of 3D PREFUL MRI ventilation parameters derived at both centers.
Note:Values of first and second 3D PREFUL measurements are expressed as a median with interquartile range in parentheses.
Abbreviations: CoV, coefficient of variation; FVL‐CM, flow‐volume loop cross‐correlation metric; ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; Mean bias, mean difference derived from Bland–Altman analysis; RVent, regional ventilation; VVPFVL‐CM, ventilated volume percentage based on FVL‐CM; VVPRVent, ventilated volume percentage based on RVent.
Two‐sided paired Wilcoxon signed‐rank test,pvalue < 0.05 was considered significant; significantly different measurements are marked with *.
The repeatability assessments are shown in Table3: (a) for Center 1 with the 1.5‐T scanner, (b) for Center 1 with the 3‐T scanner, and (c) for Center 2 with the 3‐T scanner.
Visual comparisons between both measurements for each scanner are displayed in Figure2(Center 1) and Figure3(Center 2).
No significant bias was observed between the first and second measurements at both centers, except for the mean of the RVent parameter derived at Center 2, which showed lower ventilation values in the second measurement (mean bias of 0.03 mL/mL,p= 0.0046, Table3c).
Exemplary Bland–Altman plots for VVPRVentand VVPFVL‐CMparameters are presented in Figure4.
Repeatability comparison of static 3D PREFUL MRI parameters at Center 1 at both field strengths.
Representative morphological, static regional ventilation (RVent) maps and corresponding binary ventilated volume maps (A—1.5 T Center 1, B—3 T Center 1) for a healthy volunteer (26‐year‐old female, FEV1= 99% pred.)
of the first (left) and second (right) 3D PREFUL measurements.
Mean RVent of the first measurement for the whole lung volume was 0.15 mL/mL (coefficient of variation [CoV] of 28%) at 1.5 T and 0.22 mL/mL (CoV of 31%) at 3 T. Mean RVent of the second measurement for the whole lung volume was 0.17 mL/mL (CoV of 31%) at 1.5 T and 0.20 mL/mL (CoV of 30%) at 3 T. VVPRVent, ventilated volume percentage based on RVent parameter.
Repeatability comparison of static 3D PREFUL MRI parameters at Center 2.
Representative morphological, regional ventilation (RVent) maps and corresponding binary ventilation volume maps for a healthy volunteer (33‐year‐old female, FEV1= 111% pred.)
from Center 2 of the first (left) and second (right) 3D PREFUL measurements.
Mean RVent of the first measurement for the whole lung volume was 0.25 mL/mL (coefficient of variation [CoV] of 30%) 1.5 T and 0.18 mL/mL (CoV of 31%) for the second measurement, respectively.
The mean RVent differences were pronounced in the study population at Center 2 suggesting for habituation effects, as the subjects were more relaxed during second 3D PREFUL MRI measurement which resulted in significantly lower mean RVent parameter.
Repeatability of 3D PREFUL MRI VVP measurements analyzed by Bland–Altman plots.
(a) VVPRVentmeasurement at 1.5 T and Center 1 (mean bias of 0.49% with 95% limits of agreement −5.01% to 5.99%), (b) VVPFVL‐CMmeasurement at 1.5 T and Center 1 (mean bias of 1.25% with 95% limits of agreement −8.51% to 11.02%), (c) VVPRVentmeasurement at 3 T and Center 1 (mean bias of −1.11% with 95% limits of agreement −14.35% to 12.13%), (d) VVPFVL‐CMmeasurement at 3 T and Center 1 (mean bias of 0.57% with 95% limits of agreement −10.84% to 11.97), (e) VVPRVentmeasurement at 3 T and Center 2 (mean bias of 0.05% with 95% limits of agreement −6.28% to 6.18%), and (f) VVPFVL‐CMmeasurement at 3 T and Center 2 (mean bias of −0.56% with 95% limits of agreement −10.13% to 8.62%).
Median CoV between the two measurements of all calculated 3D PREFUL parameters was less than 11.4% at both centers and both field strengths (Table3).
The ICC values ranged from 0.33 to 0.90, with most parameters showing substantial to almost perfect (ICC > 0.61) repeatability agreement.
A fair agreement (ICC between 0.21 and 0.4) was observed for mean FVL‐CM and VVPFVL‐CMparameters for 1.5‐T scanner at Center 1.
Across all scanners the absolute Cohen'sdvalues were lowest for mean FVL‐CM as well as for VVPRVentand VVPFVL‐CM(all |values| < 0.25), indicating a small effect size for the majority of 3D PREFUL MRI parameters.
On the other hand, the highest Cohen'sdvalues were observed for mean RVent at Center 1 (1.5 T) and Center 2 (3 T), with values ranging from 0.39 to 0.70.
In the regional comparison, the median spatial overlap at Center 1 with the 1.5‐T scanner was 95.5% (93.3%–97.8%) for VVRVentand 97.2% (91.5%–99.5%) for VVFVL‐CM.
At the same center using the 3‐T scanner, the overlap was 92.2% (85.5%–95.6%) for VVRVentand 90.9% (82.8%–96.9%) for VVFVL‐CM.
At Center 2 with the 3‐T scanner, the median overlap was 94.1% (90.8%–96.5%) for VVRVentand 96.9% (89.3%–98.8%) for VVFVL‐CM.
For the intercenter consistency analyses, comparisons were made between subjects scanned at 3 T between Centers 1 and 2.
As these represented two separate cohorts, an age‐matching comparison was performed, which resulted in the exclusion of Subjects #1 (F, 49 years old) and #5 (M, 62 years old) from Center 2.
The median age difference after age matching was 2 years (IQR: 1–4).
No significant bias was observed between the age‐matched 3D PREFUL measurements (Table4, allp> 0.06), except for the mean RVent in the second measurement (mean bias of 0.05 mL/mL towards higher values at Center 1,p= 0.0278).
Consistency comparison of 3D PREFUL MRI ventilation parameters across centers.
The subjects were matched according to their age.
A positive bias (+) indicates that the values at Center 1 were higher than at Center 2, while a negative bias (–) indicates that the values at Center 2 were higher than at Center 1.
Abbreviations: CoV, coefficient of variation (assessing the heterogeneity of the ventilation maps); FVL‐CM, flow‐volume loop cross‐correlation metric; Mean bias, mean difference derived from Bland–Altman analysis; RVent, regional ventilation; VVPFVL‐CM, ventilated volume percentage based on FVL‐CM; VVPRVent, ventilated volume percentage based on RVent.
Two‐sided paired Wilcoxon signed‐rank test,pvalue < 0.05 was considered significant; significantly different measurements are marked with *.
The mean tidal volumes for Center 1 were 419.94 mL for the first measurement and 388.44 mL for the second 3D PREFUL MRI measurement.
Similarly, for Center 2, the mean tidal volumes were 316.51 mL for the first and 278.40 mL for the second 3D PREFUL MRI measurement.
Although study subjects at Center 1 showed significant increases in tidal volumes for both measurements (mean bias ≥ 128.32 mL, bothp≤ 0.0177), these did not result in any differences in the VVP parameters (allp≥ 0.06).
No significant differences between breathing frequencies were seen (bothp> 0.10).
In Figure5a visual comparison of two age‐matched volunteers and their 3D PREFUL ventilation‐weighted maps is depicted.
Comparison of age‐matched volunteers among both recruiting centers.
Representative morphological, dynamic flow‐volume‐loop correlation metric (FVL‐CM) maps and corresponding binary ventilated volume maps for a healthy volunteer (22‐year‐old female, FEV1= 105% pred.)
from Center 1 (left) and a healthy volunteer (20‐year‐old female, FEV1= 99% pred.)
from Center 2 (right) 3D PREFUL measurement.
Mean FVL‐CM at Center 1 for the whole lung volume was 0.99 and 0.99 for Center 2, respectively.
There were no statistical differences among centers in comparisons of 3D PREFUL parameters derived from dynamic FVL‐CM parameter and in both ventilation volume percentage (VVP) parameters.
Please note difference in total lung volume between both subjects, this was statistically significant between both groups.
Table5summarizes the results of the field strength comparison between 3 and 1.5 T at Center 1.
For the first measurement, significant differences were observed in all 3D PREFUL parameters except for tidal volume (p= 0.29) and breathing frequency (p= 0.56) when images were acquired on a 3 T compared to a 1.5 T (allp< 0.0043).
Similar results were obtained for the second measurement (allp< 0.0093).
The respective percentage changes are listed in Table5.
The Bland–Altman analysis for VVPRVentand VVPFVL‐CMis shown in Figure6.
Comparison of 3D PREFUL MRI ventilation parameters across different field strength at Center 1.
A positive bias (+) indicates that the 1.5‐T values were higher than 3‐T values, while a negative bias (–) indicates that the 3‐T values were higher than the 1.5‐T values.
Abbreviations: CoV, coefficient of variation (assessing the heterogeneity of the ventilation maps); FVL‐CM, flow‐volume loop cross‐correlation metric; Mean bias, mean difference derived from Bland–Altman analysis; RVent, regional ventilation; VVPFVL‐CM, ventilated volume percentage based on FVL‐CM; VVPRVent, ventilated volume percentage based on RVent.
Two‐sided paired Wilcoxon signed‐rank test,pvalue < 0.05 was considered significant; significantly different measurements are marked with *.
Comparison of 3D PREFUL MRI VVP measurements across different field strengths at Center 1 analyzed by Bland–Altman plots.
(a) First VVPRVentmeasurement (mean bias of 5.48% with 95% limits of agreement −8.64% to 19.60%), (b) first VVPFVL‐CM(mean bias of 5.02% with 95% limits of agreement −4.71% to 14.74%), (c) second VVPRVentmeasurement (mean bias of 3.87% with 95% limits of agreement −9.16% to 16.91%), and (d) second VVPFVL‐CM(mean bias of 4.33% with 95% limits of agreement −10.85% to 19.52).
Specifically, RVent values (mean and CoV) were significantly increased at 3 T (allp≤ 0.0093) leading also to significantly lower VVPRVentvalues (mean bias of 5.5% and 3.9% for first and second measurement, respectively, bothp≤ 0.0086).
Also, a significant decrease of mean FVL‐CM values was observed at 3 T compared to 1.5 T (bothp≤ 0.0017, with mean biases of 0.02 and 0.01 for first and second measurements).
These pronounced variances led to significantly decreased VVPFVL‐CMfor both 3D PREFUL measurements at the 3‐T scanner (mean bias of 5.0% and 4.3%, respectively, bothp≤ 0.0086).
Most of the Cohen'sdvalues fell within the moderate to large effect size range (see Table5), indicating that the bias observed in the Bland–Altman analysis is significant and systematic.
The main results of this study are that 3D PREFUL MRI ventilation‐weighted measurements are (i) repeatable at both 3 and 1.5 T, (ii) consistent at 3 T, and (iii) show significant differences between 3‐ and 1.5‐T measurements.
Repeatability assessments showed no significant bias between the first and second measurements, except for the mean of the RVent parameter at Center 2.
These differences may be explained by the habituation effect, resulting in a more relaxed breathing pattern in subjects in Center 2 during the second measurement.
This is supported by the 15% relative decrease in RVent values observed in the second measurement compared to the first.
Another possible explanation may be the differences in the frequency of breathing between measurements [34], which might affect the static mean RVent values and the homogeneity of the breathing cycle.
While no significant difference in breathing frequency was observed, the mean bias of −1.10 breaths/min suggests a slower breathing pattern during the second measurement, which may have resulted in a lower mean RVent parameter.
CoV and ICC values reported here are in agreement with the current literature [14], underscoring substantial to almost perfect repeatability of the assessed parameters.
The only exception was in FVL‐CM, which showed only fair repeatability at 1.5 T. A possible explanation is the lower spread of FVL‐CM values between subjects, which may have negatively affected the differentiation of subjects and, consequently, the overall agreement.
Interestingly, at 3 T, the ICC and CoV values for these parameters improved and fell within the substantial to almost perfect repeatability range.
For example, when examining the mean of FVL‐CM, increased interquartile range and CoV values were observed at 3 T compared to 1.5 T, indicating greater variability in the 3‐T data, which in turn improved the ICC values.
While the ICC values of FVL‐CM were higher at 3 T, indicating better repeatability, the clinical use of FVL‐CM at 1.5 T would benefit from validation in patient cohorts to enhance the understanding of its implications for clinical reliability.
In the regional repeatability comparison, the high spatial overlap values across scanners and centers (91%–97%) suggest strong agreement in the spatial distribution of ventilated and nonventilated regions.
These results indicate that the VV (VVRVentand VVFVL‐CM) maps are robust to changes in scanner type, supporting their potential use in multicenter studies.
The dual‐center comparisons at 3 T between both centers demonstrated a significant difference in the mean RVent parameter in the comparison of the second measurement.
This finding is likely a result of the differences in tidal volumes between subjects at both centers.
Importantly, no significant differences were seen in any of the other ventilation parameters, especially VVP, highlighting the consistency of the 3D PREFUL MRI technique.
Furthermore, our results are consistent with other 3‐T studies that assessed dual‐site or multisite repeatability and reproducibility using other pulmonary MRI modalities, such as oxygen‐enhanced MRI in healthy volunteers [35] and hyperpolarized129Xe MRI in people with cystic fibrosis [36,37].
Significant differences between 3‐ and 1.5‐T ventilation‐weighted measurements at Center 1 were observed and were independent of tidal volume.
These differences were further confirmed by effect size calculations, which indicated moderate to large effects for most of the 3D PREFUL MRI parameters.
This suggests a systematic bias related to field strength rather than random error.
The observed bias could potentially be reduced through calibration between the systems using phantom measurements or, more accurately, by correlating the ventilation‐weighted results to a gold standard ventilation measurement using hyperpolarized129Xe or19F techniques.
However, such reference measurements were not available within the scope of this study.
These findings highlight the importance of using scanners of similar field strengths in future trials.
Comparing the observed differences to other imaging modalities, the VVP differences of 4%–5% seen in this study are slightly higher than the minimal clinically important difference of 2%–4% suggested for ventilation defect percentage values using3He and129Xe imaging [38,39].
While the shift in VVP at 3 T towards higher values might be corrected using less‐conservative thresholds, the more pronounced heterogeneity of the raw ventilation‐weighted measurements at 3 T cannot be directly addressed.
The differences in RVent reported here exceed 10% of the functional value, which was recently identified as the maximum absolute error for ventilation measurement in 2D self‐gated noncontrast‐enhanced functional lung MRI [40].
The most likely explanation for the differences observed between 3 and 1.5 T is the pronounced sensitivity of 3‐T data to susceptibility variations in lung parenchyma.
From a technical perspective, 3‐T scanners should result in greater SNR compared to 1.5‐T scanners, with Gai et al. reporting a 1.8‐fold increase in SNR for 3 T using echo times of 0.09 and 0.14 ms [41].
However, due to the multiple air–tissue interfaces within the lung parenchyma, MR signal decays more rapidly at 3 T than at 1.5 T (T2* at 3 T is approximately 0.74 ms compared to 2.11 ms at 1.5 T) [16].
Even when using the stack‐of‐stars acquisition with a fully symmetrical echo and an echo time of approximately 0.8 ms as described here, much of the parenchymal signal may already be lost, potentially outweighing the theoretical advantage of 3 T in terms of improved SNR.
Previous research reported significantly lower SNR in the lung at 3 T when compared to 1.5 T, which supports the observed inhomogeneities in ventilation parameters at 3 T [42].
Recently, Behrendt et al. demonstrated dependence of ventilation‐weighted parameters on TE at 1.5 T using 2D ultrashort echo time (UTE) acquisition [43].
Therefore, future research could focus on using UTE for functional ventilation techniques [13,44] at 3 T to mitigate the faster signal decay observed at higher field strengths.
The present study had several limitations.
Firstly, only healthy subjects were recruited; therefore, the initial results should be elaborated in a future study with a larger cohort including patients with distinct pulmonary disease.
Considering the exploratory nature of the study and the limited sample size, strict correction for multiple testing was avoided to reduce the potential for type II errors.
Upcoming work should also evaluate the reproducibility of 3D PREFUL MRI on different vendor systems.
In the field strength comparison, true randomization was not achieved at Center 1 due to scheduled clinical routine scans.
Specifically, 15 subjects underwent their first scan on the 1.5‐T scanner, with the remaining 9 on the 3‐T scanner.
Although this is unlikely to have influenced the results, future repeatability studies should be designed with this in mind.
In the dual‐center comparison, two different scanners were used.
While they both operated at 3 T, there were some technical differences in the gradient system performance (e.g., maximum gradient amplitude: 45 mT/m for MAGNETOM Skyra vs. 60 mT/m for MAGNETOM Vida) that may have influenced the results.
We also acknowledge that sex was not matched in the dual‐center comparisons.
3D PREFUL MRI ventilation‐weighted parameters were highly repeatable at 1.5 and 3 T and consistent across two different centers at 3 T. The significant differences noted between data acquired using 3 T compared to 1.5 T likely reflect a systematic bias related to field strength‐dependent factors, such as magnetic susceptibility effects or differences in signal‐to‐noise ratio, and highlight the importance of using the same field strength in future multicenter trials.
These results represent an important development in establishing the reliability of 3D PREFUL MRI for further applications, such as pulmonary disease monitoring.