Sleeve gastrectomy (SG) is the most commonly performed bariatric procedure worldwide, offering significant weight loss and remission of obesity-related diseases.
However, SG is associated with a high risk of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
To mitigate this issue, a modified procedure combining SG with Nissen fundoplication (Nissen-sleeve gastractomy [NSG]) has been developed.
The primary aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness of NSG in GERD remission.
Secondary objectives included the evaluation of short-term weight loss and the resolution of obesity-related diseases.
We conducted s prospective analysis of 34 patients who underwent NSG between September 2023 and August 2024 at a single center in Poland.
Inclusion criteria comprised age over 18 years, eligibility for metabolic and bariatric surgery, and GERD symptoms.
Data on GERD severity and weight loss outcomes were collected before and after the surgery.
Mean (SD) preoperative body mass index was 40.3 (4.4) kg/m².
GERD symptom severity decreased from a median score of 8 to 1 (P<⁠0.001), with 97.1% of the patients achieving GERD remission.
Mean (SD) percentage of total weight loss was 23% (6.3%) at 6 months and 30.3% (6.7%) at 12 months postoperatively.
Type 2 diabetes remission was observed in 28.6% of the patients, and hypertension remission, in 58.3%.
No postoperative complications were reported.
NSG is a safe and effective procedure that leads to GERD remission, while achieving short-term satisfactory weight loss and mitigating obesity-related diseases.
The primary aim of this study was to report the early outcomes of NSG surgery in terms of GERD remission in the department where this procedure was first introduced.
The secondary objectives included evaluating short-term weight loss and the resolution of associated comorbidities.
This was a prospective analysis of patients undergoing laparoscopic NS surgery at a single center in Poland between September 2023 and August 2024.
In order to be included in the study, the patients had to be over 18 years, meet the eligibility criteria for metabolic and bariatric surgery, present GERD symptoms before the surgery, and have GERD history with at least a 6-month follow-up.
Patients with missing or inconsistent data were excluded from the study.
The following GERD-related data were collected: preoperative gastroscopy findings (hiatal hernia based on the Los Angeles classification of esophagitis), GERD impact scale (IS) scores before the surgery and 6 months postoperatively, GERD severity assessed using a Likert scale from 1 to 10 (1 indicating no symptoms and 10 representing the most severe ones), daily use of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), and chronic cough.11Additionally, we collected demographic data, such as sex, age, preoperative body mass index (BMI), presence of obesity-related diseases (type 2 diabetes [T2D] and hypertension), complications, and weight loss outcomes expressed as the percentage of excess weight loss (%EWL) and the percentage of total weight loss (%TWL).12The data were collected during in-person patient visits.
All patients underwent NSG according to the technique proposed by Nocca et al.13The procedure began with the dissection of the esophageal hiatus and mobilization of approximately 6 cm of the esophagus from the mediastinum to the peritoneum.
All patients underwent primary suturing of the diaphragmatic crura, both posteriorly and anteriorly to the esophagus, using a continuous barbed suture.
The suturing was calibrated with a 36-F nasogastric tube.
The fundus of the stomach was completely released, as in SG.
A 360-degree fundoplication wrap was then created from the fundus of the stomach around the distal esophagus and secured with 3 single sutures, with the middle one fixed to the esophagus.
Next, SG was performed using a 36-F tube.
Stapling was carried out while continuously moving the calibration tube.
The last 2 staple firings were made approximately 1 cm from the wrap to ensure full blood supply.
No hernia mesh was used in any of the patients.
The wrap and the esophagus were not fixed to the diaphragm or the crura.
All data were analyzed using Statistica 13.PL software (StatSoft Inc., Tulsa, Oklahoma, United States).
A descriptive statistical analysis was conducted.
The normality of distribution was assessed using the Shapiro–Wilk test.
Categorical variables were presented as counts with percentages, and numerical variables, by means with standard deviations (SD), or medians with interquartile ranges (IQR), as appropriate.
The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare preoperative and postoperative GERD-IS scores, as the data were paired.Pvalues below or equal to 0.05 were considered significant.
All data were anonymized.
The study was conducted in accordance with the ethical standards of the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its subsequent amendments.
The study was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn (23/2024).
All patients provided written informed consent to participate in the study.
A total of 36 patients underwent NSG at least 6 months before the analysis.
Two patients were lost to follow-up, resulting in the follow-up rate of 94.4%.
The final analysis included 34 patients (31 women [91.2%] and 3 men [8.8%]).
Mean (SD) preoperative BMI was 40.3 (4.4) kg/m² (TABLE 1).
The majority of the patients (79.4%) had a hiatal hernia before surgery, and most (61.8%) suffered from chronic cough.
According to patient-reported outcomes, median (IQR) severity of GERD before surgery was 8 (7–9) on a 1–10 Likert scale.
Mean (SD) operative time was 60 (10.4) minutes.
Mean (SD) %TWL after 6 months was 23% (3%), and after 12 months, 30.3% (6.7%;TABLE 2).
Data are presented as mean (SD) unless indicated otherwise.
A total of 28.6% of the patients achieved T2D remission, while 58.3% experienced hypertension remission during the follow-up period.
Additionally, 81% of the patients reported cough remission.
Median (IQR) severity of GERD symptoms was 1 (1–7) on the Likert scale.
Only 1 patient (2.9%) reported persistent GERD symptoms after NSG.
There were no postoperative complications.
All patients completed the GERD-IS questionnaire.
An improvement was observed in the answers provided to all 9 questions of the GERD-IS (TABLE 3).
Our study reports the results 6 months after NSG in a high-volume bariatric center in Poland.
These are the first patients operated on at this center using this procedure.
To our knowledge, this is the first report on NSG in Poland.
NSG appears to be effective in reducing GERD symptoms.
A total of 97.1% of the patients who underwent NS reported complete remission of symptoms at 6-month follow-up.
The SM-BOSS (Swiss Multicenter Bypass or Sleeve Study)19reported that the de novo GERD rate after SG may reach 31.6%.
Olmi et al20conducted a randomized study comparing NSG and SG.
They included patients without GERD symptoms before surgery.
According to their findings, 1 year after surgery, PPIs were necessary in 4.3% of the NS patients, as compared with 17.1% of the SG patients (P= 0.001).
NSG may also have a protective effect against de novo GERD, which remains a significant concern after SG.
There are initial reports of early complications of NSG.24,25,26However, in our study, no early or late complications were observed during a 6-month follow-up.
The length of hospital stay was not prolonged, and no new postoperative symptoms were reported.
The creation of the fundoplication wrap did not lead to additional postoperative discomfort or complications.
A lack thereof is likely related to refinements in the originally described technique.
The patients who underwent NSG in our department were selected if they presented GERD symptoms.
Based on our own observations, ideal candidates for this procedure were young patients with GERD symptoms, a hiatal hernia, and a BMI between 35 and 45 kg/m2.
Smoking was a contraindication due to the risk of wrap necrosis and impaired tissue healing.
Any inflammatory changes detected during preoperative endoscopy had to be fully resolved before surgery.
With the continuous evolution of metabolic and bariatric surgery, the development of new techniques is inevitable.
Increasing evidence suggests that SG has a pro-reflux effect, leading to the worsening of pre-existing symptoms and the de novo emergence of GERD.
Introducing a procedure similar to SG which would incorporate reflux protection, appears to be a logical step.
NSG maintains similar weight loss results and obesity-related disease outcomes, while offering superior antireflux benefits.
As compared with RYGB, NSG preserves the natural gastrointestinal anatomy and allows for complete endoscopic surveillance.
Surgical techniques continue to evolve, and an increasing number of studies with large patient cohorts and long-term follow-up are being conducted10.
Moreover, there is a clear need to standardize the NSG technique.
NSG can only be performed as a primary bariatric procedure in patients who have not undergone prior bariatric surgery.
It is not suitable as a revisional procedure.
However, its significant advantage is the potential for wrap reversal, allowing for a conversion back to a standard SG if necessary, or in the event of procedure-specific complications.
The main limitations of our study included its single-center design, same surgical team analyzing patient data, a relatively small sample size, and a short follow-up period, all due to the novelty of the procedure.
A larger proportion of patients with metabolic complications of obesity, such as hypertension, T2D, and sleep apnea, would help better assess the long-term resolution of these conditions.
Additionally, the lack of randomization in patient selection was a limitation, as only patients with GERD symptoms were included, introducing potential bias.
Another limitation of the study was the lack of control endoscopy to evaluate GERD resolution.
Further studies with larger patient cohorts are necessary, and such research is currently planned at our center.
After analyzing a significantly larger group of patients, we anticipate satisfactory long-term outcomes, as the NSG procedure appears promising.
This is supported by the findings of Savvala et al10who reported favorable results in a 5-year follow-up, particularly regarding reflux symptoms relief.
NSG is a safe procedure that, in the short-term, leads to GERD remission.
Additionally, it yields satisfactory outcomes in terms of weight loss and improvement in obesity-related diseases.
PL conceived the concept of the study.
PL and NDG contributed to the design of the research.
All authors were involved in data collection.
PL and NDG analyzed the data.
All authors edited and approved the final version of the manuscript.
Artificial intelligence was not used to write the article.