The poultry sector represents an essential component of agriculture worldwide.
Its meat is one of the most consumed meat products, providing consumers with high‐quality, nutritious and affordable protein.
However, intensification of poultry production to meet the growing demand has led to the persistence of infectious diseases, which remains a serious constraint with negative impacts.
To mitigate this issue, biosecurity is used as the main strategy.
Unfortunately, farmers’ perception of biosecurity benefits is reducing its effective implementation in poultry farms.
Showing the possible positive impact of biosecurity on livestock performance could be a key reason that could drive improving biosecurity implementation by farmers.
Following the PRISMA‐Sc (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews) method, this study aimed to map existing literature on the association between farm biosecurity or management measures and poultry production performances.
The search was performed in four databases (PubMed, Embase, Web of Science and Agricola) with no time and geographic restriction.
From the 2,721 records identified during the search, only 13 were finally included in this review.
The majority concerned broilers (n= 11) and were conducted across the world.
Many of the included studies showed a positive correlation between biosecurity and production performances, with cleaning and disinfection and weight gain as the associated main factors.
For instance, the positive associations included overall biosecurity and average mortality in the first week/average performance index; housing system and weight gain/feed intake/feed conversion ratio/performance index/live body weights; frequency of waterline sanitation and general performance; and adoption of biosecurity and number of eggs/flock in 3 months.
Further studies need to be conducted to provide evidence reinforcing the adoption and implementation of farm biosecurity measures for improving animal production performances.
In this scoping review, many production performance indicators showed a positive association with biosecurity or management measures, with cleaning and disinfection and weight gain as the associated main factors.
However, some negative correlations between biosecurity and performance indicators were also recorded.
Therefore, the current review underscores the need for future studies to provide further evidence on the role of biosecurity in improving animal production performances, leading to better adoption of biosecurity measures by livestock farmers.
In recent years, the global poultry industry has experienced rapid expansion and growth.
Poultry consumption has exponentially increased due to its affordable price and its dietary benefits compared with other meats (Kleyn and Ciacciariello2021; OECD/FAO2023).
In addition, poultry has been a significant contributor to the world's agriculture sector (OECD/FAO2023).
Poultry meat and products represent the major source of cheap protein and remain one of the important contributors to the economy and income of countries such as the low‐ and middle‐income countries (Attia et al.2022).
Unfortunately, infectious diseases are an important issue in this sector (Waktole et al.2023).
Biosecurity measures are critical in the prevention of the impact of infectious diseases because they reduce the introduction, persistence or dissemination of infectious agents (Vougat Ngom et al.2024).
In poultry production, biosecurity measures have been the focus of considerable and increasing attention to preventing severe and highly transmissible diseases and food‐borne zoonotic diseases (Souillard et al.2024).
Biosecurity usually includes both external (purchase of day‐old chicks, transport and health status of source herds, depopulation of chickens, feed and water quality, etc.) and internal (cleaning and disinfection, disease management, egg management, etc.) measures.
Generally, isolation, traffic control and sanitation comprise the three components of good biosecurity (Cardona and Kuney2002; Negro‐Calduch et al.2013; Indrawan et al.2020).
Isolation includes physical barriers—such as fences—and separating sick birds from healthy birds—that stop the entry or reduce the transmission of pathogens within and between poultry farms (Imam et al.2021).
On the other hand, traffic control simply refers to the movement restriction of potential vectors—such as poultry traders, veterinarians, animals and equipment and so forth—aiding transmission of pathogens within and between poultry farms.
Sanitation refers to the cleaning and disinfection of visitors, equipment, poultry sheds and farmers (Cardona and Kuney2002; Negro‐Calduch et al.2013; Indrawan et al.2020).
The biosecurity and hygienic level of the farms are critical points in the poultry industry and should be part of any poultry production system.
The strict application of biosecurity measures was strongly recommended by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) as the most effective way in the prevention and control of the spread of infectious diseases (FAO2020).
Adequate biosecurity measures can improve overall flock health, lower antimicrobial usage, reduce economic losses and improve overall farm profitability (Goualie et al.2020; S. Dhakal and Gompo2022).
Hagenaars et al. (2024) have shown that preventive culling within a 1 km radius reduced the duration of highly pathogenic avian influenza outbreaks and the number of infected farms.
Similarly, targeted Salmonella control measures in laying hens have led to a more than 50% reduction in human salmonellosis cases associated with egg production (Koutsoumanis et al.2019).
An association between welfare index and biosecurity measures (farm management, supply of materials, control and hygienic measures implemented between farm structures, cleaning and disinfection measures on the farm) has been reported in large‐scale fattening turkey farms in Hungary (Kovács et al.2025).
Moreover, with the resurgence of avian influenza epidemics in the global poultry industry, compliance with on‐farm biosecurity measures, especially by poultry farmers and the need to monitor and improve the overall level of biosecurity globally are becoming increasingly imperative and essential (Delpont et al.2023).
The implementation of on‐farm biosecurity measures varies according to many factors, including countries, farm characteristics, poultry species, epidemiological situation, production system, legislation in force in the country and so forth.
(Mahmood et al.2025).
Generally, developed countries such as Europe demonstrated a good/adequate overall level of compliance and implementation of on‐farm biosecurity practices in poultry farms (Tilli et al.2022; Souillard et al.2024).
In contrast, recent studies conducted in developing countries, including Africa, have shown poor adoption of on‐farm biosecurity measures in poultry farms (Ismael et al.2021; Waktole et al.2023).
For instance, Dhakal et al. (2025) reported that over half of the Nepalese poultry farms were generally lacking the implementation of biosecurity measures, with over half not adhering to proper biosecurity protocols.
Furthermore, other studies also highlighted substantial weaknesses in the implementation of biosecurity measures in chicken farms (Ismael et al.2021; Pao et al.2023).
Some of the reasons for not implementing the biosecurity measures on farms included poor farmers’ knowledge regarding biosecurity, their perception of its efficacy, the attitude of farmers towards risk, costs and labour associated with the implementation, as well as a lack of training and time spent performing the biosecurity measures (Millman et al.2017; Souillard et al.2024; Alam et al.2025).
The farmers’ perception of biosecurity efficacy is correlated with the difficulty in linking biosecurity measures and production performances of their animals, considering the cost associated with biosecurity adoption.
This is especially true because biosecurity measures are defined for disease prevention or control.
However, the control of disease can contribute to improving feed and water intake, which could result in animal weight gain.
For example, stopping partial depopulation has been associated with 14% reduced profit per kg of live weight and 31% reduced profit per broiler production cycle (Sarnino et al.2022).
Faroque et al. (2023) reported a significantly higher crude mortality rate (CMR) in broiler farms that were near the neighbourhoods.
Thus, the current study is expected to map existing literature by assessing the associations (positive or negative) between farm biosecurity measures (or management) and poultry production performances.
This review was conducted based on the methodology outlined elsewhere and followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (Tricco et al.2018).
The objective of this review was to explore the relationship between farm biosecurity or management and poultry production performance.
Eligible studies included English or French publications that examined the association between biosecurity measures (or management) and poultry production performances, regardless of publication dates and the country where the study was conducted.
The search was conducted on 10 April 2024 in Agricola (via EBSCOhost), Web of Science (WOS), Embase and PubMed databases through Baylor University (Texas, USA).
The databases included in WOS were Data Citations Index, WOS Core Collection, BIOSIS Citation Index, Current Contents Connect, Derwent Innovations Index, Grants Index, KCI‐Korean Journal Database, Medline and Preprint Citation Index and ProQuest TM Dissertation and Thesis Citation Index.
In addition to this primary search strategy, PubMed was used for a backwards search starting with the final included papers.
The papers identified during this secondary search were screened using the same method as those collected from the above databases.
The search strategy employed multiple synonyms for the key terms: [biosecurity] AND [production performances] AND [poultry].
The complete search strings used in the one database can be found inSupporting Information S1.
Following selection of the relevant papers, authors maintained respective groups for data charting by using a standardized Microsoft Excel spreadsheet (2020) developed by Ronald Vougat Ngom and validated by all authors during a calibration exercise using four randomly selected articles.
Both groups of authors independently extracted data on the study's characteristics (poultry category—broilers, layers, ducks, turkeys, breeders, other minor species; number of farms, etc.); general information (year of publication, country, first author name, etc.) and findings (production parameter associated with biosecurity measures), and the descriptive data analysis was performed using a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet (version 2020).
First, an overview of production parameters studied for their potential association with biosecurity was synthetized.
Second, the production performance and biosecurity parameters that were positively or negatively associated were presented separately.
The Excel sheet containing all the extracted variables will be made available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.
A total of 2,721 records were retrieved following the searching of four databases, including PubMed (n= 154), Embase (n= 156), WOS (n= 2,303) and Agricola (n= 108) (Figure1).
Before screening, 338 studies were excluded following the deduplication.
Of the 2,383 records subjected to the title and abstract screening, 2,298 were further excluded.
Furthermore, thirteen records were excluded due to the full text not being retrieved.
Out of the 72 articles subjected to the full‐text screening, only 12 were included.
In the final phase, a total of 13 records were included in the review, with one study included after a backwards search starting from the included papers (Figure1).
The majority of the records were excluded during the full‐text screening because there was no assessment of the biosecurity measures, production performance or the association between biosecurity measures and production performances was not evaluated (Figure1).
The reason for the exclusion of each paper during the full‐text screening is provided in the Supporting Information2.
PRISMA flow diagram illustrating the selection of eligible studies.
Table1depicts the general characteristics of the included studies in this review.
All but one of the included studies had the country of the study reported.
Of the 13 selected studies, two were conducted in both Belgium and Brazil, while one each of the studies was conducted in the USA, India, China, Egypt, Ireland and Canada.
Regarding the study period, seven studies had not reported the information, while six had reported the study period ranging between 2002 and 2021 (Table1).
The majority of the studies were cross‐sectional (n= 8), conducted on broilers (n= 11), had reported the number of farms (n= 7) ranging from 9 to 771 and had not reported the number of flocks studied (n= 10) and production system type (n= 8).
Of the studies which reported the production type (n= 5), three of these were commercial, and one each was a traditional and a backyard poultry system (Table1).
Characteristics of studies included in the review.
Abbreviations: NR, not reported in the corresponding study; RCT, random control trial.
The summary of the biosecurity measures or management factors and production performances reported in each of the selected studies is presented in Table2.
In the 13 studies included, both the biosecurity measures and performance indicators were reported.
The reported biosecurity measures included cleaning and disinfection (n= 5), overall biosecurity (n= 2), house system (n= 2) and others (e.g., stocking density, foot bath, visitors allowed, etc.) (n= 4).
While, regarding the performance indicators, seven of the studies assessed the body weight of the birds, and five of the studies each evaluated the mortality/viability and feed conversion ratio (Table2).
Four of the studies each also assessed the daily growth, and others included liveability, age at slaughter, feed:gain ratio and so forth.
Others focused on the feed intake (n= 3), as well as egg production (n= 2) and performance index (n= 2) (Table2).
Biosecurity measures or management factors and production performances found in papers included in the review.
Table3presents a summary of the association between farm biosecurity and production performance indicators investigated in the selected studies.
Positive or negative associations were reported in all the selected studies.
The majority of the included studies reported a positive association.
For instance, the positive associations included overall biosecurity and average mortality in the first week/average performance index; housing system and the weight gain/feed intake/feed conversion ratio/performance index/live body weights; frequency of waterline sanitation and general performance; and adoption of biosecurity and number of eggs/flock in 3 months.
Other positive associations were stocking density (birds/m2) of 18, 20 and 22 and growth of broilers; distance from locality and decrease of CMR (Day 1/1000 birds) or CMR (Day 2–14/1000 birds) and use of deep well water (compared to tube well and supply line water) and decrease of CMR (Day 1/1000 birds) or CMR (Day 2–14/1000 birds) and so forth (Table3).
The negative associations reported included overall biosecurity and average total mortality (%) or average feed conversion (%); absence of a house; rate of egg production per duck per household farm per year and stocking density (birds/m2) of 12, 14 and 16 and growth of broilers.
Farm biosecurity or management factors found to be associated with production performance.
Abbreviation: CMR: crude mortality rate per 1000 birds.
The main objective for applying on‐farm biosecurity is to avoid the introduction of pathogens and the transmission of diseases, either between farms or within the farms worldwide, thereby ensuring good livestock and public health (Huneau‐Salaün et al.2020; Waktole et al.2023).
Biosecurity is now incorporated as one of the key components of One Health (Renault et al.2021; Renault et al.2022).
A recent study (Zaki et al.2024) observed that different levels of farms’ biosecurity measures were associated with different prevalence ofEscherichia coliin Ethiopian poultry farms and that application of stringent cleaning and disinfection practices was recommended for reducing the introduction and persistence of the organism in the farms.
Thus, proper implementation of biosecurity measures in poultry farms, including backyard production systems, is necessary for the protection of flocks from disease outbreaks and curbing their transmission (Gentile et al.2024).
However, it should be noted that biosecurity measures—including cleaning and disinfection protocols, surveillance and culling—exhibit variable outcomes influenced by local environmental conditions, farm‐specific characteristics and management practices (Alam et al.2025).
In addition, economic constraints, such as limited financial resources, and operational challenges, labour availability and training also influence biosecurity implementation (Buckel et al.2024).
Furthermore, inconsistent evaluation protocols across regions hinder standardized assessment and comparison of biosecurity performance, complicating broader applicability (Vougat Ngom et al.2024).
The perception of livestock stakeholders of the importance of animal health and its relationship with biosecurity has increased in recent years due to the emergence and re‐emergence of several diseases, such as avian influenza.
Even if the relation between biosecurity and disease prevention is almost evident, one should keep in mind that the final goal of the farmer is to improve their financial benefit through the improvement of livestock productivity.
In fact, farm profitability could be damaged because of inefficient financial management practices.
Production improvement is a critical support decision for implementing farm biosecurity.
The current scoping review explored the relationship between farm biosecurity and poultry production performance.
Only 13 studies were finally included in this review.
Cleaning and disinfection and other biosecurity measures, such as stocking density, foot baths and visitors allowed access into poultry farms, were the major farm biosecurity cited in the above studies.
On the other hand, factors such as body weight gain or loss of birds, mortality/viability and feed conversion ratio were the frequently reported production performances.
Although a negative association was reported, positive associations between biosecurity measures and production performances were mostly reported.
The limited number of included articles is due to the fact that establishing the relationship between biosecurity and production performance is complex because performance is the result of key contributory factors, namely, the genetic merit of the animals, the animal health status and the environment (biosecurity, feed, production system, climate, etc.) in which they are raised.
In fact, breed, feed and production system play important roles in livestock performance.
For example, despite all the feeding strategies, the indigenous poultry usually display a slower growth rate and a lower egg‐laying capacity compared to improved breeds (Ochora et al.2023).
Many studies have shown the influence of feeding and rearing systems on chicken performance (Van Emous et al.2024; Xu et al.2025).
However, assessing the contribution of biosecurity measures on livestock performance could be a key motivation factor for farmers to better implement biosecurity on their farms.
Therefore, more studies are needed to show this evidence.
The data analysis methods employed in the selected papers vary.
For example, a stochastic simulation model was conducted estimating the live weight broiler production, costs and profits at different days prior to depopulation and no depopulation (Sarnino et al.).
Similarly, age‐specific CMRs were calculated and compared with poultry pens with adequate or inadequate biosecurity levels (Faroque et al.).
On the other hand, others estimated production performances through measured variables such as weight gain, feed intake, feed: gain ratio, viability and so forth and were then compared with a new biosecurity program (de Castro Burbarelli et al. 2017).
The majority of the studies selected were cross‐sectional and conducted on broilers, with none of the studies concerned with layers.
The focus on broilers could be attributed to the short cycle of their production and their significant contribution to food nutrition.
This result highlights a gap concerning the other species (layers and turkeys) and suggests it as an area for future research.
The studies included in the current review reported many biosecurity measures and production performance indicators.
Among the production performances reported, mortality/viability, body weight gain and feed conversion ratio ranked high, while cleaning and disinfection and others such as stocking density, distance of farm to neighbourhoods, foot baths, water sources, visitors allowed, disposal of dead birds and presence of rodents represented the biosecurity measures frequently reported in the selected studies.
Many biosecurity measures or management factors were found to be positively or negatively associated with poultry production performance on farms.
Sarnino et al. (2022) reported a positive association between biosecurity and broiler mortality during the first week.
The same study found a negative association between biosecurity and average feed conversion.
This finding highlights as already mentioned, the complexity of the interaction between biosecurity or management factors and the performance of livestock.
However, the majority of biosecurity measures reported in the included studies were positively associated with poultry performance.
Among them, cleaning and disinfection measures were among the most cited.
Indeed, the efficacy of cleaning and disinfection to reduce infectious diseases has been reported worldwide (Agunos et al.2014; Martelli et al.2017; Štukelj et al.2021; Münster et al.2023).
The reduction of infection could improve the feed intake of animal, resulting in better weight gain and performance index.
In poultry farms, cleaning and disinfection of houses at the end of a production round is very important in reducing the pathogen pressures (Van De Giessen et al.1998).
Indeed, infectious agents from the previously infected flocks can persist in the poultry farm environment (drinking water nipples, drainage holes, floor, etc.) for a long time and cause problems in the next production round by contact with residual manure, dust or feathers (Courtice et al.2023; Gharbi et al.2023).
An efficient cleaning and disinfection procedure should include cleaning by drying, followed by wet cleaning with detergents to remove all gross dirt and render surfaces visibly clean; disinfection to kill pathogens; rinsing to clear residues of disinfectants.
Cleaning and disinfection also include the use of disinfection baths, utilization of hygiene locks, the availability and usage of disinfection baths or boot washers, the application of hand hygiene (cleaning and disinfecting of your hands) and the cleaning and disinfection of trucks and crates that enter the poultry farms (Huneau‐Salaün et al.2020; Huneau‐Salaün et al.2022; Makovska et al.2024).
The fact that this study has not considered grey literature and publications in languages other than French or English constitutes the main limitation of this review.
The limited number of studies included in this review can also be attributed to the fact that the main objective of biosecurity is not to improve the production performance of livestock.
Biosecurity is primarily intended to prevent the introduction of pathogens into farms and to control their dissemination within farms.
Moreover, as biosecurity measures—such as cleaning, disinfection, culling and so forth—exhibit variable outcomes influenced by economic constraints and inconsistent evaluation protocols across regions hindering standardized assessment and comparisons, evaluating only production performance improvements provides a limited perspective because it overlooks critical factors such as implementation feasibility, economic sustainability and socio‐cultural influences that impact long‐term success.
Furthermore, in the majority of the studies include in this review the relation between biosecurity and production performance was evaluated using univariable analysis.
This could introduice bias as many factors could justify the findings.
Future studies should perform multivariable regression model to really assess this relatioship.
Thus, a holistic evaluation approach that integrates contextual, economic and operational considerations is necessary to accurately assess the relationship between biosecurity interventions and livestock production performances.
This scoping review aimed to highlight the beneficial effect of farm biosecurity in improving poultry production performance.
Many performance indicators showed a positive association with biosecurity or management measures, with cleaning and disinfection and weight gain as the primary factors.
However, some negative correlations between biosecurity and performance indicators were also recorded.
Therefore, the current review underscores the need for future studies to provide further evidence on the role of biosecurity in improving animal production performances, leading to better adoption of biosecurity measures by livestock farmers.
However, as performance is the result of the interaction between the genetics of animals and environmental factors (feeding and biosecurity or management measures), better evidence of the beneficial effect of biosecurity on poultry production performances could be assessed by using a study design that involves the same poultry breed eating the same feeds in the same study area.