Escherichia coliaffects human health through intestinal and extraintestinal infections.
Avian pathogenicE.
coli(APEC) contributes to colibacillosis in poultry and can develop public health risks.
Antibiotic resistance and biofilm‐producer strains are challenges in infection control options.
This study aimed to characterize phenotypic and genotypic antibiotic resistance profiles as well as biofilm formation assay inE.
coliisolates from clinical and poultry samples.
In the study, 42E.
coliisolates were collected and confirmed from clinical and poultry sources.
The isolates were evaluated for pathotypes using polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Antibiotic resistance was evaluated using the disk diffusion technique and minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) tests.
PCR was utilized to identify antimicrobial resistance genes associated with fluoroquinolones, sulphonamides, tetracyclines and beta‐lactams.
Biofilm formation was evaluated using a 96‐well microtiter plate.
Three clinical isolates, including enteropathogenicE.
coli(EPEC), enteroaggregativeE.
coli(EAEC) and enterotoxigenicE.
coli(ETEC), were identified as pathogenic strains.
The highest rates of resistance were recorded against tylosin (100%), neomycin (92.85%), tetracycline (85.7%), ampicillin (73.8%), doxycycline (71.4%), ciprofloxacin (64.28%), trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (64.28%) and enrofloxacin (57.1%).
The most prevalent resistance genes detected asblaTEMandgyrA/B(97.6% and 76.1%, respectively).
The overall prevalence ofblaCTX, sul1, sul2, tetAandtetBgenes were 21.4%, 45.2%, 11.9%, 33.3% and 7.1%, respectively.
TheqnrB, qnrB4andqnrSgenes were absent in the clinical samples, whereas present in poultry isolates.
All isolates were biofilm producers, and 96.4% of poultry isolates had strong biofilm formation capacity.
The alarming levels of resistance genes and biofilm formation of isolates in the present study emphasize the need for antibiotic management practices and further research on resistance transmission dynamics in the food industry.
Three clinical isolates, including EPEC, EAEC and ETEC, were identified as pathogenic strains.
All isolates were biofilm producers, and 96.4% of poultry isolates had strong biofilm formation capacity.
The highest rates of resistance were recorded against tylosin (100%), neomycin (92.85%), tetracycline (85.7%), ampicillin (73.8%), doxycycline (71.4%), ciprofloxacin (64.28%), trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (64.28%) and enrofloxacin (57.1%).
Escherichia coli (E. coli), a multifaceted facultative anaerobic bacteria, is a commensal resident of the intestines in humans and animals (Foster‐Nyarko and Pallen2022).
This microorganism is commonly classified on the basis of its pathogenicity into nonpathogenic, intestinal pathogenic and extraintestinal pathogenic strains.
In healthcare settings,E.
coliis a well‐known pathogen that causes various infections, from urinary tract infections (UTIs) to more severe conditions like bloodstream infections and gastrointestinal diseases (Vihta et al.2018).
Intestinal pathogenicE.
coliis classified into various pathogenic groups on the basis of their virulence genes.
These pathotypes include enterohemorrhagicE.
coli(EHEC), enteropathogenicE.
coli(EPEC), enteroinvasiveE.
coli(EIEC), enterotoxigenicE.
coli(ETEC) and enteroaggregativeE.
coli(EAEC) (Pokharel et al.2023).
ETEC is commonly found in low‐ and middle‐income countries and is a significant cause of travellers’ diarrhoea, especially in children in these regions.
EAEC is often linked to a higher risk of persistent diarrhoea.
At the same time, EPEC is related to long‐lasting diarrhoea in developing countries and may also play a role in causing diarrhoea in more developed nations (Gomes et al.2016).
Avian pathogenicE.
coli(APEC) is accounting for causing colibacillosis in chicken and poultry, leading to extraintestinal infections (Cunha et al.2017).
Avian colibacillosis manifests in various forms, such as acute septicaemia, chronic respiratory diseases, cellulitis, salpingitis, pericarditis and other extraintestinal diseases (Panth2019).
PathogenicE.
coliisolates in animals and birds served as reservoirs, facilitating the spread of these strains among different livestock (Yuan et al.2021).
This can lead to contamination of the environment and increase the risk of infection in humans through direct exposure and consumption of contaminated food or water (Schmithausen et al.2018).
The development of antibiotic resistance in gram‐negative bacteria, particularly inE.
coli, poses a serious threat to global public health.E.
coliis commonly used as an indicator for monitoring antibiotic resistance in the environment, as it has shown a strong capability to acquire multiple antibiotic resistances (Anjum et al.2021).
There are concerns about the transmission of antibiotic‐resistant bacteria from animals to humans due to the widespread use of antibiotics in animals for prevention and growth promotion (Aworh et al.2021; Osman et al.2018).
Increasing antibiotic resistance among foodborne bacteria likeE.
colihas resulted in higher rates of human fatalities, longer hospital stays and increased healthcare costs (Mathers et al.2015).
Biofilms are coatings produced by microorganisms that adhere to surfaces, creating protective layers as a survival strategy (Li et al.2023).
Biofilm has been recognized as a significant contributor to the development of antimicrobial resistance and serves as a protective barrier that prevents the effective targeting of microorganisms in living tissues by antimicrobial agents, antibodies, and immune cells (Kumar et al.2017).
APECs in poultry water systems are survived by biofilm, which is present on all equipment used in food production, including waterers and pipes used for drinking (Gunathilaka et al.2024).
This study aims to determine and characterize the antibiotic resistance patterns, and formation of bacterial biofilms inE.
colistrains obtained from both clinical samples and poultry infected with colibacillosis.
A total of 42E.
colistrains were identified in samples collected from humans and poultry from April to September 2022 in Qazvin, Iran.
Out of these, 28 strains were isolated from the liver and intestine samples of poultry infected with colibacillosis, and 14 strains were obtained from clinical samples.
Enrichment was performed using peptone water and Rappaport Vassiliadis for poultry samples, and the stool samples were transferred into gram‐negative broth (GN Broth) incubated at 37°C for 8 h. Then, the cultures were again sub‐cultured on EMB (eosin methylene blue) and XLD (xylose lysine deoxycholate) agar.
Suspected colonies were subjected to standard biochemical tests, including oxidase, catalase, TSI agar, methyl red‐Voges–Proskauer (MRVP), citrate consumption (Simmons citrate agar) and urease production.
All isolates that were glucose positive, lactose negative, MR positive, VP negative, indole positive, motility positive, hydrogen sulphide negative, and citrate negative were consideredE.
coliisolates by phenotypic tests.
Stocks of all isolates were stored frozen at −80°C in microtube containing Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) complemented with 10% (v/v) glycerol until required.
Bacteria were recovered from freezing by transferring 100 µL into 5 mL of TSB, incubating overnight at 37°C, and sub‐culturing prior to use in assays.
E. coliisolates were cultured overnight on Trypticase soy agar (Sigma Aldrich, USA) plates, followed by the extraction of genomic DNA using the boiling method (da Silva et al.2012).
Briefly, bacteria were suspended in double‐distilled water and lysed by heating at 100°C for 10 min.
After centrifugation, the supernatant containing DNA was collected and stored at −20°C until polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis.
The PCR assay was conducted to detect different pathotypes of diarrheagenicE.
colistrains by targeting virulence genes related to these strains.
The specific primer sequences (Havt et al.2017) are listed in Table1.
The pathotypes tested included EHEC (stx1, stx2andhlyAgenes), ETEC (ltandstgenes), EAEC (aggR, sigAandastAgenes) and EPEC (eaegene).
The PCR products were separated by electrophoresis on a 1% agarose gel.
Primer sequences used for the identification of differentEscherichia colipathotypes by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Abbreviations: EAEC, enteroaggregativeE.
coli; EHEC, enterohemorrhagicE.
coli; ETEC, enterotoxigenicE.
The disk diffusion method, as per the Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines (CLSI 2023), was used to test the susceptibility of isolates to various antibiotics.
Various antibacterial discs (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), including cefepime (20 µg), cefotaxime (30 µg), ceftazidime (30 µg), cefoxitin (5 µg), neomycin (30 µg), ciprofloxacin (5 µg), lincospectin (30 µg), tylosin (40 µg), danofloxacin (40 µg), Tetracycline (30 µg), Enrofloxacin (10 µg), Doxycycline (30 µg), Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole (25 µg), imipenem (10 µg), ampicillin (30 µg), florfenicol (30 µg) and levofloxacin (5 µg), were selected and tested.
In addition, the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of colistin was determined.
Extended Spectrum Beta‐Lactamase (ESBL)‐producing isolates were identified using phenotypic methods as described previously (Rupp and Fey2003).E.
coliATCC 25922 served as the standard strain for comparison.
PCRs with specific primers were applied to evaluate the presence of 14 antibiotic‐resistant genes among different classes of antibiotics.
Isolates were screened for fluoroquinolone resistance:qnrA, qnrB, qnrB4, qnrC, qnrD, qnrS, gyrAandgyrB; sulfonamide resistance:sul1, sul2andsul3; tetracyclines:tetA,tetBandtetG; and beta‐lactams resistance:blaCTX‐MandblaTEM.
Table2provides a list of the primer sequences used in the study along with the corresponding annealing temperatures.
The PCR products were resolved on a 1% agarose gel and visualized using a UV‐trans illuminator.
Primer sequences applied for resistance gene identification.
The formation of biofilms was studied using a 96‐well microtiter plate technique.
Bacterial cultures were grown in a TSB medium containing 5% sucrose and then adjusted to a standard concentration (0.5 MFU [McFarland]) before being added to each microplate well.
The plate was then incubated at 37°C for 18–24 h.Pseudomonas aeruginosaand TSB medium were the positive and negative controls, respectively (Wu et al.2011).
Following three quick washes with phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS), and cell fixation with methanol 95% solution, the plate was stained with 200 µL of 1% crystal violet (CV) for 15 min.
The dye was taken out, and the wells were rinsed three times with PBS.
Subsequently, the biofilms formed were dissolved with 200 µL of 33% acetic acid for 30 min.
A microtiter plate reader (BioTek, Epoch, USA) was used to measure the optical absorbance at 570 nm (OD570, ODC570).
Biofilms were categorized into four groups on the basis of the ODc value: OD ≤ ODc (non‐biofilm formation), ODc < OD ≤ 2 ODc (weak‐biofilm formation), 2 ODc < OD ≤ 4 ODc (medium‐biofilm formation) and OD > 4 ODc (strong‐biofilm formation).
SPSS software version 16 was used for conducting statistical analysis.
The Kruskal–Wallis test was applied for comparisons of biofilm formation capacity.
A result was considered to have statistical significance if thepvalue was less than 0.05 (p< 0.05).
Out of the 42E.
colistrains, three clinical isolates, including one EPEC, one ETEC and one EAEC, were identified on the basis of the presence of the target genes.
The remaining isolates did not exhibit virulence genes characteristic of the tested pathotypes.
The highest rates of resistance were recorded against tylosin (N= 42, 100%), neomycin (N= 39, 92.85%), tetracycline (N= 36, 85.7%), ampicillin (N= 31, 73.8%), doxycycline (N= 30, 71.4%), ciprofloxacin (N= 27, 64.28%) and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (27, 64.28%).
The resistance rates to other antibiotics were as follows: enrofloxacin (N= 24, 57.1%), danofloxacin (N= 20, 47.6%), levofloxacin (N= 19, 45.2%), florfenicol (N= 18, 42.8%), cefotaxime (N= 15, 35.7%), imipenem (N= 8, 19%), lincospectin (N= 7, 16.6%), ceftazidime (N= 5, 11.9%), cefoxitin (N= 5, 11.9%) and cefepime (N= 2, 4.7%).
Additionally, all 42E.
coliisolates in the study exhibited MIC ≤ 2 to colistin.
The CLSI no longer categorizesE.
colias colistin‐susceptible, only recognizing intermediate (MIC ≤ 2) and resistant (MIC ≥ 4) categories.
However, the EUCAST 2023 still considers isolates with a colistin MIC ≤ 2 to be colistin‐susceptible (Zafer et al.2023).
Moreover, 11 strains (26.1%) were identified as ESBL positive on the basis of the phenotypic method.
Regarding antibiotic resistance genes,qnrA, qnrC, qnrD, sul3 and tetGwere not found in any isolates.
Among fluoroquinolone‐resistance isolates, the highest resistance was attributed togyrAandgyrBgenes among both clinical and poultry isolates (overall 76.1%, 85.7% of poultry and 57.1% of clinical isolates).
TheqnrB,qnrB4andqnrSgenes were found in 17.8%, 14.2% and 10.7% of poultry isolates, respectively, but not in clinical isolates.
Among sulphonamides resistance isolates, 42.8% and 46.4% of clinical and poultry isolates were positive withsul1gene.
Thesul2gene was found in 10.7% and 14.2% of poultry and clinical isolates, respectively.
In terms of beta‐lactam resistance, the most prevalent resistance gene identified wasblaTEM, present in 96.4% of poultry and 100% of clinical isolates.
TheblaCTXgene was also detected in 17.8% of poultry isolates and 28.5% of clinical isolates.
Tetracycline resistance was linked to thetetAgene in 32.1% of poultry isolates and 14.2% of clinical isolates.
ThetetBgene was found in 7.1% of both poultry and clinical isolates, whereas thetetGgene was not identified in any isolates.
The detailed information is presented in Table3.
Phenotypic and genotypic characterization ofEscherichia coliisolates from clinical and poultry samples.
Abbreviations: Amp, ampicillin; CAZ, ceftazidime; CP, ciprofloxacin; CTX, cefotaxime; D, doxycycline; DFX, danofloxacin; ENR, enrofloxacin; FEP, cefepime; FF, florfenicol; IMP, imipenem; LEV, levofloxacin; LS, lincospectin; N, neomycin; SXT, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole; T, tetracycline; TY, tylosin.
The findings showed that every isolated tested could form biofilm.
Among clinical isolates, 21.42% were categorized as weak biofilm producers, 35.71% as moderate biofilm producers, and the majority, accounting for 42.85%, were identified as strong biofilm producers.
Compared to isolates taken from clinical samples, a significant majority (96.4%) of isolates from poultry samples demonstrated the ability to form robust biofilm, and only 3.57% of isolates formed medium biofilm.
None of the poultry isolates formed a weak biofilm.
The distribution of biofilm formation according to sample sources is visually represented in Figure1and Table3.
There was no association between biofilm formation or antibiotic resistance patterns and resistance genes.
Comparison of biofilm producer's strains in clinical and poultry ofEscherichia coli.
Pathogenic strains ofE.
colican be transmitted to a host through various pathways, particularly the faecal‐oral route.
These virulent strains can readily contaminate the human food chain, leading to the development of severe gastrointestinal illnesses (Alia et al.2022; Sharifi Yazd et al.2011).
This study identified three clinicalE.
coliisolates as EPEC, ETEC and EAEC, highlighting the presence of these virulent pathotypes in Iran.
In a study conducted by Eybpoosh et al. (2021), it was found that ETEC and EPEC were the second and third most commonly found pathotypes in Iran, whereas EAEC did not show significant prevalence.
The AST conducted in this study revealed that many identified isolates had significant levels of resistance to multiple antibiotics.
The highest resistance rate was identified for tylosin (100%) and neomycin (92.8%).
The widespread use of tylosin and neomycin in animal feed for promoting growth and preventing illness could be a contributing factor to the high levels of resistance to these antibiotics (Driver et al.2009; Schmidt et al.2020).
Quinolones are frequently applied to treat various infections caused byE.
coliand other bacteria in the Enterobacteriaceae family.
However, the emergence of resistance to these antibiotics has made treatment more challenging and could result in ineffective therapy (Bush et al.2020).
In the present study, 64.2%, 57.1%, 47.6% and 45.2% of isolates were fully resistant to ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin, danofloxacin and levofloxacin, respectively.
These results were higher than those found in past studies conducted in China (Cheng et al.2020) and Iran (Hamed et al.2021).
Furthermore, in the molecular investigations, among the PMQR (plasmid‐mediated quinolones resistance) determinants,qnrB,qnrB4andqnrSgenes were identified only in poultry isolates.
This finding suggested the spread of quinolone‐resistantE.
colifrom food‐producing animals to humans cannot be ignored, asqnrcan be transferred to pathogenic bacteria through commensalE.
Our finding is consistent with Tamang et al. (2012) from Korea and Yue et al. (2008) from China.
In our study, resistance to ampicillin was prevalent (overall 73.8%), whereas resistance rates to other beta‐lactams, including ceftazidime, cefoxitin and cefepime, were uncommon among isolates.
These findings align with previous research (Adenipekun et al.2016; Dallal et al.2023).
Consideringly, 19% of allE.
coliisolates determinate resistance to imipenem.
Resistance to imipenem can pose a serious threat, as this antibiotic may be the last resort for the treatment of severe infections caused by pathogenic bacteria (Sharma et al.).
The molecular results showed thatblaTEMwas the most common ESBL gene found in isolates (100% for clinical isolates and 96.4% for poultry isolates), which aligns with what other studies have found (Dallal et al.2023; Reshadi et al.2021).
Some studies found chickens exhibited a higher frequency of theblaTEMgene, possibly due to the increased application of beta‐lactam antibiotics in poultry farms (Ogunrinu et al.2020; Saliu et al.2017).
Furthermore, theblaCTX‐Mgene was found in 17.9% of the poultry isolates and 28.6% of clinical samples.
The prevalence of this gene has shown an increase compared to a recent study conducted in Iran (Pourhossein et al.2020) but decreased compared to the study in China (Li et al.2016).
Tetracyclines and sulphonamides are essential types of antibiotics commonly used on their own or in combination with other antibiotics to treat infections caused by Enterobacteriaceae (Gao et al.2012).
The high levels of tetracycline (overall 85.7%), doxycycline (overall 71.4%) and Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (overall 64.28%) among isolates are concerning.
Interestingly, this study found that tetracycline and doxycycline resistance in poultry sources was more common than in clinical sources.
This suggests the significance of closely monitoring and regulating the use of antibiotics in poultry farms to control the transmission of antibiotic‐resistant bacteria to humans via food supplies.
Consistent with previous research, our findings indicate thattetAwas the most common determinant (Jahantigh et al.2020; Soltan Dallal et al.2023).
However, Skocková et al. (2012) foundtetBas the most prevalent tetracycline resistance gene.
Biofilm formation characteristics amongE.
coliisolates are another crucial aspect highlighted in this study.
The high proportion of isolates capable of forming strong biofilms indicates the adaptability and persistence of these bacteria in diverse environments.
On the basis of the results, biofilm formation was detected in all tested isolates using the microtiter plate method and was more prevalent than previously reported (Pavlickova et al.2017; Rodrigues et al.2019).
Our results indicate a significant presence of biofilm‐forming strains in poultry, demonstrating strong genotypic and phenotypic resistance profiles to various antibiotics.
The dominance of strong biofilm producers in poultry isolates of this study (nearly 97%) warrants further investigation into the role of agricultural practices in biofilm development and transmission dynamics (Hussain et al.2017; Siddique et al.2021).
Future research endeavours should concentrate on understanding the mechanisms underlying these resistance patterns and developing novel strategies to combat biofilm‐associated antibiotic resistance.
This research offers a deeper understanding of the frequency and features ofE.
colistrains found in human and poultry samples in Qazvin, Iran.
The co‐occurrence of high antimicrobial resistance and strong biofilm‐forming capabilities in strains highlights the urgent need for coordinated efforts to combat antibiotic resistance and ensure the effectiveness of antimicrobial therapies.