The use of social media as an educational tool has increased over the past decade.
Research to date has explored the prevalence of social media use in students.
Less is known about the ways in which social media is used, particularly by Australian medical students, in terms of purpose and function.
A constructivist grounded theory approach was utilised to explore how Australian medical students use social media for educational purposes.
Focus groups were held with 23 students enrolled in a medical degree programme in Melbourne, Australia.
Students were asked questions pertaining to specific platforms, utilisation, benefits, barriers and potential for further implementation.
Thematic analysis established themes across focus groups.
The central theme of the student–educator–social media dynamic was underpinned by three key themes: (i) social media use in medical education, (ii) implementation of digital medical education and (iii) barriers and enablers for implementation.
Students predominantly used Facebook for educational purposes due to its multipurpose functionality.
Students felt that educators and universities could play a greater role in implementing social media in education.
Professionalism, including personal boundaries and power dynamics, was acknowledged as a key barrier to implementation.
Social media is widely used by students for self‐directed learning and peer collaboration in medical education.
The student‐led nature of social media engagement provides opportunities for educators and institutions to enhance learning outcomes through strategic support and moderation.
Evolving policies and practices in digital medical education should consider both student and staff professionalism boundaries and expectations associated with digital education.
The proliferation of social media has permeated most, if not all, areas of modern life [1].
Social media is the umbrella term used for web‐based environments that seek to encourage user interaction beyond the provision of facts [2,3].
The term has become synonymous with the vast collection of social networking sites and content sharing platforms, which include Facebook, YouTube, Instagram and, more recently, Tik Tok [4].
Usage of social media continues to grow, with global usership across all platforms surpassing 4.8 billion people (close to 60% of the global population) in 2023 [4].
Utilisation data indicates these platforms are predominantly used to communicate with friends and family, share photo/video content, keep up‐to‐date with news and source information on certain products/brands [5].
However, as social media has evolved, so too has the scope of possibilities in terms of usage and features, as well as a shift from solely individual use.
Use of social media in the professional workplace is common [6], implemented across a variety of disciplines and sectors including journalism, employment (e.g., LinkedIn), health, marketing and politics [7].
In particular, is the infiltration of social media into the field of higher education.
The past decade has seen the strong uptake of social media into the education space through both formal and informal learning modes [7].
Primary drivers include facilitating the exchange of knowledge, resources and experiences, and supporting collaborative and group‐based learning and problem‐solving [8].
Underpinning social media education research is social constructivism theory, where students are viewed as active learners and conveyors of experiences and knowledge, opposed to passive receivers of information [9].
Social media facilitates the sharing of knowledge through networks of peers and educators [10].
As educators and institutions are continuously aiming to enhance the student learning experience and to adapt to the modern era, it is practical that social media presents an opportunity for innovation [11].
It is no longer a question of whether social media is being used in medical education, but how.
It is clear so far that research on the adoption and utilisation of social media in medical education is wide‐reaching [8,12].
Current evidence gaps include the implementation of social media use in medical education in local contexts, including the acceptability of different platforms and professionalism in its use [12,16].
This study explores how Australian students enrolled in a medical degree programme utilise social media for educational purposes and functions.
This study utilised a subjectivist inductive approach, through constructive grounded theory, to explore how medical students utilise social media in their studies [17].
This approach allowed the data collection process to be iterative, providing an opportunity to understand the phenomenon as constructed individually and within the groups of participants during the research [17].
The interview guide was developed based on a systematic review of the literature and piloted with a small sample of medical students.
Themes were generated through iterative inductive coding and constant comparison.
Researcher reflexivity and positionality were considered throughout the analysis to optimise methodological rigour, transparency and trustworthiness.
Purposive sampling of undergraduate and graduate‐entry medical students studying medicine at Monash University was conducted.
Participants were recruited through advertisements placed in the learning management system ‘Moodle’ and during.
All potential participants were given a written explanation form and were required to provide written informed consent before participating in the study.
This study was approved by the Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee (CF15/2639‐2015001090).
Four qualitative focus group discussions were conducted in‐person with participants.
Focus groups were conducted by a single facilitator (author DI conducting two focus groups and a research officer (KM) conducting the other two focus groups).
Both facilitators utilised an interview schedule (Table1), which was developed based on a review of the literature, to lead discussions.
Use of the interview schedule ensured that all questions were raised across all focus groups.
The discussions ranged in duration from 45 to 60 min.
All focus groups were digitally audio‐recorded and transcribed verbatim by a professional external service (GoTranscript).
Focus group discussions were conducted until the data reached a point of theoretical saturation, defined when no further novel discussion points were evident [18].
Transcriptions were read multiple times by the lead author (CB) to encourage data immersion [19].
A six‐step thematic analysis approach was used to analyse the data, with an inductive approach used to generate themes [20].
A second researcher (BH) cross‐checked transcripts, and any discrepancies were discussed until agreement on final themes was reached.
Themes and sub‐themes were consolidated based on frequent and consistent reference across multiple focus groups.
That is, it was necessary for the concept to appear in more than one focus group for it to be considered a consistent theme in this qualitative analysis [19].
Quotes are provided to support each theme, with only those most illustrative of the overall concept presented.
All quotes are verbatim, with [sic] used to denote grammatical errors appearing as per original source, and ellipsis (…) indicating irrelevant text has been omitted.
The team consisted of three medical education researchers (CB, BH and DI) and a research officer (KM).
All four team members have experience in qualitative research.
DI leads an educational theme (evidence‐based practice) in the medical degree from which students were recruited.
DI's experience and research interest facilitated the sampling of participants in establishing rapport and facilitating the sharing of experiences.
DI did not participate in the thematic analysis in order to minimise any positionality bias and any perceived power imbalance due to his role in the education programme.
Constant comparisons during thematic analysis, reflection on positionality between researchers and collaborative analyses were used as strategies to minimise any potential bias.
A total of 23 participants, including 14 females and 9 males, participated in four focus group discussions.
Thematic analysis of focus groups resulted in the central themes of the student–educator–social media dynamic (Figure1), underpinned by three themes: (i) social media use, (ii) implementation of digital medical education and (iii) barriers and enablers for implementation.
Thematic analysis: student–educator–social media dynamic.
Central to the discussion across focus groups was how students utilise social media for medical education.
On the whole, Facebook (including Facebook Messenger), YouTube and Twitter (brandedXin 2023) were utilised most.
Other platforms to appear in conversation included Instagram, LinkedIn and WhatsApp; cloud sharing such as Dropbox and Google Drive; email and Wiki sites; and blog sites such as Tumblr and Reddit.
These, however, were only mentioned briefly and were not consistent in usage across focus groups.
It was evident in all focus groups that Facebook was the preferred social media platform for medical education purposes.
This seemed to be largely due to Facebook acting as a ‘one‐stop‐shop’ that catered to all of their needs simultaneously, rather than require them to be across multiple platforms.
Facebook was the preferred social media platform for medical education purposes.
Most students also described that unlike other platforms, they could achieve almost everything they needed to on Facebook given its multiple uses such as resource and information sharing, planning study sessions and organising events.
Aside from Facebook, YouTube was also used often, in particular for digesting educational material in a relatively short period of time.
Twitter, however, was inconsistent with students.
For those who did use Twitter, it seemed to be used more for professional purposes, such as networking, conferences or learning from peers, opposed to purely educational.
It was apparent that most, if not all, of the integration of social media into medical education was created and driven by students, and that much of the learning was peer‐to‐peer rather than educator‐led.
It was apparent that most, if not all, of the integration of social media into medical education was created and driven by students.
In addition to the way social media platforms were utilised, the majority of students also spoke of the potential for further implementation in medical education.
Across focus groups, it was evident that students believed that social media could be used more effectively to enhance their learning experiences.
Students believed that social media could be used more effectively to enhance their learning experiences.
Many students believed that social media could further be implemented in medical education predominantly through educators.
Often, this was discussed in reference to educators on an individual level, or as the individual responsibility of a member of the teaching staff.
Numerous students also highlighted the importance of educational content on social media to be engaging and implied that a certain skill level would be needed to ensure it garnered the attention of students.
Although most conversations were based around individual educators, many students highlighted that the university, or faculties within the university, has the potential to play a larger role in digital education.
The necessity for a certain skillset to create engaging content was regularly highlighted.
Although there was enthusiasm for further implementation of social media in medical education, many students were also aware that there are certain barriers that would need to be considered.
The majority of the barriers identified by students pertained to concerns regarding professionalism.
Students were sensitive to the permanent nature of the internet and social media, and were concerned that this could lead to judgement, particularly by potential future employers.
There were also common concerns that further implementing social media into education would make it more difficult to distinguish between personal and professional life, in particular for teaching staff.
Some students also felt that there is a hierarchy that exists between students and educators, and that this could be difficult to navigate if social media and education were further integrated.
However, students did pose viable solutions to some of these perceived barriers, in particular in regard to maintaining boundaries between personal and professional life.
The findings in this study demonstrate that social media is frequently utilised by medical students to enhance their learning experience and to complement more traditional learning modes provided by universities.
The versatility of social media platforms was evident, with each serving a different purpose for students, including organisational, resource sharing and digesting information quickly and/or in small portions.
The potential for further implementation to enhance student experience was also highlighted.
Educators might consider integrating social media in ways that complement, rather than replace, existing student practices.
Asynchronous Q&A sessions or moderated discussion groups via social media could promote the nexus between enhancing student engagement while maintaining professional boundaries.
Social media is frequently utilised by medical students to enhance their learning experience.
Students using Facebook for educational purposes is consistent with studies in similar cohorts [10,21].
This preference for Facebook appears to have shifted over time, with a 2013 systematic review finding Facebook to be the least used platform for medical education, with blogs most favoured [2].
In the present study, blogs were rarely mentioned by students.
Their preference for Facebook seemed to stem from the wide range of functions offered (including Messenger).
Where traditionally different tools would have been used for organisation, communication and resource sharing, Facebook offers the same functionality on one platform.
This convenience was seen as a benefit to students as they are already accessing Facebook frequently throughout the day; recent data suggests users spend almost 2.5 h per day using social media [4].
Students are not required to be across multiple platforms to achieve the same functionality.
This multipurpose usage is also consistent with similar previous studies in medical students [22,23,24,25].
Despite the growing medical community on Twitter [26], it was one of the lesser‐used social media platforms utilised by students in this study.
This is consistent with similar studies in Australia and Canada in which utilisation was lower than other platforms such as Facebook [21,27].
For those who did use Twitter in the present study, in comparing functionality to Facebook, the scope of usage erred more towards professional networking, as opposed to a collaborative multi‐functional learning environment.
This aligns with perspectives of academic staff in a recent study involving focus groups with lecturers, in which participants described using Twitter as a professional development and networking tool [28].
The scope of social media implementation in medical education in this study was evidently student led.
Considering perspectives on how further implementation could be achieved, responses suggested that students are satisfied with their own involvement, but felt there could be greater participation from educational institutions.
A review of interventions implementing social media in medical education found usage to be associated with improvements in knowledge and skills [2].
Recently, Henry et al. also found a closed discussion group led to students feeling rapport was built with faculty, improved learning content and even emotional wellbeing [29].
Although these studies demonstrate there is merit in educator/institutional involvement, some have warned against this, describing it as a possible intrusion in what is currently predominantly a peer‐led space [23].
The perspectives of educators also need to be factored into discussions about their involvement in social media for learning purposes.
Focus groups with lecturers have highlighted similar concerns to those of students, including crossing personal boundaries [28].
Lecturers felt it was inappropriate to follow students on social media due to things they may post about their personal lives.
Logistically, some believed that increased involvement would also take up valuable time when they already felt time‐poor, and that social media was just another tool they would have to take the time to learn [28].
The need for separation of personal and professional realms has also arisen previously [10,12,30].
Macdonald et al. have proposed that there is a need for educators to emphasise that social media profiles should be on private, and a lack of doing so could be consequential [31].
This has previously been seen as an opportunity as a chance to educate about professionalism standards [28].
Developing frameworks that distinguish between personal and professional use of social media could help mitigate risks while encouraging responsible engagement.
The internet and social media are environments that are continually developing and evolving at a rapid pace.
There is the possibility that since conducting these focus groups, there have been technological advances that could have altered the way medical students are currently using social media for education.
Future research should consider the perspective of students, educators and institutions aiming to better understand how cultural norms influence social media digital education, perceived barriers and enablers to implementing social media use in the formal curriculum, longitudinal assessment on learning outcomes and how institutions facilitate the ethical and professional use of social media digital education.
There is an opportunity for educators and institutions to play a more active role in integrating social media into medical education.
Educators can support and enhance the student‐driven use of social media by integrating it in ways that complement existing student practices.
Moral and ethical boundaries, from both a student and educator perspective, need to be considered.
Institutions should not overstep their role in a way that overshadows the benefits of peer‐to‐peer learning, and that students feel safe engaging in social media without fear of tarnishing employment prospects.
Future research should focus on how the use of social media in medical education evolves across training, and the cultural and social factors that influence its integration in medical education.