Background:Proteinuria, a critical marker of glomerulosclerosis, poses a challenge in idiopathic membranous nephropathy (iMN), particularly when standard treatments fail.
Acthar® Gel, a US Food and Drug Administration–approved treatment option, may offer an alternative for managing refractory proteinuria in nephrotic syndrome (NS) due to iMN where multiple treatments have failed.Objective:The cost per response of Acthar® Gel vs standard of care (SoC; cyclophosphamide or rituximab) for treatment of proteinuria in NS due to iMN was evaluated among adults who had failed multiple treatments from a US payer perspective over a 1- to 3-year horizon.Methods:A probabilistic, cohort-level state-transition model simulated patient progression through various health states using 6-month cycles.
Patients began in a relapse phase and received either Acthar® Gel or SoC.
Transition probabilities determined whether patients achieved a response, experienced no response, progressed to renal failure, or remained in relapse.
Responders could potentially maintain their response or relapse, while nonresponders risked renal failure, with potential mortality from any state.
Clinical, healthcare resource utilization, and cost data were derived from published literature.
Drug prices were based on wholesale acquisition costs.Results:Over 1 year, Acthar® Gel showed a lower cost per response (377185)thancyclophosphamide(551 687) and rituximab ($741 373).
This cost advantage of Acthar® Gel was maintained over 2 and 3 years.
Acthar® Gel had higher drug acquisition costs than cyclophosphamide and rituximab but resulted in lower overall medical costs and higher response rates within 1 year, without additional treatment-related costs.
Over 2 and 3 years, Acthar® Gel had a lower overall cost of care and higher response rates than SoC, establishing it as a dominant treatment option.Conclusions:Based on current model assumptions and clinical inputs, Acthar® Gel may potentially be a cost-effective and value-based treatment strategy vs unapproved SoCs for adults with refractory proteinuria in NS due to iMN, particularly for those who have not responded to conventional therapies over a 1- to 3-year period within a US payer context.
These results may inform clinical and payer decision-making in cases when other standard therapies fail to achieve desired outcomes for a specific population.
Approximately one-third of patients with NS due to iMN experience relapse and continue to exhibit persistent or recurrent proteinuria despite standard immunosuppressive therapy, making them the primary candidates for alternative treatments such as Acthar® Gel.
Acthar® Gel (repository corticotropin injection, Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals) is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to induce a diuresis or a remission of proteinuria in NS without uremia of the idiopathic type or due to lupus erythematosus.11It is a naturally sourced complex mixture of adrenocorticotropic hormone analogs and other pituitary peptides that interacts with all 5 melanocortin receptors.11This interaction suggests that its therapeutic effects may be mediated through multiple anti-inflammatory pathways, both glucocorticoid-dependent and glucocorticoid-independent.11Clinical studies have reported the effectiveness of Acthar® Gel in reducing or inducing remission of proteinuria in NS due to iMN, with safety outcomes characterized.2,8,12–14With an established side effect profile and a higher likelihood of inducing remission,2,8,12–14Acthar® Gel may help appropriate patients with proteinuria in NS due to iMN.
To make informed decisions, clinicians and payers must evaluate clinical outcomes, healthcare resource use, and associated costs of any treatment.
This study assessed the cost per response of Acthar® Gel compared with the standard of care (SoC; cyclophosphamide or rituximab) for treatment of proteinuria in NS due to iMN among adults who have not responded to conventional therapies from a US healthcare payer perspective over a 1- to 3-year horizon.
A probabilistic, cohort-level state-transition model was developed to assess the economic value of Acthar® Gel in treating proteinuria in NS due to iMN in patients who have not responded to conventional therapies.
The model compared the cost per response of Acthar® Gel with that of the SoC, comprising cyclophosphamide and rituximab.
Although these SoC agents are recommended in treatment guidelines,6their supporting evidence is limited, and they are utilized off-label.
Therefore, their safety and efficacy have not been established by the FDA for this indication.
The analysis was conducted from a US healthcare payer perspective over a 1- to 3-year period.
This study employed Microsoft Excel 2024 to construct and execute the analytical model.
Patient progression through various health states was simulated, integrating uncertainties in the input data (Figure 1).
Initially, all patients entered the model in a relapse phase and received either Acthar® Gel or SoC treatment.
The probability of treatment success was applied during the 6-month cycles, consistent with current clinical guidelines and best practices, and patient outcomes were evaluated at the end of each cycle.
Following treatment in the relapse phase, patients could move to a response state, move to a persistent NS health state, develop acute renal failure (ARF), or have an unresolved relapse.
Patients who discontinued treatment or failed to achieve a clinical response with the assigned therapy were assumed to move to a “persistent NS” health state.
Patients who continued to relapse (recurrence of proteinuria after treatment) but demonstrated clinical improvement without meeting formal response criteria, were assumed to receive ongoing treatment.
Responders could maintain a sustained response or relapse.
Patients in the persistent NS health state were at risk of progressing to renal failure, necessitating dialysis or renal transplantation.
Death was possible from any health state.
Abbreviations: ARF, acute renal failure; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; iMN, idiopathic membranous nephropathy; NS, nephrotic syndrome; SoC, standard of care.
Persistent NS health state refers to the state to which a patient transitions when a patient fails to show a significant clinical improvement following the full course of the prescribed initial treatment.
Clinical inputs: Clinical inputs, including effectiveness, safety, complications, pain, depression, disease progression, and mortality, are presented inTable 1.
Abbreviations: ACEi, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors; ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers; ARF, acute renal failure; BLS, Bureau of Labor Statistics; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; iMN, idiopathic membranous nephropathy; NS, nephrotic syndrome; USD, US dollars.
aAll parameters from the literature were converted to a 6-month probability, where applicable.
bNo response refers to patients who initially did not exhibit a therapeutic effect but subsequently achieved a response and experienced resolution of their relapse.
cPersistent NS health state refers to the state to which a patient transitions when a patient fails to show a significant clinical improvement following the full course of the prescribed initial treatment.
dComplete remission was defined as proteinuria <0.3 g/day and partial remission as a reduction in proteinuria by >50% with a final urine protein <3.5 g/day, but >0.3 g/day and no response as a reduction in proteinuria by <50% or worsening of proteinuria.
where pCYC= probability of response with cyclophosphamide; pRTX= probability of response with rituximab, and RR = risk ratio.
Cost inputs: Wholesale acquisition costs (as of January 1, 2025), were sourced from the Micromedex Red Book (Merative).27The cost of a 5 mL multidose vial of Acthar® Gel was $45 304; an average utilization of 7.86 vials per year (based on the specialty pharmacy dispensing data for 12 months ending December 31, 2023) was considered in the model.
The total cost for SoC was calculated based on dosing information from the literature and clinical guidelines.6,53Dosage was calculated considering an average body weight of 80.0 kg and a body surface area of 2.0 m².
The annual cost of cyclophosphamide was $8554.
Additionally, the rituximab cost calculation factored in the prices and market shares of the original biologic and its biosimilars, resulting in an annual cost of $103 242.
Patients in every health state, except for those who had died, were assumed to receive supportive care medications to manage NS-related comorbidities such as deep vein thrombosis, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and stroke.
Utilization rates for these medications were as follows: angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEis) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) at 69.4%, beta-blockers at 22.2%, calcium channel blockers at 13.9%, diuretics at 73.6%, anticoagulants at 16.7%, and statins at 68.1%; derived from the Symphony Health database (January 1, 2016–December 31, 2022).
The core analysis (base case) assessed one-year cost per response for Acthar® Gel and SoC treatments.
This was computed by dividing the total healthcare costs per patient by the proportion of patients achieving resolved relapse within each treatment group.
The cost per response was also evaluated at 2 and 3 years, as part of extended analyses.
Additionally, the incremental cost-effectiveness was examined by calculating the difference in total healthcare costs per patient between the two treatment groups (incremental cost) divided by the difference in the proportion of patients achieving response between the two treatment groups (incremental response) across the specified time horizons.
Several key assumptions were made to reflect a population with refractory and persistent proteinuria in NS due to iMN and utilizing the best available data specific to this population.
Acthar® Gel was modeled only in patients who have failed at least 2 prior therapies (including corticosteroids), consistent with its real-world clinical practice.
In the absence of long-term relapse data for Acthar® Gel, an annual relapse rate of 0.1% was conservatively applied.
Similarly, comparator therapies (off-label cyclophosphamide and rituximab) have been evaluated primarily in refractory cohorts with limited randomized evidence, only SAEs requiring hospitalizations were captured, consistent with FDA definitions and standard cost-effectiveness methodology and excluded less severe events.
Further, SAEs were defined a priori as those necessitating hospitalization and therefore included only hospitalization-level events (eg, neutropenia, anemia) for cyclophosphamide and rituximab.
Adverse events reported in Acthar® Gel studies (weight gain, hypertension, edema, fatigue, seizures) did not meet this hospitalization threshold, nor were they adjudicated as treatment-related, and thus were excluded.
Deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were used to evaluate the baseline assumptions and influence of variations in model parameters to assess the robustness of the 1-year cost-per-response findings for Acthar® Gel vs SoC.
A one-way deterministic sensitivity analysis was performed by altering each key model input by ±30% and drug acquisition costs by ±10%.
A multivariable probabilistic sensitivity analysis was conducted using 5000 Monte Carlo simulations, where parameter values were randomly sampled from predefined probability distributions, allowing for a comprehensive evaluation of combined uncertainty.
The selection of these distributions was informed by the inherent characteristics and limitations of the available data, ensuring that the full range of potential uncertainty was adequately captured.
Over 1 year, Acthar® Gel exhibited a lower cost per response ($377 185) than cyclophosphamide ($551 687) and rituximab ($741 373) (Figure 2).
Relative to cyclophosphamide, Acthar® Gel incurred an additional $17 796 per patient yet delivered a 22.9% higher response rate.
Compared with rituximab, Acthar® Gel cost an additional $18 128 per patient while achieving a 33.0% higher response rate (Figure 3).
Although Acthar® Gel’s drug acquisition cost was $170 666 higher than cyclophosphamide and $93 749 higher than rituximab, it resulted in lower overall medical costs resulting from other treatments, disease management, and renal failure and did not incur any treatment-related expenses (administration/monitoring and adverse events) over 1 year.
Note: Results are presented on a per-person basis.
Size of the bubble in the plot represents cost-per-response.
Abbreviation: iMN, idiopathic membranous nephropathy.
Numbers in bold represent total costs.
Results are presented on a per-person basis; All costs inflated to 2025 US dollars.
Other treatments include immunosuppressants (including monitoring and serious adverse events costs), supportive care treatments (antihypertensives, anticoagulants, and statins), plasmapheresis, pain medications, antidepressants; Disease management includes iMN-related inpatient and outpatient (physician office visits, emergency department, other outpatient); Renal failure management includes disease progression costs, including dialysis, renal transplant, and complications.
The cost-per-response benefit with Acthar® Gel over cyclophosphamide and rituximab was maintained at an extended time horizon of 2 and 3 years (Table 2).
Specifically, Acthar® Gel had lower overall care costs and higher response rates relative to cyclophosphamide and rituximab at these extended time points.
The patterns of overall care costs at extended time horizons mirrored those seen at 1 year (Supplementary Table S1).
Acthar® Gel was a dominant treatment strategy in this economic evaluation vs unapproved treatments, cyclophosphamide and rituximab at 2 and 3 years, with lower costs and higher response rates (Supplementary Table S2).
The deterministic sensitivity analysis identified key contributors to cost per response over 1 year (Figure 4).
The key contributors to cost per response for Acthar® Gel vs cyclophosphamide were the response rate and rate of persistent NS with Acthar® Gel, immunosuppressants-related toxicity, acquisition cost of Acthar® Gel, and cyclophosphamide-related SAEs.
The key contributors to cost per response for Acthar® Gel vs rituximab were the response rate and rate of persistent NS with Acthar® Gel, the acquisition cost of Acthar® Gel and rituximab, and rituximab-related SAEs.
Abbreviations: NS, nephrotic syndrome; USD, US dollars.
Persistent NS health state refers to the state to which a patient transitions when a patient fails to show a significant clinical improvement following the full course of the prescribed initial treatment.
Bars represent the variation in the cost-per-response corresponding to high and low variation on a parameter’s point estimate.
The “lower bound” represents the model outcome when a specific parameter is set to its minimum value within the specified range, while holding all other parameters at their base or central values.
The “upper bound” represents the model outcome when a specific parameter is set to its maximum value within the specified range, while holding all other parameters at their base or central values.
The vertical line dividing the lower and upper bound bars represents the base case cost-per-response when all inputs are set to their base case estimates.
Parameters are presented in a ranked order, with the most influential variables at the top.
The length of the bars represents the magnitude of impact, and their direction (left or right) indicates whether the impact is positive or negative.
If the impact of an input is positively related, then increasing the input estimate increases the cost-per-response (upper bound bar extends to the right; lower bound bar to the left) and vice versa.
Conversely, if the impact of an input is negatively related, then increasing the input estimate decreases the cost-per-response (upper bound bar extends to the left; lower bound bar to the right) and vice versa.
The probabilistic sensitivity analysis showed that Acthar® Gel was cost-effective in 77.4% of iterations vs cyclophosphamide and 91.3% of iterations vs rituximab at a willingness-to-pay threshold of $150 000 per response over 1 year (Supplementary Figure S1).
Proteinuria plays a pivotal role in the progression of NS due to iMN and is a well-established risk factor for advancing renal disease.3,7Addressing proteinuria in NS, particularly in cases refractory to conventional treatments, poses significant challenges due to the absence of uniformly accepted therapeutic approaches.6–8This analysis assessed the economic value of treatment strategies for adults with proteinuria in NS due to iMN.
Over a period of 1 to 3 years, the findings indicated a more favorable cost per response for Acthar® Gel when compared with off-label therapies such as cyclophosphamide and rituximab.
This economic advantage was consistently shown across a range of sensitivity analyses, reinforcing the robustness of the result.
Notably, the analysis also showed that Acthar® Gel resulted in lower overall medical costs throughout the evaluation period.
Consequently, Acthar® Gel presented as a dominant strategy, achieving both cost savings and improved response rates throughout the extended 2 and 3-year analysis timeframe.
Deterministic sensitivity analysis revealed that the higher response rate associated with Acthar® Gel was the primary factor driving its lower cost per response compared with SoC.
Several other important cost drivers contributed to the more advantageous economic profile of Acthar® Gel relative to both SoCs.
Other key drivers were a lower or similar probability of patients treated with Acthar® Gel progressing to the persistent NS health state, a higher likelihood of SAEs with SoC, and the higher initial acquisition cost of Acthar® Gel.
Further analysis identified specific factors that were key drivers in the individual comparisons between Acthar® Gel and the off-label therapies.
In the comparison with cyclophosphamide, a higher probability of immunosuppressant-related toxicity associated with cyclophosphamide was a significant factor.
Similarly, the higher acquisition cost of rituximab was a key driver in its respective comparison with Acthar® Gel.
While the initial acquisition cost of Acthar® Gel was higher, the elimination of treatment-related costs associated with administration, monitoring, and the management of adverse events led to reduced overall healthcare spending.
Further, the improved response rate translated to a decreased need for supportive and subsequent treatments, including immunosuppressive agents, plasmapheresis, and medications for pain and depression, disease management services, and costly interventions like dialysis and renal transplantation, effectively balancing the higher drug cost.
This study represents the first economic evaluation comparing the clinical outcomes and cost implications of treatment options for refractory proteinuria in NS due to iMN among patients who have failed on conventional therapies from a US payer perspective.
It offers novel insights into a chronic, persistent, and refractory condition where evidence is currently limited.
By mapping potential health states and transitions, the model provides a comprehensive framework for assessing alternative treatments’ short-term clinical and economic impacts on proteinuria in NS due to iMN.
The transitions among health states in the model carry significant implications for both clinicians and payers.
For example, the possibility of moving from a relapse to a response state highlights the differences in treatment effectiveness and underscores the need for personalized approaches.
Similarly, the potential for cycling between relapse and response states emphasizes the chronic nature of proteinuria in NS due to iMN and the likelihood of ongoing treatment requirements.
Transitions to acute or chronic renal failure further illustrate the potential severity of the disease and the consequent need for intensive interventions such as dialysis or transplantation, factors that incur substantial costs for payers.
Moreover, the study’s findings provide clinicians and payers with important data that can be used to inform treatment decisions for adults who do not respond to conventional treatments.
Given that proteinuria in NS due to iMN is challenging to manage, treatment selection involves an integrated approach, including the patient’s clinical profile, physician’s judgment, and the availability of resources.
Finally, this analysis establishes a foundation for future research, including investigations into long-term clinical and economic outcomes and the identification of patient subgroups who may derive greater benefit from Acthar® Gel.
Optimal management of proteinuria in NS due to iMN aims to induce remission, mitigate complications, and delay renal failure, thereby lessening the economic impact.
Consequently, it is crucial to evaluate therapies based on their capacity to deliver favorable clinical outcomes in a cost-effective manner.69This analysis highlights the significant influence of Acthar® Gel’s greater response rate on its cost-per-response profile for the treatment of proteinuria in NS due to iMN.
Despite a higher initial acquisition cost, the observed decrease in downstream healthcare costs underscores the potential for therapies with improved response rates to achieve treatment targets and generate cost efficiencies.
This reinforces that interventions with better response rates can meet treatment objectives and provide cost savings for healthcare systems.
The favorable cost per response of Acthar® Gel vs off-label SoC treatments could be further optimized through strategic pricing strategies (eg, rebates, discounts), further strengthening its value proposition as a potentially economically viable treatment option.
Immunosuppressant-related toxicity emerged as one of the major cost determinants in the comparison of Acthar® Gel and cyclophosphamide.
Cyclophosphamide regimens, often also including systemic corticosteroids, carry a risk of long-term toxicity.9,10SAEs associated with these SoC treatments also had a substantial impact on the economic analysis.
Acthar® Gel showed an advantageous cost per response vs these off-label SoCs, signifying possible reductions in healthcare costs and improved clinical benefits through lower treatment-related toxicity rates.
Given the preliminary nature and reliance on modeled assumptions, the results are best viewed as hypothesis-generating.
Further clinical studies would be valuable to help validate key inputs such as efficacy and relapse rates.
Given the acknowledged limitations related to the limited randomized controlled trial data, relapse rates, heterogeneity in source populations, and SAE classification, the study conclusions rely on these assumptions and may change with the emergence of more robust clinical evidence.
To address these limitations, the robustness of the results was evaluated through sensitivity analyses, which consistently validated Acthar® Gel’s advantageous cost-per-response profile.
Head-to-head trials or registry data are needed to confirm the durability of response and capture the full safety profile.
The findings from this economic analysis should be interpreted in the context of the available data and underlying model assumptions and are intended to be viewed as preliminary and hypothesis-generating given the current evidence base in this population.
Notwithstanding these limitations, the study suggests Acthar® Gel may represent a potentially value-based treatment strategy for adults with proteinuria in NS due to iMN.
The observed favorable cost per response is primarily attributed to its enhanced response rate, which in turn minimizes the requirement for subsequent, high-cost interventions.
This reduction in healthcare resource utilization effectively mitigates the initial drug expenditure, resulting in overall cost efficiencies.
This analysis emphasizes the importance of a value-focused approach to treatment decisions for therapies that enhance patient outcomes and optimize healthcare resource allocation.
This analysis indicates that, based on the current assumptions and clinical inputs, Acthar® Gel has the potential to be a cost-effective and value-based treatment strategy compared with unapproved SoCs for adults with refractory proteinuria in NS due to iMN, particularly for those who have failed multiple treatments.
While the conclusions of this economic analysis are based on the available model inputs, they provide valuable preliminary insights and help generate hypotheses for further research, particularly given the limited data in this population.
These results may inform clinical and payer decision-making in cases where standard therapies fail to achieve desired outcomes for a specific population.
Additional research is needed to assess the long-term benefits of Acthar® Gel.
Future research, including head-to-head trials or registry studies, is needed to confirm the durability of response and to fully characterize the safety profile.
This work was funded by Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals.