Large language models (LLMs) have shown potential in medical education, but their application to cardiology specialist examinations remains underexplored.
We compared the performances of a retrieval-augmented generation LLM (RAG-LLM) ‘CardioCanon’ against general-purpose LLMs.
A total of 96 publicly available text-based open-source multiple-choice questions from the Japanese Cardiology Specialist Examination (1997–2022) were used.
CardioCanon showed similar option-level accuracy to ChatGPT-4o and Gemini 2.0 Flash (81.0%, 76.0%, and 77.2%, respectively), but higher case-based accuracy than ChatGPT (57.3% vs. 29.2%, P<0.001).
RAG techniques can enhance AI-assisted examination performance by improving case-level reasoning and decision-making.
Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT have shown growing potential in medical education, particularly for high-stakes standardized assessments such Medical Licensing Examinations.1,2However, general-purpose LLMs remain limited by misinformation, hallucinations, and insufficient domain-specific contextual knowledge.
The application of LLMs to medical specialty board examinations, such as cardiology, remains underexplored.
To address this, we developed CardioCanon, a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) architecture that integrates a pre-trained LLM (ChatGPT-4o) with a cardiology-specific corpus.3,4This study evaluated its performance on Japanese Cardiology Specialist Examination questions compared with that of general-purpose LLMs.
We compiled a dataset of 96 publicly available multiple-choice questions from the Japanese Cardiology Specialist Examination (1997–2022).
In CardioCanon, 664 documents (publicly available clinical guidelines and clinical trial data up to year 2024) were embedded using the text-embedding-ada-002 model (OpenAI) to create 1,536 high-dimensional vector representations.3These embeddings were stored and managed using cloud-based vector storage, Pinecone, which enabled similarity-based retrieval of the guideline content relevant to the input query.
During inference, CardioCanon retrieved semantically similar and relevant passages from the vector store using a conversational retrieval QA chain that integrated 3 key components: (1) the Pinecone Retriever for document retrieval, (2) ChatGPT-4o model as the inference engine with temperature set to 0.4 for output stability, and (3) Conversation Summary Memory to preserve dialogue history for multi-turn interactions.
The architecture follows a modular design, allowing real-time retrieval-augmented reasoning without fine-tuning the underlying LLM.
CardioCanon was compared to general-purpose LLMs ChatGPT-4o (Open AI) and Gemini-2.0-Flash (Google DeepMind), evaluated using 2 metrics: (1) option-level accuracy, defined as the proportion of correct answer choices across all options, and (2) case-based accuracy, defined as the proportion of fully correct responses per question.
These metrics were chosen to distinguish between partial and complete task resolution and assess the model’s ability to produce clinically coherent responses.
A chi-square test was used for statistical comparison.
Two-sided P<0.05 was accepted as indicating statistical significance.
CardioCanon achieved an option-level accuracy of 81.0% (389/480 choices), which was comparable to that of ChatGPT-4o (76.0%, 365/480 choices) (P=0.07) and Gemini-2.0-Flash (77.2%, 371/480) (P=0.18) (Figure A).
However, CardioCanon showed a significantly higher case-based accuracy: 57.3% (55/96), compared with 29.2% (28/96 cases) (P<0.001) for ChatGPT-4o and 45.8% (44/96) (P=0.15) for Gemini-2.0-Flash (Figure B).
Comparison of model performance: (A) option-level accuracy (proportion of correct choices across all MCQ options); (B) case-based accuracy (proportion of fully correct responses per question).
MCQ, multiple-choice question; NS, not significant.
These findings indicate that RAG-based architecture may serve as an effective tool in medical education and specialist assessment, particularly where reliable literature-based responses are critical.
The multimodal abilities of ChatGPT-4o will need to be formally assessed for performance in the accurate analysis of medical images and graphics when it is more capable, likely in future versions.
Our analysis was constrained to the text-based capabilities of LLMs because image-based questions were excluded from analysis, as the multimodal capabilities of current LLMs in accurate medical image interpretation remain in their infancy.
CardioCanon, a RAG-LLM model, demonstrated a significantly higher case-based accuracy than general-purpose LLMs in the context of Japanese cardiology board examination questions.
These results highlight the utility of RAG in enhancing AI-driven medical education and assessment.
With the advent of multimodal models, further research is warranted.