R-loops are three-stranded DNA/RNA hybrids that are essential for various cellular pathways.
However, when dysregulated, they lead to genomic instability and numerous human diseases.
R-loops are tightly regulated, with RNase H1 acting as a key enzyme responsible for resolving DNA/RNA hybrids.
Here, we identify the DNA-binding protein AND-1 as an essential factor in R-loop regulation through directly binding to R-loop structures, where it enhances the recruitment of RNase H1 and stimulates its endonuclease activity.
We also provide in vivo evidence that R-loop accumulation occurs in the mammary gland tissue of AND-1–deficient mice.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that inhibition of AND-1 decreasesESR1expression by disrupting R-loop regulation at the enhancer region of theESR1gene in estrogen receptor–positive (ER+) breast cancer cells, thereby overcoming resistance to aromatase inhibitors.
Collectively, our findings reveal a mechanism by which AND-1 modulates R-loop dynamics and present a promising therapeutic strategy to combat endocrine resistance in breast cancer.
AND-1 regulates R-loops, and its inhibition overcomes endocrine resistance by suppressingESR1expression in ER+breast cancer.
R-loops are non–B DNA structures formed when an RNA strand invades double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and displaces the nontemplate DNA strand.
These structures have been detected across the genomes of bacteria, yeast, and higher eukaryotes throughout the cell cycle.
Naturally occurring R-loops participate in various physiological processes, including prokaryotic origins of replication (1,2), mitochondrial DNA replication (3), immunoglobulin class switching (4), transcription (5), and DNA repair (6–9).
However, dysregulated R-loop formation or unresolved R-loops can lead to DNA double-strand breaks, chromosome translocation, gene mutations (10), and interference with DNA replication and transcription, all of which are sources of genomic instability (11,12).
Recent evidence suggests that aberrant R-loop homeostasis is implicated in the development of multiple human diseases, including neurological disorders, Aicardi-Goutières syndrome, nucleotide expansion diseases, various cancers, and even drug resistance (13–15).
Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms governing R-loop regulation is crucial for identifying novel therapeutic opportunities.
A growing number of proteins have been implicated in the prevention or resolution of unscheduled R-loops.
These include RNA biogenesis factors, ribonuclease (RNase) H enzymes, RNA:DNA (R:D) helicases, and specific DNA repair proteins such as FANCD2, BRCA1, and BRCA2 (13–16).
Loss of these regulators often results in elevated R-loop levels and associated DNA damage in both yeast and human cells (17–21).
Among them, RNase H1 is a conserved enzyme from bacteria to humans that recognizes R:D hybrids and resolves R-loops through degrading the RNA strand (22). Due to its key role, exogenous expression of RNase H1 is widely used to validate the presence of R-loops at specific genomic loci.
Cells that are deficient in RNase H1 exhibit impaired R-loop resolution, leading to increased genomic instability (23). Despite its importance, the mechanisms by which RNase H1 specifically recognizes R-loops and how its endonuclease activity is regulated at these sites remain largely unknown.
AND-1/WDHD1(also known as Ctf4 in yeast) is an acidic nucleoplasmic DNA-binding protein that is essential for DNA replication and DNA damage repair (24–29).
Previous studies in yeast have demonstrated that Ctf4 deletion leads to an accumulation of R:D hybrids recognized by S9.6 antibody (30), suggesting a potential role of Ctf4 in R-loop resolution.
However, the precise mechanism by which Ctf4 regulates R-loops remains unknown.
Moreover, whether AND-1 plays a similar role in R-loop regulation in human cells has yet to be investigated.
Estrogen receptor–positive (ER+) breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related death in women (31). ER+breast cancer cells express estrogen receptors that drive tumor proliferation upon binding to the hormone.
Endocrine therapy (ET), including aromatase inhibitors (AIs) such as letrozole and selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) like tamoxifen, is a commonly prescribed treatment.
However, patients harboringESR1mutations often develop resistance to standard ET and exhibit worse overall survival (31,32).
These mutations, primarily located in the ligand-binding domain ofESR1, render the receptor constitutively active and are less sensitive to ET treatment (32). The Y537S and D538G mutations are the most common and confer ET resistance through altered protein structure that leads to constitutive transcriptional activity and reduced affinity for ligands, including estrogen, AIs, and SERMs (33). Thus, targeting mutantESR1is a critical therapeutic strategy for overcoming endocrine resistance in breast cancer.
We and others have identified R-loops at a noncoding region upstream of theESR1locus, where unresolved R-loops can suppressESR1gene expression (15,34–36).
These findings provide a previously underappreciated concept to down-regulateESR1expression by manipulating R-loop resolution, offering a potential strategy to overcome endocrine resistance caused byESR1mutations in breast cancer.
In this study, we demonstrated that AND-1 directly binds to R-loops and is critical for R-loop regulation.
Mechanistically, AND-1 facilitates R-loop clearance by promoting the recruitment of RNase H1 to R-loops and enhances RNase H1 endonuclease activity in a manner dependent on its phosphorylation at the T826 site.
Notably, the role of AND-1 in R-loop regulation is supported by in vivo evidence, showing increased R-loop accumulation in the mammary gland of AND-1–deficient mice.
Furthermore, silencing AND-1 by small interfering RNA (siRNA) or inhibiting AND-1 using newly identified specific inhibitors (E)-5-(3,4-dichlorostyryl)benzo[c][1,2]oxaborol-1(3H)-ol (CH3) and bazedoxifene acetate (BZA) effectively suppressedESR1expression and overcame AI resistance (AR) driven byESR1mutations.
Together, our study uncovers a mechanism by which AND-1 regulates R-loops via modulation of RNase H1 activity and provides preclinical evidence for a therapeutic strategy targetingESR1expression through AND-1–mediated R-loop dynamics.
To explore the molecular mechanism by which AND-1 regulates R-loops, we examined R-loop levels by immunofluorescence (IF) assay using S9.6 antibody in U2OS cells with AND-1 depletion by siRNA.
Because S9.6 antibody recognizes not only R:D hybrids but also non–R-loop cellular RNAs (37), we therefore pretreated cells with RNase A, T1, and III to remove non–R-loop RNA as described previously (38–40).
Consistent with previous report (38–40), RNase A, T1, and III treatment significantly reduced the amount of cytoplasmic S9.6 IF signals (fig. S1A), confirming the effective removal of non–R-loop RNAs recognized by S9.6 antibody and validating the specificity of our IF assay.
Using this IF assay, we found that knockdown of AND-1 by siRNA significantly increased the nuclear S9.6 fluorescence compared to cells treated with control siRNA (Fig. 1, A to C, and fig. S1B).
Ectopic expression of AND-1 suppressed the increased nuclear S9.6 fluorescence caused by AND-1 depletion (Fig. 1, A to C, and fig. S1B), ruling out potential siRNA off-target effects.
To further confirm the specificity of R-loop detection, we ectopically expressed V5-tagged RNase H1, which is known to efficiently resolve R-loops and is widely used for R-loop detection (20,41).
As expected, exogenous expression of RNase H1 significantly reduced the S9.6 signal in cells across all three groups (Fig. 1, A to C), supporting the specificity of the S9.6 antibody in recognition of R-loops.
(AtoC) Images [(A) and (B)] and quantification (C) of S9.6 immunostaining in U2OS cells treated with control siRNA (Ctrl), AND-1 siRNA (siA), or siA with plasmid-mediated expression of WT AND-1 (siA + WT).
Cells were also transfected with or without V5-tagged RNase H1 (V5-RH1).
Scale bars, 10 μm.n= 50.
(D) Quantification of S9.6 dot blot signals shown in fig. S1E.
U2OS cells were treated with Ctrl, siA, or siA + WT as in (A), with or without 1 μM camptothecin (CPT) for 4 hours.n= 3.
(E) Proximity ligation assay (PLA) to assess the association of AND-1 with FLAG-RNase H1D210N.
U2OS cells expressing FLAG-RNase H1D210Nwere treated with or without 1 μM CPT for 4 hours.
Anti–AND-1 and anti-FLAG antibodies were used.
Scale bars, 10 μm.
(F) Quantification of PLA signals from (E).n= 50.
(G) S9.6 co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assay to show the interaction between R-loops and endogenous AND-1 and RNase H1 (RH1).
Cells were treated with or without 1 μM CPT for 4 hours.
(H) Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) to show that AND-1 binds to different substrates including R-loop, R:D, dsDNA, and D-loop.
(I) Schematic representation of AND-1 (FL) and its mutant (1-984).
(J) EMSA to show that AND-1 (FL), but not AND-1 (1-984), binds to R-loop molecules.
(KandL) PLA image (K) and quantification (L) in U2OS cells cotransfected with V5-tagged RNase H1D210N(V5-RH1) and FLAG tagged AND-1 (FL or 1-984).
Anti-FLAG and anti-V5 antibodies were used.
Scale bars, 10 μm.n= 50.
(M) S9.6 co-IP assay to examine the interactions between R-loops and FLAG-tagged AND-1 (FL or 1-984) in U2OS cells.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
*P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001; n.s., not significant, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
IgG, immunoglobulin G.
To complement these findings, we performed dot blot analysis as described previously (fig. S1C) (39,42).
Consistently, AND-1 knockdown increased R-loop levels, as indicated by the intensity of dot blots recognized by S9.6 antibody.
This signal was eliminated upon RNase H treatment, confirming its R-loop specificity (Fig. 1Dand fig. S1, D and E).
Camptothecin (CPT) is a topoisomerase I inhibitor that can induce R-loop (43). Consistent with this result, CPT treatment increased R-loop levels across all groups (Fig. 1Dand fig. S1, D and E), supporting the role of AND-1 in R-loop regulation.
The above results indicate that AND-1 is involved in R-loop regulation.
We therefore hypothesized that AND-1 might physically associate with R-loops in cells.
To test this, we examined the colocalization of AND-1 with R-loops using proximity ligation assay (PLA), an assay to detect protein-protein interactions in situ (at distances of <40 nm) (44). RNase H1D210Nis a catalytically inactive RNase H1 mutant that remains persistently present at R-loops and was, therefore, used as a marker for R-loop localization (45,46).
We expressed FLAG-RNase H1D210Nin U2OS cells and performed PLA using anti–AND-1 and anti-FLAG antibodies to detect their colocalization.
No PLA signal was observed in negative controls lacking primary antibodies or stained with either one of the two antibodies (Fig. 1, E and F).
However, PLA signal (red puncta) was detected in cells costained with both anti–AND-1 and anti-FLAG antibodies, and the signal was increased following CPT treatment, indicating an interaction between AND-1 and R-loops (Fig. 1, E and F).
To confirm this interaction, we conducted a co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assay using S9.6 antibody.
As shown inFig.
1G, both RNase H1 and AND-1 were detected in S9.6 immunoprecipitates (IPs), and the association of both proteins with R-loops was enhanced upon CPT treatment, supporting the involvement of AND-1 in R-loop regulation.
To corroborate the PLA and co-IP results, we further examined the interaction between AND-1 and R-loops using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP).
Specifically, we analyzed the association of AND-1 with the termination pause sites of β-ACTINandGEMIN7genes, two genomic loci known to form R-loops (46). FLAG-RNase H1D210Nwas used as a positive control in these experiments.
Consistent with the previous observation (46), FLAG-RNase H1D210Nwas enriched at the termination pause sites of both β-ACTINandGEMIN7genes compared with nearby control loci without R-loop formation, and these associations were reduced in cells expressing V5-tagged wild-type (WT) RNase H1 (fig. S1, F and H).
Intriguingly, endogenous AND-1 was also enriched at the same termination pause sites (fig. S1, G and I).
These findings strongly support the colocalization of RNase H1 and AND-1 at two R-loop–forming loci.
To further examine whether AND-1 directly interacts with R-loops in vitro, we generated different biotin-labeled nucleic acid substrates, including R-loop, D-loop, R:D hybrid, and dsDNA, as previously described (fig. S1J) (46). We then performed an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) to assess the binding of AND-1 to these substrates (47). As shown inFig.
1H, AND-1 bound to all tested substrate, but exhibited notably higher affinity for R-loop and D-loop.
AND-1 contains an N-terminal WD40 domain, a middle SepB domain, and a C-terminal high-mobility group (HMG) domain that is responsible for interacting with DNA directly (48,49).
To dissect the requirement of the HMG domain for R-loop biding, we purified recombinant full-length AND-1 [AND-1 (FL)] and a truncated mutant, AND-1 (1-984), lacking the HMG domain (Fig. 1Iand fig. S1K).
EMSA revealed that the R-loop substrate was upshifted upon incubation with AND-1 (FL), but not with AND-1 (1-984) (Fig. 1J), indicating that the HMG domain is required for the interaction.
Consistently, both PLA (Fig. 1, K and L, and fig. S1L) and S9.6 co-IP assays (Fig. 1M) confirmed the loss of interaction between AND-1 (1-984) and R-loops as compared to AND-1 (FL).
Collectively, these data demonstrate that AND-1 directly associates with R-loops, and its HMG domain is essential for this interaction.
Given that AND-1 directly binds to R-loops, we assumed that it may functionally and physically interact with RNase H1.
To test this, we performed co-IP assays to examine the interaction between AND-1 and RNase H1.
As shown inFig.
2A, endogenous RNase H1 was detected in AND-1 IPs, and this interaction was enhanced upon CPT treatment.
Conversely, the interaction was suppressed by actinomycin D, an RNA polymerase inhibitor known to reduce R-loop formation (50). In addition, we detected the interaction between AND-1 and FLAG-tagged RNase H1D210N(fig. S2A), indicating a physical association between AND-1 and RNase H1 and that the catalytic inactivation of RNase H1 does not impair its interaction with AND-1.
To test whether the AND-1–R-loop interaction is limited to S-phase, we conducted a short EdU pulse (10 μM, 20 min) in U2OS cells, followed by PLA staining using anti–AND-1 and anti-S9.6 antibodies, along with EdU click.
As shown in fig. S2 (B and C), PLA signals were detected in both EdU-positive and EdU-negative cells, suggesting that the interaction of AND-1 with R-loops is not restricted to the S-phase.
(A) Co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assay to show the interaction between endogenous AND-1 and RNase H1 (RH1) in U2OS cells.
Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti–AND-1 or control immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies, followed by immunoblotting for indicated proteins.
Cells were treated with 1 μM CPT for 4 hours to induce R-loop formation or treated with RNA polymerase inhibitor (5 μg/ml; actinomycin D) for 6 hours to attenuate R-loop generation.
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) treatment was used as control.
(B) Schematic representation of AND-1 (FL) and its truncated mutants.
(C) Co-IP assay using lysates of HEK293T cells expressing indicated FLAG-tagged AND-1 or its mutants.
Lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG antibody, followed by immunoblotting for indicated proteins.
(DandE) In vitro co-IP assay to show the interaction between purified His–AND-1 and purified FLAG-RNase H1WT(FLAG-RH1WT) (D) or FLAG-RNase H1D210N(FLAG-RH1D210N) (E).
(F) In vitro co-IP assay to show the interaction between purified FLAG-RH1WTproteins and purified His–AND-1 (FL) or its mutants.
(G) PLA to show the colocalization of RH1 with R-loops in U2OS cells costained with anti-RH1 and S9.6 antibodies.
Red foci indicate PLA signals.
Scale bars, 10 μm.
Cells were treated with control siRNA (Ctrl), AND-1 siRNA (siA), or siA followed by transfection with WT AND-1 plasmid.
(H) S9.6 co-IP assay to detect the interaction between endogenous RH1 and R-loops in U2OS cells.
Cells were treated with Ctrl or siA, followed by the treatment with 1 μM CPT for 4 hours or actinomycin D (5 μg/ml) for 6 hours, as in (A).
We next mapped the domain(s) of AND-1 responsible for its interaction with RNase H1 by generating various AND-1 mutants (Fig. 2B).
FLAG-tagged AND-1 (FL) and its truncated variants were expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells.
As shown inFig.
2C, RNase H1 was detected from FLAG IPs of AND-1 (FL) and AND-1 mutants (336-984), (1-984), and (336-1129), but not (1-336) or (984-1129), indicating that the SepB domain, located between residues 336 and 984, is critical to mediate the interaction between AND-1 and RNase H1.
To examine whether this interaction is direct, we conducted an in vitro co-IP assay by using purified recombinant His-tagged AND-1 (fig. S1K) and FLAG-tagged RNase H1 proteins (fig. S2D).
As shown inFig.
2 (D and E), both FLAG-RNase H1WTand FLAG-RNase H1D210Nwere detected from His–AND-1 IPs, confirming a direct interaction between AND-1 and RNase H1.
Consistent with the cell-based data, in vitro co-IP assay using purified AND-1 and truncated AND-1 mutants (fig. S2E) also demonstrated that the SepB domain is required for AND-1’s binding to RNase H1 (Fig. 2F).
Given that AND-1 directly interacts with both R-loops and RNase H1, we next explored whether AND-1 regulates the association of RNase H1 with R-loops.
Using PLA, we observed that depletion of AND-1 by siRNA significantly reduced the RNase H1:S9.6 PLA fluorescence signals, which was rescued by ectopic expression of AND-1 (Fig. 2Gand fig. S2, F to H).
Consistently, the amount of RNase H1 detected from S9.6 IPs was decreased in cells treated with siAND-1 compared to control siRNA treatment (Fig. 2H).
To further determine whether AND-1 can promote the association of RNase H1 with R-loops in vitro, we performed streptavidin-bead pulldown assay (51). Specifically, biotin-labeled R-loop molecules (fig. S1J) were incubated with purified recombinant RNase H1 in the presence of bovine serum albumin (BSA) or purified AND-1 protein, followed by pulldown using streptavidin-conjugated beads.
As shown in fig. S2I, RNase H1 exhibited a weak association with biotin-labeled R-loops in the presence or absence of BSA; however, the interaction was markedly enhanced in the presence of AND-1.
These results demonstrate that AND-1 promotes the association of RNase H1 with R-loops in vitro.
Together with the cellular data, these findings strongly suggest that AND-1 facilitates the recruitment of RNase H1 to R-loops.
We next explored whether AND-1 regulates RNase H1 endonuclease activity using in vitro endonuclease assays.
Given that AND-1 directly binds to both R-loops and RNase H1 and enhances their association, we hypothesized that AND-1 may regulate RNase H1 endonuclease activity.
To test this possibility, we purified recombinant RNase H1 and AND-1 proteins (fig. S2D) and conducted both fluorescence-based and gel-based RNase H1 activity assays.
The principle of the fluorescence-based assay is that RNA cleavage by RNase H1 releases the fluorescein molecules, which can be measured with excitation at 488 nm and emission at 535 nm (Fig. 3A) (52,53).
We synthesized a dual-labeled 25–base pair (bp) R:D hybrid using oligos of 5′-FAM–labeled RNA oligo and 3′-ROX–labeled DNA oligo (fig. S3A), following previously described protocols (46). As shown inFig.
3B, when the inactive R:D substrates were incubated with WT RNase H1, but not the catalytically inactive mutant RNase H1D210N, we could detect a robust increase in fluorescence in both concentration- and time-dependent manner, indicating that RNase H1 efficiently cleaves the RNA within R:D hybrids efficiently in vitro.
(A) Schematic representation of the fluorescence-based RNase H1 (RH1) activity assay.
(B) Relative fluorescence intensity of R:D substrates incubated with indicated amounts of WT RH1 or RH1D210N.
(C) Relative fluorescence intensity of R:D substrates incubated with 2 nM RH1 alone or premixed with 40 nM BSA or AND-1.
(D) Top: Schematic representation of AND-1 (FL) and its truncated mutants.
Bottom: Relative fluorescence intensity of R:D substrates incubated with 2 nM RH1 alone or premixed with 40 nM AND-1 (FL) or two mutants (1-984 and S1).
(E) Gel-based assay to detect RH1 activity.
FAM-labeled R:D substrates were incubated with RH1D210Nor with increasing concentrations of RH1 for 20 min.
The cleavage of substrates was analyzed on a 12% denaturing PAGE.
Bottom: Quantification of cleaved substrates.
(F) FAM-labeled R:D substrates were incubated with RH1 and either BSA or increasing concentrations of AND-1 for 20 min, followed by gel analysis as in (E).
Bottom: Quantification of cleaved products.
(G) Time-course analysis of RH1 activity.
FAM-labeled R:D substrates were incubated with RH1 in the presence or absence of AND-1.
The reactions were analyzed at indicated time points.
Bottom: Quantification of cleaved products.
(H) FAM-labeled R:D substrates were incubated with RH1 alone or with AND-1 (FL, 1-984, or S1) for the indicated time points.
Bottom: Quantification of cleaved products shown in top panel.
(I) FAM-labeled R-loop substrates (1 μM) were incubated with RH1 alone or with AND-1 (FL, 1-984, or S1) for the indicated time points.
Right: The cleaved products were quantified.n= 3.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
*P< 0.05; ***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001; n.s., not significant, compared to RH1-alone group, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
We next used this assay to test whether AND-1 influences RNase H1 endonuclease activity.
As shown inFig.
3C, AND-1 alone did not alter the fluorescence signal when incubated with R:D hybrids, indicating that AND-1 lacks endonuclease activity to cleave RNA.
Notably, the addition of AND-1, but not BSA, to R:D hybrids in the presence of RNase H1 significantly increased the fluorescence signal compared to reactions with RNase H1 alone.
These data strongly suggest that AND-1 stimulates RNase H1 endonuclease activity toward RNA cleavage in R:D hybrids.
To further delineate the domains of AND-1 required for this reaction, we repeated the assay using AND-1 mutants.
Neither the SepB domain-deleted mutant (S1) nor the HMG domain-deleted mutant (1-984) enhanced the fluorescence signal generated by RNase H1 (Fig. 3D), suggesting that both HMG and the SepB domains of AND-1 are indispensable for AND-1–mediated stimulation of RNase H1 activity.
The purified RNase H1 and AND-1 proteins used in these assays are shown in fig. S2 (D and E).
To visualize cleaved products by RNase H1, we synthesized a 25-bp R:D hybrid containing 5′-FAM–labeled RNA (fig. S3B) and performed gel-based RNase H1 activity assay (46,54,55).
Consistent with fluorescence-based assay results, cleaved RNA products could only be detected when the R:D substrates were incubated with WT RNase H1, but not catalytically inactive RNaseH1D210N, and the cleavage occurred in a concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 3E), demonstrating that RNase H1-mediated cleavage of the R:D hybrid can be effectively visualized in vitro by a gel-based assay.
Using this gel-based assay, we found that AND-1 alone at 40 nM did not display any RNase activity toward the R:D hybrid.
However, in the presence of RNase H1, AND-1 stimulated the cleavage of the R:D substrates in a concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 3F).
Additionally, AND-1 accelerated the cleavage of R:D substrates by RNase H1 in a time-dependent manner (Fig. 3G).
Compared to AND-1 (FL), AND-1 mutants (S1) or (1-984) exhibited markedly reduced capability to stimulate RNase H1 activity (Fig. 3H).
To test whether AND-1 stimulates RNase H1 endonuclease activity on R-loops, we generated an “R-loop–like” substrate using a protocol as described by Nguyenet al.
(46). This structure contains 30-bp dsDNA arms, a central 31-nucleotide ssDNA bubble, and a 25-bp R:D hybrid within the bubble.
The RNA strand was 5′-FAM–labeled (fig. S3C).
As shown in fig. S3D, RNase H1 was able to cleave the RNA in the R-loop substrates in a concentration-dependent manner.
Although AND-1 alone showed no detectable activity, it significantly stimulated the activity of RNase H1 on the R-loop substrates in both concentration- and time-dependent manner (fig. S3, E and F).
Moreover, RNase H1 cleaved the R-loop substrates more rapidly in the presence of AND-1 (FL), but not the S1 or 1-984 mutants (Fig. 3I).
These in vitro data strongly demonstrate that AND-1 can stimulate the endonuclease activity of RNase H1 on R-loops and that both SepB and HMG domains are required.
Our previous studies demonstrated that AND-1 is phosphorylated by ATR at threonine-826 (T826), a modification crucial for its role in DNA damage response (28,29,49).
We therefore examined whether phosphorylation at T826 regulates AND-1’s function in R-loop dynamics.
Using PLA with a phospho–AND-1 (T826) antibody (p–AND-1) and V5 antibody in U2OS cells expressing V5-RNase H1D210N, we detected distinct PLA fluorescence signals (fig. S4, A and B), indicating that phosphorylated AND-1 localizes to R-loops.
Treatment with CPT not only induced phosphorylation of AND-1 at T826 (fig. S4C) but also enhanced the PLA signals (fig. S4, A and B), further supporting a role for p–AND-1 in R-loop regulation.
To further evaluate the functional impact of T826 phosphorylation, we coexpressed V5-RNase H1D210Nwith FLAG-tagged AND-1 (WT) or the phosphorylation-deficient T826A mutant in U2OS cells and performed PLA using anti-FLAG and anti-V5 antibodies.
Both WT and T826A mutant AND-1 localized to the nuclei (fig. S4, D and E); however, PLA signals were only observed in cells expressing WT AND-1, but not the T826A mutant (Fig. 4, A and B), indicating that phosphorylation at T826 facilitates the interaction between AND-1 and R-loops.
We next examined the effect of T826 phosphorylation on the direct association between AND-1 and R-loops in vitro.
To achieve this objective, we purified recombinant His-tag WT AND-1 and T826A or T826E mutant AND-1 proteins and confirmed the absence of phosphorylation in the T826A mutant.
The phosphomimic T826E mutant cannot be recognized by phosphor-T826 antibody (fig. S4, F and G).
EMSA results revealed that WT and T826E AND-1 proteins, but not T826A mutant, were able to upshift R-loop molecules (fig. S4H).
These findings indicate that T826 phosphorylation is essential for AND-1’s association with R-loop.
(AandB) PLA (A) and quantification (B) of U2OS cells cotransfected with V5-RNase H1D210Nand FLAG–AND-1 (WT) or mutant (T826A).
Anti-FLAG and anti-V5 antibodies were used.
Scale bars, 10 μm.n= 50.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
****P< 0.0001, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
(C) Co-IP assay in AND-1 KO U2OS cells transfected with FLAG-empty vector (Ctrl) and FLAG- AND-1 (WT or T826A).
Cells were treated with 1 μM CPT for 4 hours or with ATR inhibitor (VE-821, 2.5 μM for 12 hours) and CPT.
Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG antibody.
(D) S9.6 co-IP to show the interaction between RH1 and R-loops under the treatment as (C).
(E) Fluorescence-based RNase H1 (RH1) activity assay.
FAM-labeled R:D substrates (1 μM) were incubated with 2 nM RNase H1 alone or in the presence of 40 nM AND-1 (RH1 + WT), phosphatase-treated AND-1 (RH1 + WT-P), or T826A AND-1 (RH1 + T826A).n= 3.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
****P< 0.0001; n.s., not significant, when compared with the RH1 group, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
(FandG) Gel-based RH1 activity assay (F) and quantification of cleaved products (G).
FAM-labeled R-loop substrates (1 μM) were incubated with RH1 in the presence or absence of 40 nM WT AND-1, WT-P, or T826A.n= 3.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
****P< 0.0001; n.s., not significant, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
(HandI) S9.6 Immunostaining (H) and quantification (I) in U2OS cells treated with control siRNA (Ctrl), AND-1 siRNA (siA), or siA with plasmid expressing WT or T826A AND-1.
Scale bars, 5 μm.n= 50.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001; n.s., not significant, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
We next explored how phosphorylation of AND-1 at T826 regulates its role in R-loops.
To this end, we expressed FLAG-tagged WT AND-1 (WT) and T826A in AND-1 knockout (KO) U2OS cells (AND-1 KO), followed by treatment with CPT or cotreatment with CPT and the ATR inhibitor VE-821.
Co-IP using anti-FLAG antibody (Fig. 4C) showed that CPT treatment enhanced the association between AND-1 and RNase H1, whereas cotreatment with VE-821, which blocked AND-1 phosphorylation at T826, diminished this CPT-mediated enhanced interaction.
Additionally, the T826A mutant showed a reduced association with RNase H1 compared to WT AND-1.
These data suggest that AND-1 phosphorylation at T826A is critical for its interaction with RNase H1.
We therefore hypothesized that this phosphorylation may also affect the recruitment of RNase H1 to R-loops.
S9.6 co-IP results (Fig. 4D) showed that both AND-1 and RNase H1 were detected from S9.6 IPs and CPT treatment enhanced their association, which was abrogated when treated with VE-821.
Furthermore, AND-1 (T826A) was not detected in S9.6 IPs, and the amount of RNase H1 bound to R-loops was reduced in cells with AND-1 (T826A) expression.
These findings indicate that T826 phosphorylation is required for AND-1 to facilitate the recruitment of RNase H1 to R-loops.
Given that AND-1 phosphorylation at T826 regulates the interaction between RNase H1 and R-loops, we assumed that this modification may also influence RNase H1 endonuclease activity.
To test this hypothesis, we used purified WT and T826A AND-1 proteins (fig. S4, F and G) to conduct in vitro fluorescence-based and gel-based RNase H1 activity assays.
As shown inFig.
4E, the addition of purified WT AND-1, but not T826A AND-1, significantly increased the fluorescence signals generated by RNase H1 when incubated with R:D hybrids, indicating enhanced endonuclease activity.
WT AND-1 pretreated with phosphatase (WT-P) failed to enhance fluorescence signals, confirming the requirement of phosphorylation for this effect.
Consistently, gel-based cleavage assays showed that RNaseH1 cleaved both R:D hybrids (fig. S4, I and J) and R-loops substrates (Fig. 4, F and G) more efficiently in the presence of WT AND-1, but not phosphatase-pretreated WT AND-1 or T826A mutant.
These data collectively indicate that phosphorylation of AND-1 at T826 is critical for its ability to stimulate RNase H1 endonuclease activity.
We next examined whether phosphorylation of AND-1 at T826 is required for R-loop accumulation in cells.
To this end, we exogenously expressed FLAG-tagged WT or T826A mutant AND-1 in U2OS cells with endogenous AND-1 deleted by siRNA (fig. S4K) and assessed R-loop levels using both S9.6 dot blot and S9.6 IF assays.
Compared to the control treated cells, AND-1 deletion by siRNA increased R-loops levels as evidenced by elevated signals of R-loop in the dot blot assay (fig. S4, L and M) and increased fluorescence intensity in S9.6 IF staining (Fig. 4, H and I).
The increased R-loop level by AND-1 depletion was significantly suppressed by exogenous expression of WT AND-1, but not the T826A mutant (Fig. 4, H and I; and fig. S4, L and M).
Thus, our results demonstrate that phosphorylation of AND-1 at T826 is crucial for R-loop regulation.
(A) Schematic illustration of the CRISPR-Cas9–mediated generation of theWdhd1-floxed allele.
Guide RNAs (gRNAs) were designed to target sites upstream and downstream of the eighth coding exon ofWdhd1, guiding Cas9 to create double-strand breaks (green vertical arrows).
These breaks are then mended by homology-directed repair (HDR) using a donor template, which contains the twoloxPsites and homology arms.
Two pairs of screening primers as indicated are designed and used to screen the founders.
(B) Schematic illustration of CRISPR-Cas9–mediated generation of theWdhd1T819A allele within the exon 18, along with the locations of PCR primers (F3a and R3a) used for screening.Wdhd1T819 was mutated from ACC (T) to GCA (A).
(CandD) Immunostaining (C) and quantification (D) of S9.6 nuclear fluorescence signal in indicated MEF cells pretreated with or without RH.
All cells were pretreated with a combination of RNases A, T1, and III.
Scale bars, 10 μm.n= 50.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
****P< 0.0001; n.s., not significant, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
(EandF) S9.6 dot blot (E) and quantification (F) using genomic DNA extracted from indicated MEF cells treated with or without 1 μM CPT for 4 hours before harvest.n= 3.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
*P< 0.05; ***P< 0.001, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
(GandH) R-loop IF images (G) and quantification of the relative R-loop intensity (H) in mouse mammary gland from 17- to 18-week-old virginWdhd1WTandWdhd1T819Amice.
Scale bars, 50 μm and 10 μm (inset).
Five animals were used in each group.
Data are shown as means±SD.
**P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
We isolated mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from WT (Wdhd1WT),Wdhd1loxP/loxP, andWdhd1T819Aembryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) embryos, using previously described protocols (fig. S5D) (56). We then obtainedWdhd1−/−MEF cells by infectingWdhd1loxP/loxPMEFs with adenovirus expressing Cre (Ad-CMV-Cre).
As shown in fig. S5E, AND-1 protein expression was significantly decreased inWdhd1−/−MEF cells, and p–AND-1 was only detected in MEFWdhd1WTcells.
Using IF staining with the S9.6 antibody, we found that the R-loop level was increased in AND-1–deficient MEFs (Wdhd1−/−andWdhd1T819A) as compared to WT MEFs (Wdhd1WT) (Fig. 5, C and D, left).
Pretreatment of MEF cells with RNase H abolished the IF signal (Fig. 5, C and D, right), which confirms the specificity of the S9.6 antibody in the detection of the R-loops in MEFs.
In PLA assay using anti–AND-1 and anti-S9.6 antibodies, PLA signals were observed only inWdhd1WTMEFs and RNase H pretreatment significantly reduced PLA signals (fig. S5, F and G).
These results suggest the absence of a role for AND-1 in R-loop regulation inWdhd1−/−andWdhd1T819AMEFs.
Consistently, S9.6 dot blot results showed the increased level of R-loops in AND-1–deficient MEFs, with or without CPT treatment (Fig. 5, E and F).
Previous reports showed R-loop accumulation in BRCA1-deficient mouse mammary epithelium and in breast epithelium of human germline BRCA1 mutation carriers (15,35).
To investigate R-loop formation in our model, we assessed R-loop levels in the mouse mammary epithelium of bothWdhd1WTandWdhd1T819Ausing IF staining (36). To induce R-loop accumulation, mice of each genotype were treated with aphidicolin (APH) once per week for 10 weeks (fig. S5D) (57). We previously reported that R-loop levels are increased in mice with deletion ofBrca1in mammary epithelium [deletion of Brca1 in mammary epithelium (BKO)] (35). Accordingly, BKO mammary tissues were used as a positive control to validate the specificity of R-loop IF signal.
Pretreatment with RNase H abolished the nuclear staining of S9.6 antibody, confirming the specificity of S9.6 antibody for detecting R-loops in BKO mouse mammary epithelium (fig. S5, H and I).
As shown inFig.
5(G and H), R-loop signals were significantly increased in the mammary epithelium ofWdhd1T819Amice compared to that inWdhd1WTmice.
As expected, APH treatment elevated R-loop levels in both genotypes, with a robust increase in the mammary epithelium ofWdhd1T819Amice.
These findings strongly support a critical role of AND-1 in suppressing R-loop levels in vivo.
Recent studies have uncovered a key role of R-loops in cancer propagation and the development of chemotherapy drug resistance, including in breast cancer (58). To explore the clinical potential of targeting the AND-1–mediated R-loop suppression pathway, we examined whether AND-1 inhibition could suppressESR1expression by regulating R-loops in breast cancer cells.
To this end, we first validated the impact of AND-1 depletion on R-loop accumulation in MCF7 breast cancer cells.
Both S9.6 dot blot and IF assays demonstrated that AND-1 depletion significantly increased R-loop levels, which could be suppressed by ectopic expression of WT AND-1, but not T826 mutant (Fig. 6, A and B; and fig. S6, A to C).
These results indicate that AND-1, and specifically its phosphorylation at T826, is essential for R-loop regulation in MCF7 cells.
(AandB) S9.6 dot blot (A) and quantification (B) using genomic DNA extracted from MCF7 cells treated with control siRNA (Ctrl), AND-1 siRNA (siA), or siA with plasmid-mediated expression of the indicated AND-1 variants.
(C) Schematic representation of theESR1genomic locus, includingESR1gene (blue),ESR1super-enhancer region (yellow), andESR1regulatory element (ESR1-RE; red).
(D) DNA-RNA immunoprecipitation (DRIP) combined with qPCR (DRIP-qPCR) to detect R-loop enrichment atESR1-RE region in MCF7 cells.
Cells were transfected with V5-empty vector (Vec) or V5-RNase H1 (RH1).
(E) ChIP-qPCR to detect AND-1 enrichment atESR1-RE region in MCF7 cells transfected with V5-Vec or V5-RH1.
(F) DRIP-qPCR to detect R-loop enrichment atESR1-RE region in MCF7 cells expressing V5-Vec or V5-RH1 and treated with Ctrl or siA.
(GandH) qPCR (G) and Western blot (H) to detectESR1mRNA or protein levels in MCF7 cells treated with Ctrl, siA, or siA with plasmid-mediated expression of the WT AND-1 (WT) or T816A mutant (TA).
(IandJ) mRNA (I) and protein (J) levels ofESR1in MCF7 cells transfected with V5-Vec or V5-RH1 plasmid and treated with Con, siA, or siA and AND-1 (WT) or T816A mutant (TA) as in (H).
(KandL) mRNA (K) and protein (L) levels ofESR1in MCF7 cells (WT) and MCF7 cells with depletion ofESR1-RE (ESR1-RE KO).
Cells were treated as in (H).
Statistical analysis for (B), (D) to (G), (I), and (K).n= 3.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
*P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001; n.s., not significant, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
Previous studies identified R-loops at a noncoding region upstream of theESR1locus and the resolution of these R-loops affectsESR1gene expression (Fig. 6C) (15,34,35,36).
To validate the presence of R-loops at upstream of theESR1locus, we conducted DNA-RNA immunoprecipitation (DRIP) combined with quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR; DRIP-qPCR) using primers specific to theESR1regulatory element (ESR1-RE) region that was reported to contain R-loops (15,59).
As shown inFig.
6Dand fig. S6D, R-loops were enriched at theESR1-RE region.
Pretreatment of DNA samples with RNase H (RH) significantly reduced the DRIP signal, confirming the presence of R-loop.
Notably, in DNA samples from cells expressing V5-tagged RNase H1, R-loop signals were significantly diminished compared to the control cells.
Notably, ChIP-qPCR analysis revealed that AND-1 was also enriched at thisESR1-RE region; however, this association was markedly reduced in cells expressing V5-tagged RNase H1 (Fig. 6Eand fig. S6D).
These findings suggest that AND-1 binds directly to R-loops present at theESR1-RE region.
To assess the specificity of R-loop enrichment atESR1-RE, we extended the DRIP-qPCR analysis to additional regions withinESR1locus, including the enhancer and gene body, as well as the two nearby genes,PPP14CDandPLEKHG1, which were reported to lack R-loops across their entire gene regions (34). As shown in fig. S6 (D to F), DRIP-qPCR signals were only detected atESR1-RE and at two identified R-loop–positive loci (E-P1 and G-P1) (34), with the signal atESR1-RE markedly higher than the other two loci.
Moreover, we found that siRNA-mediated deletion of AND-1 increased the DRIP-qPCR signal atESR1-RE region in cell expressing a V5-tagged empty vector.
This elevated signal was suppressed by RNase H pretreatment, confirming the R-loop specificity of the signal (Fig. 6Fand fig. S6G).
In contrast, in cells expressing V5-tagged RNase H1, the DRIP-qPCR signal atESR1-RE was markedly reduced compared to the cells expressing the empty vector, and AND-1 depletion had no further effect on DRIP-qPCR signal atESR1-RE in these cells.
These data support a critical role for AND-1 in regulating R-loop formation atESR1-RE.
We next tested whether AND-1 depletion specifically suppressesESR1expression.
As shown inFig.
6 (G and H), bothESR1mRNA levels andESR1protein (ER-α) levels were significantly reduced in cells treated with siAND-1.
This effect was rescued by exogenous expression of WT AND-1, but not T826A mutant.
To determine whether AND-1 regulatesESR1transcription through R-loop modulation atESR1-RE, we knocked down AND-1 in MCF7 cells expressing either a V5-tagged empty vector or V5-tagged RNase H1.
In cells expressing the empty vector, AND-1 depletion significantly reducedESR1mRNA and protein levels, which were restored by exogenous expression of WT AND-1, but not T826A mutant.
In contrast, in cells expressing exogenous RNase H1,ESR1mRNA and protein levels were elevated, and AND-1 depletion had no additional effect (Fig. 6, I and J).
These results suggest that the suppression ofESR1expression following AND-1 depletion is dependent on R-loop regulation.
To further investigate the role of AND-1 in regulatingESR1expression, we used anESR1-RE KO cell line, in whichESR1-RE region was removed by using CRISPR-Cas9 technology as we described previously (15). Consistent with previous findings,ESR1expression was reduced inESR1-RE KO cells (Fig. 6, K and L) (15). Notably, depletion of AND-1 by siRNA reduced expression of bothESR1mRNA and protein levels in WT cells, but not inESR1-RE KO cell lines, further indicating that AND-1 regulatesESR1expression by affecting R-loops accumulation atESR1-RE.
To test whether AND-1 also regulates R-loop resolution at other R-loop–prone loci, we performed DRIP-qPCR analysis at several well-characterized R-loop–enriched regions, includingRPL13A,TRIM33,TPCN2, andSRRT(34,60).
As shown in fig. S6H, AND-1 depletion led to increased R-loop accumulation at all these loci, suggesting that AND-1’s role in R-loops is not restricted toESR1-RE loci.
Our above data demonstrated that inhibition of AND-1 suppressesESR1expression, suggesting that targeting AND-1 may be a useful approach to overcome resistance to AIs driven byESR1mutations in breast cancer cells.
To test this hypothesis, we treated MCF7 cells with two newly identified AND-1 inhibitors, BZA and CH3, which specifically inhibit AND-1 by promoting its degradation (61). In cells expressing V5-tagged empty vector, both inhibitors resulted in AND-1 protein degradation and decreasedESR1expression at both mRNA and protein levels.
In contrast, in cells expressing V5-tagged RNase H1, the effect of the AND-1 inhibitors onESR1expression was reduced.
These results indicate that AND-1 inhibitors suppressESR1expression through R-loop regulation (fig. S7, A and B).
To investigate whether targeting AND-1 could overcome AR in breast cancer cells, we knocked down AND-1 in WT and AR MCF7 cells expressingESR1mutations, including Y537S, Y537N, or D538G (fig. S7C), and then treated the cells with letrozole, an AI (62). Notably, AND-1 knockdown by siRNA decreased ER-α levels (fig. S7D) and restored the sensitivity of all three AR MCF7 cells to letrozole (fig. S7, E to G).
Additionally, a strong synergistic effect was observed when combining AND-1 inhibitor (CH3) with letrozole in both WT and AR MCF7 cells (Fig. 7, A to D; and fig. S7, H to M).
We next subcutaneously implanted AR MCF7 cells (Y537S) into nude mice to form tumors, which were then treated with a combination of CH3 and letrozole.
In line with the in vitro results, the combined treatments of CH3 with letrozole exhibited a significant synergistic effect in suppressing resistant tumor growth with minimal effects on the mice’s body weight (Fig. 7, E to G).
Compared with the control and the letrozole treatment groups, tumors in mice treated with CH3 alone or CH3 combined with letrozole displayed significantly reduced expression of AND-1 and ER-α proteins (Fig. 7H) and increased expression of R-loops (Fig. 7, I and J).
Together, these results suggest that targeting AND-1 could overcome AR caused byESR1mutations in ER+breast cancer cells.
(AandB) Surface plots (top) and synergy matrix (bottom) showing the synergistic effect of AND-1 inhibitor (CH3) with AI (letrozole) in breast cancer cells, including WT (MCF7 WT) (A) and letrozole resistant cells (MCF7 Y537S) (B).
(CandD) Synergetic effect of CH3 and Letrozole in MCF7 WT (C) and MCF7 Y537S (D) cells.
Cells treated with indicated concentration of inhibitors were harvested 72 hours posttreatment.
The combination index (CI) values were presented below the bars.
(EandF) Tumor growth of MCF7 Y537S xenograft tumor-bearing mice intraperitoneally treated with control, letrozole (20 mg/kg), CH3 (20 mg/kg), or combination of letrozole and CH3 for 20 days, administered once every 2 days.n= 5.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
**P< 0.01; ****P< 0.0001; n.s., not significant.
All the data were analyzed on the basis of unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
(G) Body weights of MCF7 Y537S xenograft tumor-bearing mice during treatment as in (E) and (F).
(H) Immunoblot analysis of AND-1 and ER-α protein levels of tumor samples in each experiment group.
Five animals were used in each group.
GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.
(IandJ) S9.6 dot blot (I) and quantification (J) using genomic DNA extracted from tumor samples from mice bearing MCF7 Y537S xenograft tumors intraperitoneally treated with indicated drugs as in (E) and (F).
Five animals were used in each group.
Data are shown as means ± SD.
****P< 0.0001; n.s., not significant, based on unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
(K) Schematic representation of the mechanism.
AND-1 directly binds to R-loop structures, where it promotes RNase H1 recruitment to R-loops and stimulates endonuclease activity of RNase H1.
R-loop dysregulation has been implicated in immune response, disease progression, and cancer development (13). Therefore, understanding the mechanisms of regulating R-loops is particularly important.
In this study, we identified AND-1 as an R-loop–interacting protein that plays a critical role in R-loop regulation, as demonstrated by studies in both cells and animal models.
We further show that inhibition of AND-1, by either siRNA-mediated depletion or treatment with specific small-molecule inhibitors, can overcomeESR1mutation-driven resistance to the AI letrozole, through modulation of R-loop dynamics.
Collectively, our study not only elucidates a previously unidentified mechanism of R-loop regulation but also provides preclinical evidence that targeting AND-1 may offer a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of endocrine-resistant breast cancer.
Ctf4, the homolog of AND-1 in yeast cells, was shown to be required for R-loop regulation (30). However, the underlying mechanism by which it modulates R-loops remains unsolved.
In this study, we uncovered a previously unidentified role for AND-1 in the early stage of R-loop regulation by modulating both the recruitment and the endonuclease activity of RNase H1 at R-loops.
AND-1 contains a C-terminal HMG DNA-binding domain, which contributes to its direct interaction with R-loops, as observed both in vitro and in cell-based studies.
The HMG domain usually facilitates the formation of nucleoprotein complexes on the chromatin via bending DNA (48,63).
It is likely that AND-1 directly binds to R-loops and alters chromatin architecture at R-loop regions to enhance RNase H1 accessibility.
Given that AND-1 also interacts with RNase H1, our working model (Fig. 7K) is that AND-1 directly binds to R-loops and promotes a favorable chromatin change that facilitates RNase H1’s recruitment to R-loops via the AND-1–RNase H1 interaction.
Further structural analysis will help to elucidate the details of how AND-1 remodels R-loop–containing chromatin to facilitate the recruitment of RNase H1 to R-loops.
While Ctf4/AND-1 is known to function in DNA replication (29,64,65), one question is whether the observed R-loop accumulation upon AND-1 depletion is a secondary consequence of impaired DNA replication.
To address this, we performed all the experiments at 48 hours post-siRNA transfection, before the onset of detectable DNA replication defects, which only became evident at 72 hours posttransfection, as assessed by EdU incorporation and fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis (fig. S1, M and N).
Furthermore, our data show that the interaction between AND-1 and R-loops is not restricted to S-phase cells (fig. S2, B and C), supporting the idea that the role of AND-1 in R-loops is not dependent on DNA replication.
Therefore, the R-loop accumulation observed upon AND-1 loss in this study is unlikely to be a consequence of replication stress.
Notably, AND-1 is a replication fork-associated protein, and its accumulation at stalled replication forks is known to facilitate the recruitment of DNA repair factors to maintain genomic stability (49,64).
Our findings extend its role by demonstrating that AND-1 contributes to genome stability through not only replication fork maintenance but also a previously unrecognized function in sensing R-loops and promoting RNase H1 activity.
Collectively, these results highlight the multifaceted role of AND-1 in safeguarding genome integrity through direct interactions with distinct DNA structures.
Notably, we also provided in vivo evidence that R-loop levels are elevated in mammary epithelial cells of AND-1–deficient (T819A) mice, indicating a key role for AND-1 in R-loop regulation in vivo.
Ctf4/AND-1 is an important factor to maintain chromosome stability (66,67).
Therefore, future studies investigating whether R-loop accumulation due to AND-1 deficiency contributes to tumorigenesis in animal models would greatly advance our understanding of its role in cancer development.
ER+breast cancer, which accounts for a substantial portion of breast cancer cases, often develops resistance to AIs, resulting in treatment failure (68). One of the major causes of ET resistance is mutations in theESR1gene, which lead to its constitutive transcriptional activity and reduced ET sensitivity (69). TargetingESR1mutations remains a critical unmet clinical need, as theseESR1mutations are rare in those with primary breast cancer but occur in ~30% of patients who develop metastasis after AI treatment (32). Our study demonstrates that AND-1 plays a pivotal role in controlling R-loop levels in breast cancer cells and that AND-1 depletion leads to decreasedESR1expression.
This reduction is due to increased R-loop accumulation within theESR1-RE locus, a region previously shown to form R-loop structures (15,34,35,36).
Notably, we show that pharmacological inhibition of AND-1 using small molecules such as BZA and CH3 effectively suppressesESR1expression and overcomes theESR1mutation-driven AR in both in vitro and in vivo models.
AND-1/WDHD1is highly expressed across multiple tumor types but exhibits extremely low expression in normal tissues (fig. S7N) (70). Furthermore, pharmacological inhibition of AND-1 causes minimal toxicity in mice (61), further supporting its potential as a tumor-selective therapeutic target.
The precise mechanism by which R-loops influenceESR1transcription remains to be fully elucidated.
Our results highlight a regulatory role of AND-1 onESR1expression by affecting R-loop resolution at theESR1-RE locus, indicating a potential approach to overcomeESR1mutation-mediated endocrine resistance by targeting AND-1 in breast cancer.
However, we must realize that AND-1’s role in R-loops is not restricted to theESR1-RE, and we still do not know how AND-1 regulates R-loops as well as R-loop–mediated gene expression at a genome-wide level.
In addition, the molecular mechanism of how unresolved R-loops at theESR1-RE locus affects its transcription is still not clear.
We are planning to answer these questions in our future studies, which we believe will provide more evidence to support anti–AND-1–mediated therapy for cancer treatment.
Collectively, our findings provide preclinical evidence to support the development of approaches targeting mutatedESR1at the transcriptional level by inhibiting AND-1 to treat ET-resistant breast cancer.
Notably, BZA is a Food and Drug Administration–approved SERM for osteoporosis (71), raising the possibility of repurposing BZA for clinical trials in AI-resistant breast cancer patients in the near future.
Human U2OS (RRID: CVCL_0042), HEK293T (RRID: CVCL_0045), and WT MCF7 cells (RRID: CVCL_0031) were purchased from American Type Culture Collection.
MCF7 mutant cell lines (Y537S, Y537N, and D538G) were a gift from J. Shao (Washington University, St.
Louis) (72).ESR1-RE KO MCF7 cells were generated as previously described (15). All cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37°C with 5% CO2.
HEK293T AND-1 KO cells were generated by using CRISPR-Cas9–mediated technology.
Specific guide RNAs (sgRNAs) were designed using online CRISPR Design Tool (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gppx/crispick/public), and sgRNAs with the highest score (Table 1) were chosen and ligated into the Lenti V2 plasmid according to the protocol described previously (73). Cells transfected with control or sgRNA were selected in a medium with puromycin (2.5 μg/ml) for 2 to 3 weeks.
3′UTR, 3′ untranslated region; qRT-PCR, quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction; F-primer, forward primer; R-primer, reverse primer.
The antibodies against AND-1 were raised against a synthetic peptide (SKKQKPLDFSTNQKLSAF) of AND-1.
The antibody against AND-1 at the T826 site (p–AND-1 T826) was described previously (49). S9.6 antibody (ENH002, RRID: AB_2687463) was from Kerafast.
Antibody against RNase H1 (no. ab229078, RRID: AB_945244) was from Abcam.
Antibodies against ER-α (no. 8644, RRID: AB_2617128), β-tubulin (no. 2146, RRID: AB_2210545), β-Actin (no. 8457, RRID: AB_10950489), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (no. 5174, RRID: AB_10622025), V5-Tag (no. 13202, RRID: AB_2687461), FLAG-Tag (no. 14793, RRID: AB_2572291), His-Tag (no. 2365, RRID: AB_2115720), and glutathioneS-transferase (GST)–Tag (no. 2622, RRID: AB_331670) were from Cell Signaling Technology.
The antibody against BSA (no. B2901, RRID: AB_258533) was from MilliporeSigma.
The plasmid expressing pCDH-EF1-FLAG-RNase H1 (M27) under the control of an EF-1α promoter was a gift from R. Li (The George Washington University, Washington, DC).
The M27 form of RNaseH1 primarily localizes to the nucleus (74). The RNase H1 mutation (D210N) was generated using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (no. 200518, Agilent).
FLAG–AND-1 and GST–AND-1 (full-length and various fragments) were constructed as described previously (25).
Individual siRNAs were synthesized from Sigma-Aldrich (seeTable 1for target sequences).
siRNA transfections were performed with a final concentration of 20 nM siRNA oligonucleotide duplexes using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Experiments were carried out 3 days after siRNA transfection.
siRNA oligonucleotides against AND-1 are shown inTable 1.
Cells were lysed in NETN lysis buffer containing 50 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 0.5% NP-40, and 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (no. 11836170001, Roche) for 30 min on ice, followed by sonication.
Benzonase nuclease (E1014, Sigma-Aldrich) was included during the co-IP assay to degrade DNA and RNA, ensuring that the observed protein-protein interactions were not bridged by nucleic acids.
After centrifugation, the supernatants were collected and incubated with indicated antibodies preconjugated with protein A/G beads at 4°C overnight.
Subsequently, beads were then washed three times with lysis buffer and analyzed by Western blot.
For Western blot analysis, samples were boiled at 95°C for 10 min in SDS loading buffer.
Then, they were subjected to electrophoresis in 8 to 12% SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and transferred to the nitrocellulose membrane.
The membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat milk in Tris-buffered saline with Tween 20 (TBST) for 1 hour before being incubated with primary antibody at 4°C overnight.
Then, the membranes were washed three times with 0.1% TBST and incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–conjugated secondary antibody (1:5000) for 2 hours at room temperature (RT) followed by three times wash with 0.1% TBST.
SuperSignal West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescent Substrate (no. 34580, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for protein detection.
Images were acquired in the Odyssey Fc imaging system (LICORbio) with Image Studio software.
ChIP assays were carried out with the SimpleChIP Enzymatic Chromatin IP Kit (no. 9003, Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer’s instruction manual.
Briefly, cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde for 10 min and quenched with 1× glycine.
Extracted genomic DNA was sonicated to an average size of 200 bp.
ChIPs were performed using ChIP-validated antibodies and ChIP-Grade Protein G Magnetic Beads.
After reversal of protein-DNA cross-links, the DNA was eluted and purified.
The enrichment of particular DNA sequences was analyzed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using primers listed inTable 1.
DRIP was performed with modifications from previously described (15,17,59).
Briefly, genomic DNA extracted from U2OS or MCF7 cells was pretreated with 1:200 dilutions of RNase T1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, EN0541), ShortCut RNase III (New England Biolabs, M0245S), RNase A (Thermo Fisher Scientific, EN0531) at 37°C for 1 hour to reduce noise as the S9.6 antibody recognizes non–R-loop cellular RNAs (75). The genomic DNA was sonicated to an average size of 200 bp.
For immunoprecipitation, 7.5 μg of genomic DNA was incubated overnight at 4°C with 10 μl of S9.6 antibody or no antibody control in binding buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, 140 mM NaCl, and 0.05% Triton X-100) overnight at 4°C.
Dynabeads incubation, washes, and elution steps were carried out following the same procedure described for ChIP.
RNase H sensitivity was performed by adding 1.7 U of RNase H (New England Biolabs, M0297S) per microgram of genomic DNA for 2 hours or overnight at 37°C before the IP step.
Locus-specific DRIP signals were assessed by reverse transcription PCR using primers listed inTable 1and table S1.
S9.6 co-IP was performed as described previously (75), with modifications.
Briefly, genomic DNA was extracted from non–cross-linked cells and pretreated with a combination of RNases A, T1, and III and then was sonicated to an average size of 200 bp, following the same procedures in DRIP.
Genomic DNA (7.5 μg) was incubated overnight at 4°C with 10 μl of S9.6 antibody or immunoglobulin G and 20 μl of Dynabeads Protein A or Protein G (Invitrogen) in co-IP buffer overnight at 4°C.
Beads were washed three times with co-IP buffer and incubated with nuclear extraction pretreated with RNase A at 4°C overnight.
The beads were then washed three times with co-IP buffer and eluted for Western blot.
Either U2OS or MCF7 genomic DNA was collected and sonicated to an average size of 200 bp according to the same protocols as described in DRIP.
DNA fragments were diluted in TE buffer and pretreated with a combination of RNases A, T1, and III to remove single-stranded RNA/double-stranded RNA and spotted onto a positively charged nylon membrane.
RNase H sensitivity treatment was performed before spotting DNA onto the membrane.
Once dried, the membrane was ultraviolet (UV)–cross-linked and blocked in 5% milk/TBST at RT for 1 hour.
Membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C with mouse S9.6 antibodies (Kerafast S9.6, 0.5 μg/ml) or methylene blue (NYLM-RO, Roche).
Membranes were washed three times with TBST and incubated with a secondary antibody (anti-mouse HRP, 1:5000 in TBST) at RT for 2 hours before developing on a film using ECL Western Blotting Detection Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 34580).
U2OS cells with the indicated treatment were incubated with 10 μM EdU for 30 min.
After the click reaction, the cells were analyzed by flow cytometry to assess EdU incorporation.
Data were collected and analyzed using an Attune Acoustic Cytometer using 488-nm excitation and a 530/30 bandpass for detection of the EdU Alexa Fluor 488 azide and 405-nm excitation and a 450/40 bandpass for detection of the FxCycle Violet fluorescence.
For R-loop IF using the S9.6 antibody performed in cells, samples were prepared using a previously described protocol (40,46).
Briefly, U2OS and MCF7 cells were collected using trypsin and incubated with prewarmed KCl solution (75 mM) at 37°C for 12 min.
Cells were pelleted (1000 rpm, 5 min, 25°C) and resuspended in freshly made, ice-cold methanol:acetic acid (3:1) on ice for 20 min.
After one time wash with methanol:acetic acid (3:1), cells were spotted onto slides and incubated with blocking buffer [1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), 5% BSA, and 0.5% Triton X-100] for 1 hour at RT.
Enzymatic treatments were done before primary antibody incubation.
Cells were incubated with 1:200 dilutions of RNase T1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, EN0541), ShortCut RNase III (New England Biolabs, M0245S), RNase A (Thermo Fisher Scientific, EN0531), and/or RNase H (New England Biolabs, M0297S) at 37°C for 1 hour (75–77).
Samples were subsequently washed and incubated with primary S9.6 antibody (Karafast, ENH001, 1:1000) overnight at 4°C and then incubated with Alexa 488–conjugated secondary antibody for 45 min at RT.
Cells were stained with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and mounted using Vectorshield (Vector Laboratories).
R-loop intensity was quantified using the MetaMorph Microscopy Automation and Image Analysis Software 7.8 as previously described (35).
For R-loop IF in breast mammary gland samples, experiments were carried out according to a previous description (36). Briefly, freshly cut 3-μm formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples were performed with deparaffin, rehydration, and antigen unmasking.
Samples were then treated with 0.2× saline sodium citrate buffer for 20 min and incubated in a staining buffer (TBST with 0.1% BSA) for 10 min with rocking.
Enzymatic treatments with 1:200 dilutions of RNase T1, ShortCut RNase III, RNase A, and/or RNase H in staining buffer supplemented with 3 mM magnesium chloride were performed before incubation with the S9.6 Primary antibody (Karafast, ENH001, 1:100).
The following steps of washing and secondary antibody incubation were the same as in cell R-loop IF described above.
Samples were then mounted with DAPI and analyzed as described (35,36).
The relative fluorescence signal of R-loop was analyzed by ImageJ.
In situ PLAs were conducted in U2OS/MCF7 cells with the Duolink In Situ Red Starter Kit Mouse/Rabbit (MilliporeSigma, DUO92101) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, cells were fixed and incubated with the primary antibody as described in IF experiments.
The cells were treated with PLA probe incubation, ligation, and amplification.
Duolink In Situ Mounting Medium with DAPI was used for mounting cells.
The result from a Duolink PLA experiment was viewed using a fluorescence microscope with the appropriate filters for the detection of the fluorophore.
Various N-terminally 3xFAG-tagged and C-terminally His-tagged human AND-1 proteins (WT and mutants) and N-terminally 3xFAG-tagged human RNaseH1 (WT and D210N mutant) were purified from AND-1 KO HEK293T cells.
Plasmids were transfected into AND-1 KO HEK293T cells.
Cells were harvested 36 hours after transfection and lysed in NETN lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail for 30 min on ice, followed by sonication and clarified by centrifugation (12,000g for 10 min).
The supernatants were incubated with ANTI-FLAG M2 Affinity Agarose Gel (A2220, MilliporeSigma) at 4°C overnight.
The agarose gel was washed three times with NETN lysis buffer and subsequently eluted with FLAG Peptide (F3290, MilliporeSigma).
AND-1 proteins were concentrated using Ultracel-100 K centrifugal filters, and RNase H1 fractions were concentrated using Ultracel-30 K centrifugal filters and stored at −80°C in small aliquots.
The oligonucleotide sequences used to make R:D hybrids or R-loops were described previously (46). The RNA oligo was 5′-biotin labeled.
Oligos were annealed by heating to 95°C in a water bath for 5 min and slowly cooled down overnight in buffer H [90 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl2, and 50 mM NaCl].
Annealed substrates were separated on a 10% native PAGE gel at 4°C.
The corresponding gel band of the indicated annealed substrate was excised, purified, and stored at −20°C.
Oligonucleotides used for in vitro substrates were listed inTable 2.
For the R:D substrate, the biotin-labeled RNA oligo was annealed with oligo 4.
For the dsDNA substrate, the biotin-labeled oligo 3 was annealed with oligo 4.
For the R-loop substrate, the biotin-labeled RNA oligo was annealed with oligos 1 and 2.
For the D-loop substrate, the biotin-labeled oligo 3 was annealed with oligos 1 and 2.
EMSA was performed using the LightShift Chemiluminescent EMSA Kit (Thermo Scientific, 20148) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, R-loop substrates containing 5′-biotin–labeled RNA were incubated with various amounts of AND-1 at 30°C for 15 min (46). The resulting protein-substrate complexes were resolved on 6% PAGE and then transferred to Nylon Membrane.
After that, the transferred DNA was UV–cross-linked and detected by chemiluminescence.
The assay was preformed according to previous publications with modification (46,52,53).
Specifically, the assay to measure RNase H1 activity was performed in a 96 Well Black/Clear Bottom Plate (Thermo Scientific, no. 152036) and monitored by fluorescence stopped flow on SpectraMax i3x (Molecular Devices).
R:D hybrid substrate was synthesized using oligos of 5′-FAM–labeled RNA oligo and 3′-ROX–labeled DNA oligo shown inTable 2.
Then, the two strands were annealed by heating to 95°C and slowly cooling over a long period of time in annealing buffer [90 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl2, and 50 mM NaCl].
Annealed substrates were separated on a 10% native PAGE in Tris-Borate-EDTA (TBE) buffer at 4°C.
The gel band corresponding to the annealed substrate was excised, purified, and lastly eluted.
After annealing, the FAM moiety was quenched by the ROX moiety in close proximity.
Once RNase H1 cleaves the RNA strand within the R:D substrate, the FAM moiety can be detected at the excitation of 488 nm.
Experiments were conducted at 30°C in reaction buffer [25 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 5 mM MgCl2, BSA (50 μg/ml), and 50 mM KCl].
The concentration of R:D substrate was 50 nM, and RNase H1 and AND-1 protein concentrations varied from 0 to 10 nM and from 0 to 40 nM, respectively.
The indicated concentration of AND-1 and RNase H1 was preincubated with R:D substrate for 5 min at 30°C in a 50-μl system, followed by the addition of 50-μl 2× reaction buffer, and the fluorescence signal was monitored for 40 min using the Spectramax i3x machine with excitation at 488 nm and emission at 535 nm.
Control experiments included protein mixture alone or R:D substrates alone mixed with reaction buffer.
Data were analyzed and plotted using GraphPad Prism 10 software (GraphPad).
The assay was performed according to previous publications with modification (46,54,55).
R:D hybrid substrates were synthesized using oligos of 5′-FAM–labeled RNA oligo and DNA oligo 3 shown inTable 2.
For the R-loop substrates, the 5′-FAM–labeled RNA oligo was annealed with DNA oligos 1 and 2.
The indicated concentration of RNaseH1 was preincubated with varying amounts of AND-1 on ice for 10 min in reaction buffer [25 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2, BSA (50 μg/ml), and 50 mM KCl], followed by the addition of 1 μM R:D or R-loop substrates containing 5′-FAM–labeled RNA in the reaction.
The reactions were incubated at 37°C for indicated time and halted by addition of stop buffer [proteinase K (0.5 mg/ml), 5 mM EDTA, and 0.5% SDS] for 10 min at 37°C.
Each sample was mixed with denaturing PAGE gel loading buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, AM8547) and was analyzed by 12% denaturing PAGE with 7 M urea in 0.5× TBE buffer.
Gels were exposed at 600 OD in the Odyssey Fc imaging system (LICORbio) with Image Studio software and analyzed by ImageJ.
Five- to 6-week-old female BALB/c athymic nude mice of 20 to 25 g were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory.
Mice were subcutaneously injected with 4 × 106MCF7 (Y537S) cells into the dorsal flank and were randomly divided into four groups: control (saline), letrozole (20 mg/kg), CH3 (20 mg/kg), and combo (letrozole + CH3).
When the tumor volume reached about 100 mm3, mice were administered intraperitoneally with indicated drugs every 2 days for 4 weeks.
Tumor size and body weight were measured every 2 days.
The relative tumor volume was calculated using the formula:a× (b2)/2, for whichaandbrepresent the longest and shortest diameters, respectively (78). All the tissue and tumor samples were obtained 3 days after the final drug administration for subsequent evaluation.
All animal studies were conducted in accordance with National Institutes of Health (NIH) regulation concerning the care and use of experimental animals and with the approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the George Washington University (Washington, DC).
All animal studies were conducted in accordance with NIH regulations concerning the care and use of experimental animals and with the approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the George Washington University (Washington, DC).
All mice are on a C57BL/6J background.
To generateWdhd1loxP/loxPmice, the leftloxPand the rightloxPwere knocked into intron 7 and intron 8 of theWdhd1gene using CRISPR-Cas9 technology (Applied StemCell).
Correct insertion of the loxP sites was confirmed by PCR and DNA sequencing.
Floxed founder mice were backcrossed to WT mice for at least five generations.
All animals were weaned between 21 to 28 days old.
Genotyping ofWdhd1loxP/loxPmice was performed by PCR using tail snip DNA and primers listed inTable 3.
TheWdhd1loxP/loxPallele was detected by PCR amplification of the leftloxPsite with primers F1a and R1a, yielding the PCR product of 358 bp for the floxed allele (324 bp for WT).
The rightloxPsite was amplified with primers F2a and R2a, yielding a 307-bp PCR product for the floxed allele (273 bp for WT).
For the above PCRs, thermocycling conditions consisted of one step of 5 min at 94°C, 35 cycles of 10 s at 94°C, 20 s at 58°C, and 30 s at 72°C, followed by 5 min at 72°C.
The mouse T819 is equivalent to human T826, so we generated theWdhd1T819Aknock-in mouse line by changing Codon 819 from ACC>GCA using CRISPR-Cas9 technology (Applied StemCell).
Briefly, a mixture of guide RNA (gRNA; 5′-TTCTTTCTCTTCTTCTGACTGGG-3′), spCas9 mRNA, and single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotide donor was injected into zygotes collected from C57BL/6J mice.
F0 founders were identified by PCR and confirmed by Sanger sequencing using F3a and R3a primers listed inTable 3.
They were then crossed with C57Bl/6J WT mice to produce F1 pups.
MEFs were derived from WT (Wdhd1WT),Wdhd1loxP/loxP, andWdhd1T819AE13.5 embryos using previously described protocols (56).Wdhd1−/−MEF cells were obtained by infectingWdhd1loxP/loxPMEFs with adenovirus expressing cre recombinase (Ad-CMV-Cre; Vector Biolaboratories, no. 1045).
Following infection, clones were isolated by limiting dilution or colony picking and screened by PCR for the excision of Exon 8 (79).
Seven- to 8-week-old mice (Wdhd1WTandWdhd1T819A) were intraperitoneally injected with APH once a week for 10 weeks to induce R-loops in vivo.
Inguinal mammary glands were isolated and fixed in 8% formaldehyde solution for 36 to ~48 hours.
Next, the fixing solution was removed, and the tissue was rinsed in a washing solution containing 30% PBS and 70% ethanol, and then stored at −20°C.
The tissues were embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 3-μm thickness before IF staining of R-loop, and the relative fluorescence intensity was analyzed by ImageJ.
Data analysis and statistics were done using GraphPad Prism 10 software.
Data are represented as the means ± SD;Pvalues were calculated with two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) or unpaired two-tailed Student’sttests.
*P< 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
We are grateful to J. Shao for providing the MCF7 mutant cell lines (Y537S, Y537N, and D538G).
Our thanks also go to R. Fernandes for sharing the Spectramax i3x machine.
We would like to extend our appreciation to C. Peng and M. Jameel Mughal for valuable support throughout this work.
Funding:This work was partially supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health (CA288337, CA258357, and CA247684 to W.Z.
; CA270153 to H.P.
; and CA282303 to R.L.)
and a grant from the McCormick Genomic and Proteomic Center.
Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.