Dignity is crucial for family members providing care to individuals with dementia, yet its conceptualization may vary based on periods since onset and family relationships.
This study employed quantitative text analysis to elucidate family members' concepts of dignity in care, considering both the time elapsed since the dementia diagnosis and the nature of family relationships.
Concepts of dignity were gathered from 120 Japanese family members through an open‐ended question.
Morphemes extracted from the responses, along with family relationship attributes and periods after diagnosis, were plotted on dimensions of correspondence analysis.
Hypotheses about these concepts were formulated based on the plots and content analysis of the responses.
Fisher's exact test was used to compare the frequency of morphemes across different attributes.
Three hypotheses of concepts of dignity related to periods after diagnosis and six related to family relationships were established.
Significant differences in morpheme frequencies connected with the concepts were observed among attributes such as periods, spouse versus non‐spouse, blood relative versus non‐blood relative, and sex.
For instance, the frequency on ‘Do not deny or hurt, and manage symptoms’ was more during the short period after the diagnosis than the other periods while the frequencies regarding ‘Accept her/him, esteem her/him as an adult or a member of society’ was more during the long period than the other periods.
While opinions did express challenges in maintaining dignity, these did not show significant variation across attributes.
Different morpheme frequencies of concepts of dignity among the attributes suggest that the conceptualization varies with the periods since the diagnosis and family relationships.
Common challenges in practicing dignified care suggest that all family members experience conflicts between ideals and reality.
It is essential for professionals to recognise these differing ideals and shared conflicts.
Further cross‐cultural comparisons of these findings are needed.
The number of people with dementia is increasing by approximately 10 million annually on a global scale [1].
The ‘Response to Dementia 2017–2025’ states that a dementia‐friendly society requires an inclusive and accessible community environment to ensure dignity in care for individuals with dementia [2].
Providing person‐centred care necessitates finding creative ways to preserve dignity and make individuals with dementia feel valued [3].
The quality of care depends on how those around individuals with dementia respond, influenced by the interplay between dementia and the evolving culture of person‐centred care [4].
Understanding the perceptions of dignity in care among those surrounding individuals with dementia is essential for maintaining their dignity.
Qualitative studies frequently explore perspectives from families.
Many families wish to care for their loved ones until the end; however, as dementia severity and care burdens increase, they may consider transitioning their loved one to a nursing home.
A study [5] that interviewed family members before and after institutionalisation identified undignified care themes, such as a lack of involvement of individuals with dementia, as central issues.
In contrast, dignified care themes addressed these concerns.
A narrative review [6] of dignity concepts for individuals with dementia in nursing homes, based on interviews with informal caregivers (mostly family members), found similar themes.
Families feared undignified care in institutions, characterised by aspects such as ‘stigmatisation and objectivation’ or ‘scarcity and hastiness’.
Conversely, dignified care themes included ‘personalisation’, ‘respect, attentiveness, and encouragement’ and ‘attention to physical care and bodily gestures’.
As dementia progresses, family members face end‐of‐life care for their loved ones.
Two studies [7,8] extracted components of dignity at this period.
These studies revealed that families wish to care for their loved ones as individuals, maintaining ‘personalisation’ [6], treating them with respect and ‘dignity’ and ‘maintaining the person within’, even at the final period.
Thus, family members desire to care for their loved ones with dignity, and expect institutions to do likewise.
Moreover, the efforts of family members to maintain the dignity of their loved ones are linked to the preservation of their own dignity [9,10].
Families strive to ensure the dignity of their loved ones is upheld; however, they simultaneously face physical and psychological burdens of care.
To secure their own dignity, family carers often deceive loved ones with dementia and struggle with feelings of dishonesty [9].
One study showed that a challenge faced by women is loneliness, with no one truly understanding their experiences as caregivers [10].
However, peer support groups may help alleviate this loneliness, allowing them to share experiences and information [10].
Qualitative studies targeting family carers and dignity in dementia care have examined specific periods from the onset, revealing themes related to dignity and familial conflicts.
However, a comprehensive understanding is yet to be achieved.
Dementia presents distinct challenges during various periods, beginning from the initial diagnosis.
It is essential to ascertain family members' perceptions of dignity at each period from the onset, particularly when care professionals aim to provide continuous support.
Furthermore, families comprise various relationships, and family members may hold differing perspectives based on their roles, such as spouse, child, blood/in‐law relations and sex.
To date, no studies have explored dignity in care from an all‐encompassing perspective.
This study aimed to address these research gaps and provide a comprehensive understanding of family members' concepts of dignity in dementia care, considering the different periods following diagnosis and the diversity of family relationships, using a large sample size and employing multivariate and qualitative text analysis.
It should be noted that it is difficult to identify the time of onset of dementia through interviews with family members.
Therefore, we instead used time since the diagnosis as an independent variable.
We distributed a questionnaire to 196 family members who accompanied outpatients with dementia at two geriatric clinics and one geriatric hospital in Ibaraki, Japan.
Of these, 123 participants responded to the questionnaire.
The data from 120 participants were analysed, excluding three participants who did not provide information on both family relationships and the periods of time following the dementia diagnosis (valid response rate: 61.2%).
Table1presents the characteristics of the participants and their relatives with dementia.
Characteristics of family members and their relatives with dementia (n= 120).
The following categories of homes are designated by the Japanese government: Care Home: A specialised facility providing 24‐h care for residents who generally require non‐medical assistance.
Group Home: A specialised facility for residents with dementia who cannot live independently but can manage some activities of daily living in a supportive environment.
Each unit accommodates fewer than 10 residents.
Nursing Home: A specialised facility for residents requiring medical and/or rehabilitation care.
Others: Living arrangements not included in the above categories, which may involve privately managed homes not covered by long‐term care insurance.
Participants were informed that maintaining dignity is crucial in the care of people with dementia.
They were then asked a single question: ‘What comes to mind when you hear the term “dignity for people with dementia”?’ An open‐ended question was chosen to encourage family members to express their honest opinions in their own words, allowing them ample time for reflection.
An anonymous questionnaire was distributed to each participant after obtaining informed consent.
We used KH Coder ver.
3 Alpha.16 [11,12], a systemic software for quantitative content analysis and text mining, in conjunction with morpheme analysers and statistical software (R).
Originally developed in Japanese, KH Coder is now available in multiple languages, with an English version accessible [13].
The software divides responses to open‐ended questions into morphemes and converts the extracted morphemes into codes.
It allows users to explore locational relationships between morphemes and independent variables across dimensions created based on their chi‐square distances using correspondence analysis [14,15,16].
Through this analysis, we examined the relationships between morphemes expressed in responses regarding concepts of dignity and the attributes of independent variables (family relationships and periods following dementia diagnosis).
Morphemes with a frequency of five or more (the default setting of KH Coder) and cases without missing values for each independent variable were analysed.
As the analysis required a sufficient number of cases for each attribute, the data from ‘grandchild' (n= 1) were excluded, and the data from ‘husbands’ (n= 9) were combined with that of ‘wives’ under the ‘spouses’ attribute.
Ultimately, four family relationships (spouses, sons, daughters and daughters‐in‐law) were used.
Regarding the periods following dementia diagnosis, the data were divided into three categories: a short time after diagnosis (30 months or less), a long time after diagnosis (more than 30 months but 60 months or less), and a very long time after diagnosis (more than 60 months).
Next, content analysis was conducted based on the morphemes associated with the attributes plotted on the dimensions created by correspondence analysis, as well as the sentences containing these morphemes [17,18].
Two authors (K.Y.
independently formulated hypotheses regarding the characteristic concepts of dignity for each attribute and developed final hypotheses through discussion.
During this process, the authors manually reviewed actual sentences to determine whether the usage of morphemes was positive or negative (e.g., ‘deny’ or ‘not deny’), as the morpheme analyser extracted morphemes without discrimination, and correspondence analysis represented them simply on the dimensions (e.g., just ‘deny’).
Finally, Fisher's exact test and a post hoc test were employed to determine whether the characteristic morphemes, including those relevant to the hypotheses, were significantly more prevalent in a particular attribute compared to others within each independent variable [17,18], using data sheets generated by KH Coder.
In other words, it was verified whether the concept of dignity was characteristic of the specified attribute.
In the post hoc tests, adjustedpvalues were calculated using Holm's method for multiple testing [19].
The software EZR on R commander [20] was used for this analysis, which is also available as the ‘RcmdrPlugin.EZR’ package [21].
Figure1illustrates the plotted morphemes and family relationships according to the scores of the first and second dimensions created by correspondence analysis.
Generally, more common morphemes are clustered near the origin of the two axes.
However, morphemes more closely related to specific attributes of family relationships are plotted nearer to those attributes.
The contribution rates of the first and second dimensions were 48.01% and 33.98%, respectively, with a cumulative contribution rate of 81.99%.
‘Sons’ was plotted on the positive coordinate of horizontal Dimension 1, while ‘Daughters’, ‘Daughters‐in‐law’ and ‘Spouses’ were on the negative coordinate.
‘Spouses’ included wives and husbands, although most were wives.
Thus, this dimension appears to relate to sex: men (+) and women (−).
Regarding vertical Dimension 2, ‘Spouses’ was the highest, with ‘Daughters’ and ‘Sons’ at intermediate points, and ‘Daughters‐in‐law’ at the lowest.
Therefore, this dimension appears to be associated with the length of the family relationship: longer (+) and shorter (−).
In summary, it reflects the duration of the family relationship.
Correspondence analysis of morphemes related to dignity and family relationships.Note:The figure illustrates a correspondence analysis of independent variables (attributes of family relationships) and morphemes associated with dignity in care, plotted across two dimensions (Dimension 1: sex; Dimension 2: duration of the family relationship).
White squares indicate the positions of family relationship attributes, while black dots represent morphemes derived from opinions.
Areas A, a, B, b, C, and D highlight clusters of morphemes that inform the hypotheses on the components of dignity.
The morphemes that were more closely related to each family relationship included: ‘Human’, ‘Wish’, ‘Point out’, ‘Facility’, ‘Personality’, ‘Talk with’, ‘Disease', ‘Family’ and ‘Like the past’ (Area A in Figure1), which were plotted nearer to ‘Spouses’ than other family attributes, based on their directions and distances from the coordinate.
Examples of how each morpheme was used in participants' opinions include: accept her/him as a ‘Human’; understand her/his ‘Wish’, even though understanding might be challenging; recognise that she/he dislikes it when people ‘Point out’ that she/he forgot; acknowledge that her/his feelings are hurt when staff members in the ‘Facility’ treat her/him in ways she/he dislikes, as she/he is sensitive to their facial expressions and detests being treated like a child; accept her/him even if it is apparent that she/he no longer possesses her/his past ‘Personality’; help her/him participate in conversations and ‘Talk with’ people naturally, and seek her/his advice; do not confuse the symptoms of the ‘Disease’ with her/his characteristics or nature; do not make her/him feel isolated within the ‘Family’ and help her/him continue her/his life ‘Like the past’ when she/he was well.
Based on these morphemes and examples, we formulated a hypothesis that spouses conceive dignity as ‘Humanity, following her/his wishes, avoiding institutionalisation, and maintaining the same family and life as in the past’.
The morphemes ‘Esteem’, ‘Life history’, ‘Parent’, ‘Necessary’, ‘Heart’, ‘Normal’ and ‘Challenging’ (Area B in Figure1) were plotted closer to ‘Daughters’ than other family relationships.
Examples include: ‘Esteem’ her/his intentions; value care and relationships considering her/his ‘Life history’ and trajectory; have greater recognition of my ‘Parent’ as an individual; cherish what she/he considers ‘Necessary’ within the family; understand that her/his ‘Heart’ is easily hurt; interact with her/him in a ‘Normal’ and emotional manner and when her/his behaviour is ‘Challenging' to me, I often cope without considering dignity, which I later regret.
From these morphemes and examples, daughters may perceive dignity as ‘Esteem my parent, considering her/his heart and life history, treating her/him in a normal manner, but finding it challenging' as a hypothesis.
Near ‘Daughters‐in‐law’, the morphemes ‘Careful/Polite’, ‘Toileting/Excretion’, ‘Harm/Hurt’, ‘Judge’, ‘Assist’, ‘Bathing’, and ‘Repeat’ (Area C in Figure1) were identified.
Examples of opinions include: listen to her/him ‘Carefully’; make every effort to avoid making her/him feel embarrassed or uncomfortable, for example, by providing private care such as helping with ‘Toileting’ promptly; be ‘Careful’ not to ‘Hurt’ her/him with words or actions when ‘Assisting’ her/him while eating or ‘Toileting’; recognise the difficulty in ‘Judging’ differences between symptoms and her/his personality; acknowledge that, owing to my position within the family, I could not often ‘Assist’ her/him much with private care such as ‘Bathing’ or ‘Toileting’, but I could help more closely if I were her/his blood daughter; and cope with her/him as much as possible, even when she/he ‘Repeats’ the same questions.
Considering these morphemes and examples, we formulated a hypothesis that daughters‐in‐law may perceive dignity as ‘Be careful, do no harm, particularly in private care settings’.
‘Respect’, ‘Society’, ‘Free’, ‘Forgetfulness’, ‘Explain’, ‘Health’, ‘Infringe upon’, and ‘Right’ (Area D in Figure1) were plotted near ‘Sons’.
Examples include: her/his disease has now progressed to a point that resembles a return to childhood, but continue to do things with her/him, with ‘Respect’ for a senior who has lived long and gained much experience; care for her/him humanely with ‘Respect’ and gratitude for what she/he contributed to ‘Society’ and the family; esteem her/his intentions, allow her/him autonomy and help her/him to remain ‘Free’; she/he cannot avoid ‘Forgetfulness’ due to ageing, so ‘Explain’ things to her/him from her/his perspective; keep her/his room and clothes clean, store leftovers in her/his fridge, and help maintain her/his ‘Health’; do not ‘Infringe upon’ her/his ‘Right’ to live or the ‘Right’ to be free from violence.
Based on these morphemes and examples, sons may perceive dignity as ‘Respect, freedom, good health, clear explanations, and protection of her/his rights’.
Table2presents the differences in the frequency of morphemes related to the hypotheses of concepts of dignity by family members.
Spouses used the morphemes related to the concept of ‘Humanity, following her/his wishes, avoiding institutionalisation, and maintaining the same family and life as in the past’ significantly more than daughters‐in‐law (p= 0.006).
Furthermore, spouses used the morphemes ‘Human’, ‘Point out’, ‘Wish’ and ‘Facility’ (‘a’ in Figure1), related to the concept of ‘Humanity, following her/his wishes, avoiding institutionalisation’, which is a core part of the concept of Area ‘A’, significantly more frequently than daughters‐in‐law and sons (p= 0.030 andp= 0.010, respectively).
Frequency of morphemes related to concepts of dignity by family relationship.
Note:Themes were formulated based on morphemes included in areas (A, a, B, b, C, and D) in Figure1.
Each area is shown in parentheses in themes in this table.
Regarding morphemes related to the concept of ‘Esteem my parent, considering her/his heart and life history, treating her/him in a normal way, but finding it challenging', daughters had the highest frequency of use (70.37%).
However, there was no statistical difference in the use of these morphemes among all family relationships.
Nevertheless, daughters used the morphemes ‘Esteem’, ‘Necessary’, ‘Heart’, ‘Life history’ and ‘Parent’ (‘b’ in Figure1), which are related to ‘Esteem my parent, considering her/his heart and life history’, which is a core part of the concept of Area ‘B', significantly more than spouses and daughters‐in‐law (p= 0.010 andp= 0.011, respectively).
Figure2illustrates the plotted morphemes and periods following a dementia diagnosis in the first and second dimensions of correspondence analysis.
The contribution rates of the first and second dimensions were 59.97% and 40.03%, respectively, resulting in a cumulative contribution rate of 100.00%.
In horizontal Dimension 1, morphemes related to the individual's past life, contributions, and appreciation, such as ‘Life history’, ‘Society’ and ‘Pride', appear to be higher.
Conversely, morphemes associated with the individual's present condition and treatment, such as (not) ‘Infringe' her/his ‘Right’, ‘Necessary’, ‘Gentle/Loving', or ‘Careful/Polite’, seem to be lower.
Therefore, Dimension 1 appears to relate to considering the person's present (−) versus past (+).
Regarding the vertical Dimension 2, ‘Accept’, ‘Listen to’ and ‘Respect’ were plotted on positive points, while ‘Deny’ and ‘Harm/Hurt’ were plotted on negative points.
These verbs were used in negative forms in actual sentences: ‘Not deny’ and ‘Not harm/hurt’.
They seem to express a controlled effort to avoid denying the person's statements or actions, or to avoid harming the person's feelings.
In other words, the negative coordinate of Dimension 2 appears to relate to a negative acceptance of the person's identity, while the positive coordinate reflects positive acceptance.
Correspondence analysis of morphemes related to dignity and periods after dementia diagnosis.Note:The figure presents a correspondence analysis of independent variables (attributes of periods following a dementia diagnosis) and morphemes associated with dignity in care, mapped across two dimensions (Dimension 1: The present and past of the person; Dimension 2: Negative versus positive acceptance).
White squares indicate the positions of family attributes, while black dots represent morphemes derived from opinions.
Areas E, F, and G highlight clusters of morphemes that contribute to the hypotheses on the components of dignity.
Morphemes more associated with each period were also identified.
‘Deny’, ‘Heart’, ‘Live', ‘Symptom’, ‘Harm/Hurt’ and ‘Word’ (Area E in Figure2) were plotted near the ‘Short’ period after diagnosis.
Examples include: avoid ‘Denying’ her/his ‘Word’ as much as possible; understand that her/his ‘Heart’ is easily ‘Hurt’; treat her/him with great respect as a senior who has ‘Lived’ a much longer life; view ‘Symptoms’ as temporary agitations and avoid criticising, speaking gently until the agitations subside.
From these morphemes and examples, we hypothesised that family members during this period think, ‘Do not deny or hurt, and manage symptoms’.
‘Society’, ‘Accept’, ‘Explain’, ‘Wish’, ‘Free’, ‘Child’ and ‘Point out’ (Area F in Figure2) were closer to the ‘Long’ period after diagnosis than to other periods.
Examples include: ‘Accept’ what she/he does in the usual way as in the past; she/he dislikes being treated as a ‘Child’.
Examples of ‘Wish’ and ‘Point out’ were already mentioned under ‘Spouses’, and examples of ‘Society’, ‘Explain’ and ‘Free' were noted in ‘Sons’.
Based on these morphemes and examples, family members during this period might think, ‘Accept her/him, esteem her/him as an adult or a member of society’.
‘Possible’, ‘Watch over’, ‘Facility’, ‘Mind’, ‘Gentle/Loving’ ‘Right’, and ‘Infringe upon’ (Area G in Figure2) were closer to the ‘Very long’ period after diagnosis than to the other periods.
Examples include: only ‘Watch over’ her/him for as long as ‘Possible’, if there is minimal danger of death or injury; explore her/his ‘Mind' and make her/him smile; speak to her/him ‘Gently’ and politely even if she/he does not understand.
The example of ‘Facility’ was already mentioned under ‘Spouses’, and examples of ‘Right’ and ‘Infringe upon’ were noted under ‘Sons’.
From these morphemes and examples, we hypothesised that family members during this period think, ‘As much as possible, follow her/his wishes, watch over, be gentle, and protect their rights’.
Table3shows the differences in the frequency of morphemes related to the hypotheses of dignity concepts by periods following diagnosis.
From Fisher's exact test and the post hoc test, family members during the short period after diagnosis used morphemes related to the concept of ‘Do not deny or hurt, and manage symptoms’ significantly more than those during other periods: the long period,p= 0.006; the very long period,p= 0.013.
Family members during the long period after diagnosis used morphemes related to the concept of ‘Accept her/him, esteem her/him as an adult or a member of society’ significantly more than those during other periods: the short period,p= 0.036; the very long period,p= 0.049.
Family members during the very long period after diagnosis used morphemes related to the concept of ‘As much as possible, follow the wishes of the person with dementia, watch over, be gentle, and protect their rights’ significantly more than those during the long time after diagnosis (p= 0.007).
Frequency of morphemes related to concepts of dignity across different periods after diagnosis.
Note:Themes were formulated based on morphemes included in areas (E, F, and G) in Figure2.
Each area is shown in parentheses in themes in this table.
More than 30 months, but 60 months or less after the diagnosis.
For example, ‘for as long as possible', ‘as much as possible'.
Not all opinions regarding dignity were positive.
Negative morphemes indicating challenges to dignified care appeared in Figures1and2: ‘Challenging’, ‘Be overwhelmed’, and ‘Get angry’.
Table4shows the frequency of these morphemes across two independent variables.
The overall percentages were 27.73% in family relationships and 28.45% in periods after dementia diagnosis.
However, no significant difference was observed among family relationships.
Regarding periods after diagnosis, no significant difference was found, although the percentage of morphemes during the long period after diagnosis appeared to be lower than those in other periods.
Frequency of morphemes related to challenges in practicing care with dignity.
Search words and search strategies: ‘Challenging’ or ‘Be overwhelmed’ or ‘Get angry’.
More than 30 months, but 60 months or less after the diagnosis.
This study employed quantitative text analysis to elucidate various concepts related to dignity among family relationships and periods after the diagnosis of dementia, which were previously unclear.
Two key findings emerged: first, concepts of dignity varied based on whether family members are spouses or not and blood relatives or not, and their sex.
Second, these concepts differed according to the time elapsed since the dementia diagnosis.
Regarding family relationships, the frequency of morphemes associated with the concept of ‘Humanity, following wishes, and avoiding institutionalisation’ was highest among spouses.
Spouses, who live with the individual with dementia for the longest duration, aim to maintain their loved one's humanity, despite the progression of dementia.
They may place great value on respecting their partner's wishes and may be reluctant to consider institutional care due to concerns about it being inhumane.
Daughters expressed similar concepts to spouses, as evidenced by a non‐significantly different frequency of morphemes.
Contrastingly, daughters‐in‐law and sons showed significant differences.
As most spouses of individuals with dementia are women, there may be minimal differences between wives and biological daughters in terms of perspective.
These concepts may reflect the emotions of women who have a long‐standing family history with the individual with dementia.
The frequency of morphemes related to the concept of ‘Esteem my parent, consider her/his heart or life history’ was highest among daughters.
To maintain their parents' esteem, many daughters avoid actions that could hurt their parents' feelings and choose words and activities that reflect their parents' life history.
This concept likely reflects the emotional connections of children with their parents, as the frequency of morphemes used by sons was not significantly different from that of daughters.
Conversely, the frequency of morphemes related to ‘Be careful, do no harm, particularly in private care settings’ was highest among daughters‐in‐law, as many of them may focus on their parent‐in‐law's emotions to ensure they are not overwhelmed in private care settings; this could indicate significant pressure and a need for external support, including from care professionals.
Unlike spouses and blood children, daughters‐in‐law do not have the same depth of knowledge about their parents‐in‐laws' past.
The traditional cultural expectation in Japan for them to support their parents‐in‐law may influence their concepts of dignity.
An ethnocultural study in Israel showed variations in perspectives on dignity and autonomy among Arabs and Russians [22].
While the study identified general characteristics of dignity across ethnicities, it did not explore differences among family relationships, highlighting the need for more comparative research.
Women in the current study frequently mentioned emotional aspects of dignity, such as ‘Wish’ and ‘Harm/Hurt’.
In contrast, sons used morphemes related to ‘Respect, freedom, good health, good explanations, and protection of rights’ more frequently than other family members, focusing on problem‐solving and preventing infringements on rights.
This finding aligns with a systematic review indicating that women employ more emotion‐focused coping strategies, while men use problem‐focused strategies [23].
Concepts of dignity varied across the periods since the dementia diagnosis.
Family members may strive to avoid denying the experiences or actions of their loved ones during the short period after diagnosis but might shift to a more accepting stance as the disease progresses.
This shift parallels findings in a synthesis of spouses' experiences, which described adaptation, acceptance and coping with change [24].
The concept of ‘watching over’ during the very long period after diagnosis overlaps with ‘supervision and care’ identified in previous research [5].
In this study, approximately 30% of family members used morphemes related to challenges in maintaining dignity, a noteworthy proportion.
Previous research indicates that efforts to uphold the dignity of individuals with dementia are linked to preserving the dignity of family members themselves [9,10].
Family members may find some personal satisfaction in their caregiving roles but concurrently face ongoing challenges.
Care professionals should support family members in maintaining their own dignity, as well as that of their loved ones, tailored to the specific periods after diagnosis.
For instance, in the early post‐diagnosis period, professionals should listen to family members struggling with the discrepancy between past and present realities, offer understanding and avoid denial.
They should address conflicts between maintaining dignity and managing challenges, encourage reliance on professional services, and provide additional support.
This study's main limitation is the use of a single open‐ended question without follow‐up questions.
The extent to which the participants were also involved in caregiving was not asked, although the extent of the experience could influence their answers.
Further research with larger samples is also necessary to examine differences between husbands and wives.
Moreover, more studies are needed to confirm whether the findings are consistent in different regions, including rural, suburban and metropolitan areas because there are studies suggesting differences of hours of caregiving [25], and the financial barriers and caregiving‐related difficulties [26] between rural and urban areas.
Additionally, it remains unclear if the characteristics of daughters‐in‐law are specific to Japanese culture.
More global studies are needed.
Despite its limitations, this study highlighted differences in concepts of dignity among various family relationships and at different periods following a dementia diagnosis, which is a notable strength of this research.
The findings underscored the importance of delivering dignified care to individuals with dementia, taking into account the diversity of family relationships and the time elapsed since the dementia diagnosis.
Although family members recognise the value of dignity, their descriptions frequently reveal the challenges they face in maintaining it.
Family members may hold ideals of dignified care and strive to implement these ideals with regard to their relative who has dementia, yet they often encounter conflicts between these ideals and the realities of daily caregiving.
We conclude that care professionals should provide psychological and social support to families from a holistic and integrated perspective, to prevent caregiver burnout and alleviate the burdens associated with caregiving.