Chronic and end‐of‐life pain in children is underreported and undermanaged.
Current guidelines for pediatric chronic pain include medical and interventional modalities; however, the inclusion of neurosurgical treatments is uncommon and inconsistent.
This systematic review presents the literature, and we provide recommendations for the role of neurosurgical procedures in treating chronic and end‐of‐life pain in children.
A systematic review was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta‐analyses (PRISMA) guidelines using three databases: PubMed, Embase, and Scopus.
We included 40 studies presenting neurosurgical procedures for the treatment of chronic and end‐of‐life pain in children.
Thirty‐one (77.5%) manuscripts focused on the treatment of neuropathic pain, five (12.5%) focused on nociceptive pain, and four (10%) treated mixed pain conditions.
The most common neurosurgical procedure was intrathecal opioid therapy via pump placement (29.3%), followed by spinal cord stimulation (26.8%).
Neuropathic pain syndromes were primarily treated with neurostimulation (58%), demonstrating good efficacy.
Ablative procedures (40%) were most effective for nociceptive pain syndromes.
Both chordotomy and intrathecal pumps provided subjective pain relief for mixed pain syndromes.
The quantification of procedural efficacy, including pain outcomes and grading scales, varied significantly across studies.
Neurosurgical treatments for chronic pediatric pain are safe, although broad efficacy cannot be determined due to sparse literature and inadequately quantified pain responses.
Guidelines for escalating chronic and end‐of‐life pain management in pediatric patients should be updated to include neurosurgical treatments and appropriate outcome scales.
Focused research on appropriate patients, available neurosurgical therapies, and pediatric outcomes is warranted.
Comprehensive reviews of the neurosurgical treatment of pain in adults stipulate indications and outcomes across procedures and pain syndromes; however, this is entirely lacking for children.5We systematically review the existing literature regarding the neurosurgical treatment of chronic and end‐of‐life pain in pediatric populations and provide recommendations for neurosurgical procedures in practice.
All publications from the initial search were imported into EndNote (Clarivate Analytics, Philadelphia, PA), and duplicates were excluded.
The deduplicated articles were screened for relevance by title and abstract by two authors (SA and GB).
Articles progressing to full‐text review were screened for final inclusion according to the following predetermined inclusion criteria: (1) published in or translated into the English language, (2) available full text, (3) pediatric population (<25 years of age) with chronic pain, (4) neurosurgical therapy for the primary purpose of pain control, and (5) provided outcomes of neurosurgical procedures.
The outcomes of treatment included complication rates and efficacy determined by improvement in pain scales.
Articles were screened independently by two reviewers (SA and GB) through Rayyan (https://rayyan.qcri.org/).
All disagreements were discussed and resolved by the reviewers.
Data from included studies were extracted independently and cross‐checked for accuracy by authors (SA and GB).
Article information including bibliographic data, study design, number of patients, condition, type of pain, procedure, and outcomes—efficacy and complications—were reviewed.
Studies were grouped into three categories based on the type of pain (neuropathic, nociceptive, or mixed).
The type of pain was determined in the following tiered system: (1) reported within the study manuscript, (2) pain condition with known etiology, and (3) classified by authors through standard definitions of pain types.
Any manuscript needing to be classified by authors was reviewed by a senior author (JSR) for accuracy.
The primary outcome was efficacy of the neurosurgical procedure to treat pain.
Efficacy was determined for studies that reported numerical pain scores pre‐ and postoperatively.
Treatment was determined effective if there was a ≥50% reduction in the numeric pain score and ineffective if there was a <50% reduction.
Studies that did not report a numeric pain score or had missing data were classified as “not quantified.” Subjective data on the effect on pain control were collected, but these data were not used to determine efficacy.
Secondary outcomes included both intraoperative and postoperative complications.
Descriptive analysis was performed in Excel.
Critical appraisal of all included studies was conducted by assessing the risk of bias using the Risk Of Bias In Non‐Randomized Studies—of Interventions (ROBINS‐I) tool and quality using the Grading of Study Design Quality framework as described in another study.12,13Two reviewers (SA, GB) assessed the risk of bias and quality of each study independently, and disagreements were resolved by a third reviewer (NV).
A total of 3492 articles were identified: 990 from PubMed, 915 from Scopus, and 1587 from Embase.
858 duplicate articles were removed, and 2634 articles were screened by title and abstract.
After initial title and abstract screening, 139 full‐text articles were assessed for eligibility and 40 articles were found to be eligible (FigureS1).14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53Study characteristics are reported in Table1.
The study periods ranged from 1992 to 2023.
The majority of studies were case reports (72.5%) followed by case series (12.5%), retrospective cohorts (10%), prospective cohorts (2.5%), and randomized clinical trials (2.5%).
The number of patients in each study ranged from 1 to 88.
In total, there were 281 pediatric participants with chronic pain who received neurosurgical treatment.
The overall risk of bias in this study was serious, and the overall quality of evidence was low due to the prevalence of case reports and lack of randomized control trials included.
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CRPS, chronic regional pain syndrome; CRPS‐I, chronic regional pain syndrome type 1; DN4, Douleur Neuropathique 4; DREZ, dorsal root entry zone; NRS, Numeric Rating Scale; PPP, Pediatric Pain Profile; VAS, Visual Analogue Scale; VNS, Verbal Numeric Scale; VRS, Verbal Rating Scale; UK, United Kingdom; USA, United States of America.
Abbreviations: CRPS, chronic regional pain syndrome.
Funnel plot of pain diagnoses reported in the included studies, from most commonly (top) to least commonly (bottom) reported.
ACNES, anterior cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome; CRPS, chronic regional pain syndrome; NTOS, neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome.
*other includes studies (Aram 2001, Bakr 2022, and Kim 2018) including patients with multiple etiologies of chronic pain these include cancer/metastatic disease, hematologic conditions, severe trauma causing lasting injury, chronic low back pain, spinal cord injury, musculoskeletal conditions, cerebral palsy.
Funnel plot of neurosurgical procedures for pain reported in the included studies, from most commonly (top) to least commonly (bottom) reported.
DREZ, dorsal root entry zone; DRG, dorsal root ganglion; MM, midline myelotomy.
Reported pain outcomes across studies were heterogeneous, with both qualitative and quantitative measures used (Table3).
The most common methods for reporting pain outcomes were qualitative measures, including pain relief (47.5%) and functional status (47.5%).
Six quantitative assessments were used, with the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) being the most frequent (40.0%), followed by the Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) (12.5%), the Karnofsky Performance Scale (5.0%), the Verbal Rating Scale (VRS) (2.5%), the Verbal Numeric Scale (VNS) (2.5%), and Douleur Neuropathique (DN4) (2.5%).
Efficacy of neurosurgical procedures reported in the included studies.
The first column (dark blue, left) indicates the type of pain (neuropathic, nociceptive, or mixed) and the number of neurosurgical procedures by study employed.
The middle column (light blue, middle) reports the type of procedure.
The last column (right) reports the efficacy, with effective indicated in green, not quantified in yellow, and not effective in red.
Efficacy was determined using only quantitative measures of pain control, defining effectiveness as a ≥50% reduction in the numeric pain score.
DBS = deep brain stimulation; DREZ, dorsal root entry zone; PRF, pulsed radiofrequency; SCS, spinal cord stimulation.
Abbreviations: DREZ, dorsal root entry zone; NRS, Numeric Rating Scale; VAS, Visual Analogue Scale; VNS, Verbal Numeric Scale.
Firstly, an individually randomised double‐blinded study design was not feasible due to logistic and organisational constraints.
Therefore, we opted for group randomisation as the most suitable alternative, classifying this study as quasi‐experimental.
Additionally, there was a disparity in the number of participants consenting to share their anonymised SAQ formative results between the study arms.
This disparity might have influenced the outcomes and reduced our ability to detect subtle differences between groups.
Moreover, there was a discrepancy between the number of students attending the sessions and filling both pre‐ and post‐session tests (see TableS2).
Furthermore, the study was conducted at a single institution with a specific cohort of third‐year medical students undertaking a surgical rotation, potentially limiting the generalisability of the findings to other institutions, student populations or clinical settings.
Although qualitative data in the form of post‐session comments and feedback were gathered, future work entailing comprehensive qualitative data acquisition and analysis will provide further insight into the benefits and differences between online PAL and CTF teaching.
This study shows that online PAL can be an effective alternative to online faculty‐led teaching, yielding similar academic outcomes in SAQ performance and self‐perceived confidence.
However, faculty tutors may provide a higher‐quality educational experience for students, therefore, where resources are limited, online PAL offers a viable option for enhancing student learning whilst maintaining comparable academic results.
(A) Protein-protein interaction network of up-regulated genes, colored by cluster ID, where nodes that share the same cluster ID are typically close to each other.
(B) Protein-protein interaction network of up-regulated genes, colored byP-value, where terms containing more genes tend to have a more significantP-value.
(C) Protein-protein interaction network of down-regulated genes, where nodes that share the same cluster ID are typically close to each other.
(D) Protein-protein interaction network of down-regulated genes, colored byP-value, where terms containing more genes tend to have a more significantP-value.