Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a multifaceted disease associated with heart failure (HF), which affects the vascular system.
The endothelin (ET) system is a key player in MetS and HF; therefore, targets for ET receptors are of therapeutic interest.
This study sought to evaluate the effects of macitentan, a dual endothelin receptor antagonist (ERA), in a rat model of MetS‐induced heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF).
We assessed in 12‐week‐old Zuckerfa/farats the effects of macitentan (10 mg/kg/day as a food additive for short‐term/7‐ or long‐term/90‐day treatment) on right ventricular (RV) and left ventricular (LV) function/remodelling (MRI), RV and LV haemodynamics (catheterization) and RV and LV coronary function (myograph).
After 7‐ and 90‐days, untreated Zuckerfa/farats presented isolated LV diastolic dysfunction (illustrated by elevated LV end‐diastolic pressure [EDP] and LV end‐diastolic pressure‐volume relationship [EDPVR] without changes in LV EDPVR).
This was associated with increased collagen deposition and impaired endothelium‐dependent coronary artery relaxation.
Macitentan 7‐ and 90‐day treatment significantly decreased blood pressure and prevented LV, RV and coronary dysfunctions and long‐term treatment reduced LV collagen density.
Moreover, 7‐ and 90‐day macitentan treatment significantly reduced cardiac inflammation and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production.
Dual ERA macitentan improved both LV and RV diastolic dysfunction.
This was associated with improved coronary vasodilation, diminished cardiac oxidative stress and improved blood composition.
These results suggest that antagonizing the ET system with macitentan is a promising approach to treat HFpEF and its complications.
Metabolic syndrome (MetS), also known as syndrome X, is a leading global challenge affecting 23.9% of men and 24.6% of women in the western world [1].
It is a multifaceted disease requiring clinical and qualitative assessment of the patients, and it serves as an umbrella term for the association with other diseases including obesity, diabetes mellitus (DM), heart failure (HF) and pulmonary hypertension (PH) [2,3,4].
Untreated patients risk developing HF, which is a leading cause of mortality worldwide; therefore, it is beneficial to explore effective therapies for these intertwined diseases [4].
HF is divided into three categories; heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), HF with mild reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF) and HF with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) [5,6].
HFpEF is more prevalent than HFrEF and harder to treat, which enforces the need to investigate other mechanisms for therapeutic targets [5].
HFpEF is a serious global disease, which affects multiple organ systems and is heavily associated with obesity and metabolic dysfunctions; hence, it has a strong link to MetS [4,7,8].
HFpEF is characterized by a decrease in left ventricular (LV) relaxation with a preserved LV ejection fraction (EF) of 50% or more, alongside LV remodelling such as collagen deposition and diastolic dysfunction [5,9].
HFpEF also affects the vasculature which may be part of the explanation for the involvement of the renal and pulmonary systems [8].
Endothelin‐1 (ET‐1), which causes vasoconstriction, is increased in patients with HF, including HFpEF.
ET‐1 may also contribute to cardiac dysfunction, via vasoconstriction and the promotion of endothelial dysfunction [9].
Furthermore, PH and in particular pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) associated with right ventricular (RV) dysfunction has been linked to ET‐1 dysfunction [10].
A dual endothelin type A and B (ETA, ETB) receptor antagonist macitentan is approved for the treatment for PAH (WHO Group I) and has been shown to be beneficial to treat PH [10,11].
Macitentan prevents the binding of ET‐1 to the ETAand ETBreceptors on the vascular smooth muscle cells, thereby preventing ET‐1‐mediated vasoconstriction, leading to decreased pulmonary blood pressure [10].
Furthermore, due to the link between hypertension and type II diabetes mellitus (T2DM), targeting ET‐1 appears to be a suitable option for the treatment of T2DM, shown by the use of macitentan and other endothelin receptor antagonists (ERA) in several studies [12,13,14,15].
According to the American Heart Association, DM patients age 65 years and above have 68% mortality rate from heart disease [16].
This highlights the need for new therapies targeting comorbidities related to cardiovascular disease (CVD).
The current treatment for HFpEF is diuretics, sodium‐glucose co‐transporter type‐2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) and treatment of the aetiology and comorbidities [17,18].
However, these classical treatments, which are effective in the treatment of HFrEF, show less efficacy in HFpEF patients, which may be due to the comorbidities associated with the disease [19,20,21,22].
Among several targets involved in PH associated with HFpEF, ET‐1 is particularly interesting as it is involved in precapillary PH and activated in HFrEF and HFpEF associated or not with DM [23,24,25].
Furthermore ET‐1 promotes collagen deposition, leading to cardiac fibrosis, a major mechanism involved in diastolic dysfunction and HFpEF [26,27].
Since dual ERAs, such as macitentan, demonstrated the role of ET‐1 in the development of PH, RV dysfunction and DM, we hypothesized that a dual ERA might be beneficial in a model of HFpEF with PH and T2DM characteristics [9,11,28].
Furthermore, as the incidence of MetS and HFpEF is increasing our aim was to investigate these two comorbidities in a rodent model [9,28,29,30,31,32,33].
Thus, the aims of this study were to assess (1) whether a previously established model of MetS, Zuckerfa/farats is associated with a development of HFpEF, RV and LV hypertrophy/dysfunction and PH characteristics; (2) whether the dual ERA macitentan improves RV, LV and systemic haemodynamics, RV and LV function and morphological alterations.
All animal procedures performed conformed to the guidelines from Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes and was approved by the local ethical comity CENOMEXA n°54 (authorization number: 05.231.01).
This study was performed in 12‐week‐old male Zucker lean fa/+ and obese Zuckerfa/farats, which are a model of HFpEF (Charles River Laboratories, France).
Animals were kept two per cage in standard laboratory conditions [34].
For methods of analysis, all operators were blinded during data analysis.
Animals were monitored at least daily throughout the studies for any signs of discomfort according to the grimace scale.
Discomfort according to the grimace scale that was moderate or more or could not be alleviated would have been a humane end‐point but fortunately no adverse effects or stress behaviours were observed from the animals.
Short‐term macitentan treatment for 7 days to evaluate the acute effect of macitentan independent of cardiac remodelling which occurs over a longer period of time.
To evaluate the effects of long‐term/chronic macitentan treatment for 90 days alongside cardiac remodelling.
Both studies underwent the same analysis except for RV haemodynamics, which was only assessed in Study 2.
Zuckerfa/farats were randomized by Latin square design randomization at the age of 12 weeks in two groups, either untreated (n= 14) or treated for 7 days with macitentan 10 mg.kg−1.day−1(n= 14) administered as food additive as previously described until the rats were 13 weeks old [9,35].
Untreated Zucker lean fa/+ animals were used as healthy controls from 12 weeks old to 13 weeks old (n= 12).
Zuckerfa/farats were randomized by Latin square design randomization at the age of 12 weeks in two groups either untreated (n= 14) or treated for 90 days with macitentan 10 mg.kg−1.day−1(n= 14) administered as food additive as previously described until the rats were 24 weeks old [9,35].
Untreated Zucker lean fa/+ animals were used as healthy controls (n= 12) from 12 weeks old to 24 weeks old.
Blood pressure and HR were measured in conscious rats by telemetry (n= 6 per group) (Dataquest ART system, Data Sciences Inc., St Paul, Minn, USA) as previously described [36].
To confirm ET receptor blockade, the blood pressure variation induced by ET‐1 (1 nmol.kg−IV bolus injection) were assessed after 7 and 90 days of macitentan administration in (n= 3) randomly selected animals from each group, as previously described [37].
MRI was performed using a 4.7‐T BIOSPEC (Bruker, Germany) as previously described [38].
After anaesthesia (sodium methohexital, 60 mg/kg IP), using the Intragate sequence (Bruker, France), 12 continuous ventricular short‐axis slices of 1.5 mm thickness with no inter‐slice gap were acquired to cover the entire range of both ventricles.
Data analysis was performed with an operator‐interactive threshold technique by one trained observer using FARM‐CAAS 2.0 software (Pie Medical, Netherlands).
RV (7‐day: leann= 11, untreatedn= 14 and treatedn= 14.
90‐day: leann= 8, untreatedn= 10 and treatedn= 10) and LV (7‐day: leann= 9, untreatedn= 11 and treatedn= 13.
90‐day: leann= 9, untreatedn= 11 and treatedn= 12) volumes were determined from end‐diastolic and end‐systolic images by multiplication of RV and LV compartment area and slice thickness (1.5 mm).
Total volumes were calculated as the sum of all slice volumes.
EF was calculated with the end‐diastolic volume (EDV) and end‐systolic volume (ESV) (EF = SV/EDV).
Cardiac output (CO) was calculated as (EDV‐ESV) multiplied by HR.
At the end of the 7‐day and 90‐day studies, myocardial tissue perfusion (7‐day: leann= 10, untreatedn= 6 and treatedn= 6, 90‐day: leann= 8, untreatedn= 9 and treatedn= 8) was evaluated using the same MRI equipment by Arterial Spin Labelling (ASL), in which, the blood in the arteries upstream from the imaging volume is magnetically labelled.
This results in image intensity changes that will occur depending on the blood supply to the tissue in the imaged slice.
Upon subtraction of an image acquired without spin labelling, the background signal from static spins is removed, and the image can be used to quantify perfusion.
The difference of the inverse of the apparent T1 images then yields a measure of the regional cardiac blood flow (rCBF) according to rCBF = l (1/T1sel‐1/T1nonsel), where l is the blood‐tissue partition coefficient [39].
At the end of the 7‐day (LV; leann= 6, untreatedn= 9 and treatedn= 9) and 90‐day (LV; leann= 6, untreatedn= 9 and treatedn= 9.
RV; leann= 9, untreatedn= 9 and treatedn= 7) studies, rats were anesthetized (sodium methohexital, 60 mg/kg, IP) and a Millar microtip manometer was introduced either into the RV (via the jugular vein) or the LV (via the carotid artery) for recording of RV and LV systolic (RVSP and LVSP), end‐diastolic pressures (RVEDP and LVEDP), the maximum rate of rise of RVSP and LVSP (LV dP/dtmaxand dP/dtmax)and RV and LV relaxation constant Tau, as previously described [40].
Moreover, LV pressure‐volume loops were obtained at baseline and during loading by gently occluding the abdominal aorta with a cotton swab.
Data were stored and analysed by using Millar conductance data acquisition and analysis software (IOX™, EMKA, France) and LV end‐systolic as well as end‐diastolic pressure‐volume relationship (EDPVR) were calculated.
At the end of the treatment periods, the heart was dissected; the atria as well as the right and left ventricle were weighted separately (7‐day: leann= 7, untreatedn= 10 and treatedn= 10, 90‐day: leann= 11, untreatedn= 10 and treatedn= 9), and sections of the LV were either immersed in fixative solution or snap‐frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent assessment of LV collagen or LV immunohistochemistry as previously described [41].
Before harvesting, body weight was measured and after removal of the heart, lung weight was also measured (7‐day: leann= 7, untreatedn= 10 and treatedn= 10, 90‐day: leann= 11, untreatedn= 10 and treatedn= 9).
LV collagen density was determined on Sirius‐red stained slices in the 7‐ and 90‐day studies (7‐day: leann= 10, untreatedn= 6 and treatedn= 6, 90‐day: leann= 8, untreatedn= 9 and treatedn= 8).
In brief, after fixation, sections were embedded in paraffin, and 5 μm thick slices were obtained and stained with Sirius Red for collagen determination by image analysis.
Collagen density was expressed as the surface area occupied by collagen divided by the total surface area of the image.
LV capillary density and LV macrophage M1/2‐populations were obtained by immunohistology from frozen slices (7‐day: leann= 10, untreatedn= 6 and treatedn= 6, 90‐day: leann= 8, untreatedn= 9 and treatedn= 8), as previously described [42].
In brief, cryosections were stained using biotinylated mouse anti‐rat CD31 (BD Biosciences, 555 026, 1/100) and mouse anti‐human smooth muscle α actin (Sigma, F3777, 1/200), for the detection of blood vessels.
Macrophages were visualized using biotinylated rat anti‐mouse F4/80 (Abcam, 192 834, 1/75) together with rabbit anti‐mouse CD206/MRC‐1, followed by Cy3‐conjugated donkey anti‐rabbit IgG.
Biotinylated primary antibodies were revealed using SA‐Alexa 488 (FluoProbes, 1/400).
RV and LV reactive oxygen species (ROS) production were determined after the 7‐ and 90‐day studies (7‐day: leann= 10, untreatedn= 6 and treatedn= 6, 90‐day: leann= 8, untreatedn= 9 and treatedn= 8) by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, as previously described [43].
Snap‐frozen biopsies of LV or RV tissues collected from the ventricle were homogenized and incubated at 37°C for 60 min in 50 mmol/L phosphate buffer containing 25 μmol/L deferoxamine, 5 μmol/L diethyldithiocarbamate, and 500 μmol/L 1‐hydroxy‐3‐methocarbonyl‐2,2,5,5‐tetramethyl pyrrolidine hydrochloride (CMH, Noxygen, Hamburg, Germany).
The oxidation of CMH into the paramagnetic nitroxide CM•, driven mainly by superoxide and peroxynitrite reactions, was measured by electron paramagnetic resonance exactly 60 min after the beginning of incubation.
Tissues were introduced into an insulin syringe and frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Spectra were recorded at 77 K in a liquid nitrogen cooled dewar using an MS200 spectrometer (Magnettech, Berlin, Germany) with the following acquisition parameters: microwave power: 20 mW; microwave frequency: 9.54 GHz; modulation amplitude: 5 G; modulation frequency: 100 kHz; gain: 2 × 10 [2]; sweep time 120 s and number of scans 2.
Intensity of the spectra was measured from the height of the central line and expressed in arbitrary units (AU) per mg of protein.
Coronary endothelium‐dependent relaxation (7‐day: RV; leann= 6, untreatedn= 4 and treatedn= 5 and LV; leann= 4, untreatedn= 6 and treatedn= 8.
90‐day: RV; leann= 4, untreatedn= 6 and treatedn= 8 and LV; leann= 4, untreatedn= 6 and treatedn= 7) was assessed ex vivo by obtaining concentration–relaxing response curves to acetylcholine as described previously [44].
Briefly, the heart was removed and placed in cold, oxygenated Krebs buffer.
Segments of septal coronary artery (1.5 mm long and ∼180 to 250 μm in diameter), or of right coronary artery (1.5 mm long and ∼120 to 175 μm in diameter) were carefully dissected and mounted in a small vessel myograph for isometric tension recording (Dual Wire Myograph System; Danish Myo Technology).
Endothelium‐dependent relaxations to acetylcholine (10−9to 10–4.5M) were assessed after vessel contraction with 10−5M serotonin.
Results were normalized to the average expression of three housekeeping genes: GAPDH, tubulin and EEF2.
During the 90‐day study using metabolic cages, urine was collected overnight on the final night (leann= 8, untreatedn= 7 and treatmentn= 7) and at the end of the 7‐ and 90‐day studies, plasma samples (7‐day: leann= 7, untreatedn= 4 and treatedn= 4.
90‐day: leann= 6, untreatedn= 12 and treatedn= 13) were obtained for subsequent determination of triglycerides, HDL‐C/LDL‐C, albumin and creatinine, which were measured using a Catalysts analyser (IDEXX France).
Galectin‐3, ET‐1 and N‐terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT‐ProBNP) were determined using an ELISA kit (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), a chemiluminescent immunoassay (QuantiGlo; R&D Systems GmbH, Wiesbaden‐Nordenstadt, Germany) and an MSD assay kit (Meso Scale Discovery, Rockville, MD), respectively.
All results are given as mean ± SEM.
RV and LV diastolic/systolic diameters and haemodynamic parameters were assessed as a primary end‐point, whereas all other parameters, that is, the molecular mechanisms, were assessed as secondary end‐points.
Based upon historical data obtained with other drugs in Zuckerfa/farats, we determined the sample sizes and made a simulation for each parameter obtained in untreated animals to demonstrate a statistical significance (P< 0.05) with a minimal power of 80% [40,45].
The minimal expected difference between untreated and treated was fixed to 10%, with a coefficient of variation of 15% for echocardiographic and haemodynamic studies.
For all significant differences concerning primary end‐points, a posteriori power higher than 80% was also checked.
In order to evaluate the effect of HFpEF, all measurements obtained in untreated Zuckerfa/faand lean rats were compared by Student's unpaired two‐tailedt‐test.
To evaluate the effects of 7‐ or 90‐day macitentan treatment, all measurements obtained in 7‐ and 90‐day macitentan‐treated Zuckerfa/farats were compared with time‐matched untreated Zuckerfa/fausing Student's unpaired two‐tailedt‐test.
For vascular studies, differences between groups were analysed by two‐factor repeated ANOVA.
Before applying parametric tests such as Student's unpaired two‐tailedt‐test, the Gaussian distribution of data was assessed by Shapiro–Wilk normality test and Kolmogorov–Smirnov test and graphically by QQplot and normal probability plot.
There were no exclusions from experiments or analysis.
The same parameters were measured in both studies except RV haemodynamics, and we wanted to compare 7‐day to 90‐day treatment effectiveness; therefore, to prevent repetition, the results are presented under the same sections and figures.
Systolic and diastolic pressures and HR were recorded by telemetry in untreated or macitentan‐treated Zucker rats for the duration of both studies.
At Day 0, blood pressure and HR were identical in both Zuckerfa/fagroups.
Macitentan administration reduced blood pressure reaching statistical significance at D90without modification of HR (Figure1and TableS1).
Blood pressure and heart rate.Twenty‐four hour measurements of diastolic and systolic blood pressure (upper panel) as well as heart rate (lower panel) assessed by telemetry in conscious untreated Zuckerfa/farats (open circles), and in Zuckerfa/famacitentan‐treated rats before (Day 0) and after 1, 7 and 90 days macitentan administration (black circles).
Black bars indicate lights off.
Each point is the mean of 6 animals.
Study 1: In 7‐day untreated Zuckerfa/farats, RV function was preserved, shown by similar CO values compared to lean.
Both RV EDV and RV ESV were decreased, but RV EF had an increased trend in untreated compared to lean rats.
Macitentan‐treated rats did not show any significant changes compared to untreated Zuckerfa/farats (Figure2, upper panels).
Right ventricular function.
Upper panel.
Right ventricular (RV) ejection fraction (EF), RV end‐diastolic volume (RV EDV), RV end‐systolic volume (RV ESV) and cardiac output obtained by MRI in 13 week‐old lean (n= 11; white bars) and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated (n= 14; grey bars) or treated for 7 days with macitentan (n= 14; down‐hatched bars).Lower panel.
RV EF, RV EDV, RV ESV and cardiac output obtained by MRI in 24 week‐old lean (n= 8; white bars), and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated (n= 10; grey bars) or treated for 90 days with macitentan (n= 10; down‐hatched bars).
*:P< 0.05 versus lean; †:P< 0.05 versus untreated Zuckerfa/fa.
Study 2: In 90‐day untreated Zuckerfa/farats, RV EF, EDV and CO were significantly decreased but RV ESV was unchanged.
Macitentan treatment led to significantly increased RV EF and RV EDV, consequently increasing CO compared to untreated Zuckerfa/farats (Figure2, lower panels).
RV ESV after macitentan treatment was significantly decreased compared to the untreated group.
Study 2: In the 90‐day study, RV haemodynamics (Figure3) showed that untreated rats had a significant increase in RV ESP, RV dP/dtminand RV Tau compared to lean and an increased trend for RV EDP and RV dP/dtmax.
Macitentan treatment significantly decreased RV ESP and a decreased trend for RV EDP compared to untreated.
Moreover, macitentan significantly decreased RV dP/dtminand RV Tau and a reduced trend for RV dP/dtmax.
Right ventricular haemodynamics.
Right ventricular (RV) end‐systolic pressure (ESP), RV end‐diastolic pressure (EDP), as well as RV dP/dtmaxand dP/dtminand RV relaxation constant Tau determined in 24 week‐old lean rats (n= 9; white bars), and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated (n= 9; grey bars) or treated for 90 days with macitentan (n= 7; down‐hatched bars).
*:P< 0.05 versus lean; †:P< 0.05 versus untreated Zuckerfa/fa.
Regarding LV function, compared to lean, 7‐day untreated Zuckerfa/farats showed no significant differences in terms of LV EF, LV EDV, LV ESV or CO (Figure4, upper panels).
Macitentan treatment significantly increased LV EF and decreased LV ESV but did not significantly modify LV EDV or CO (Figure4, upper panels) compared to untreated.
LV function in 90‐day untreated Zucker rats compared to lean, displayed a significant decrease in LV EDV, LV ESV and CO without modification of LV EF (Figure4, lower panels), demonstrating HFpEF characteristics.
Macitentan treatment showed slight increased trends but did not significantly change the functional parameters investigated (Figure4, lower panels).
Concerning LV haemodynamics, in 7‐day untreated Zuckerfa/farats, LV; ESP, ESPVR, EDP, Tau and EDPVR were significantly increased compared to the lean controls (Figure5; upper panels).
Macitentan 7‐day treatment significantly reduced LV; ESP, EDP, Tau and EDPVR but did not modify LV ESPVR (Figure5; upper panels).
For LV haemodynamics in 90‐day untreated Zuckerfa/farats, LV; ESP, EDP and EDPVR were significantly increased, but LV, ESPVR and Tau were unchanged compared to lean (Figure5, lower panels).
Macitentan 90‐day treatment significantly decreased LV; ESP, EDP, EDPVR but did not modify LV; Tau or ESPVR (Figure5; lower panels).
Left ventricular function analysis by MRI.
Upper panel.
Left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF), LV end‐diastolic volume (LV EDV), LV end‐systolic volume (LV ESV) and cardiac output obtained by MRI in 13 week‐old lean (n= 9; white bars) and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated (n= 11; grey bars) or treated for 7 days with macitentan (n= 13; down‐hatched bars).Lower panel.
LV EF, LV EDV, LV ESV and cardiac output obtained by MRI in 24 week‐old lean (n= 9; white bars) and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated (n= 11; grey bars) or treated for 90 days with macitentan (n= 12; down‐hatched bars).
*:P< 0.05 versus lean; †:P< 0.05 versus untreated Zuckerfa/fa.
Left ventricular haemodynamics.
Upper panel.
Left ventricular (LV) end‐systolic pressure (ESP), LV end‐systolic pressure‐volume relationship (ESPVR), LV end‐diastolic pressure (EDP) and LV end‐diastolic pressure‐volume relationship (EDPVR) determined in 13 week‐old lean rats (n= 6; white bars) and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated (n= 9; grey bars) or treated for 7 days with macitentan (n= 9; down‐hatched bars).Lower panelLV ESP, LV ESPVR, LV EDP and LV EDPVR determined in 24 week‐old lean rats (n= 6; white bars), and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated (n= 9; grey bars) or treated for 90 days with macitentan (n= 9; down‐hatched bars).
*:P< 0.05 versus lean; †:P< 0.05 versus untreated Zuckerfa/fa.
RV coronary function: RV coronary endothelium‐dependent relaxation to acetylcholine both in 7‐ and 90‐day untreated and treated rats did not show a significant difference to their respective controls (Figure6; upper panel and TableS2).
Right ventricular and left ventricular coronary endothelium‐dependent relaxation.
Upper panel.
Right ventricular (RV) (upper panel) and left ventricular (LV) (lower panel) coronary relaxation induced by acetylcholine in 13 and 24 week‐old lean rats (n= 6 andn= 4, respectively; white circles) and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated (n= 4 andn= 6, respectively; black circles) or treated for 7 or 90 days, respectively, with macitentan (n= 5 andn= 8 respectively black triangles).Lower panel.
Left ventricular (LV) (lower panel) coronary relaxation induced by acetylcholine in 13‐ and 24‐week‐old lean rats (n= 4 andn= 4, respectively; white circles) and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated (n= 6 andn= 6, respectively; black circles) or treated for 7 or 90 days, respectively, with macitentan (n= 8 andn= 7, respectively black triangles).
*:P< 0.05 versus lean; †:P< 0.05 versus untreated Zuckerfa/fa.
LV coronary function: Untreated 7‐ and 90‐day Zuckerfa/farats demonstrated an impairment of acetylcholine‐induced relaxation of LV coronary artery when compared respective lean controls.
Macitentan 7‐ and 90‐day treatment restored or prevented this impairment in LV coronary relaxation compared to respective untreated groups (Figure6and TableS2).
RV and LV weights were unchanged in 7‐day untreated Zucker rats; however, cardiomyocyte size and collagen deposition were significantly increased compared to lean.
Moreover, LV perfusion, LV macrophage type‐1 nor type‐2 was not modified, but LV ROS was significantly increased and RV ROS had an increased trend in untreated compared to lean.
Macitentan treatment significantly decreased LV and RV ROS and LV macrophages and increased myocardial perfusion compared to untreated (Table1).
Macitentan treatment did not change the other parameters measured compared to untreated.
In 90‐day untreated Zucker rats, RV weight, RV ROS and LV macrophages were not modified, but LV, weight, cardiomyocyte size, ROS and collagen were significantly increased, while myocardial perfusion was decreased compared to lean rats.
Macitentan treatment significantly decreased LV; collagen density, ROS and macrophages and increased myocardial perfusion compared to untreated but other parameters were unchanged (Table1).
Body weight, right and left ventricular characteristics.
Note: Histological analysis, capillary density, ROS, LV perfusion and macrophage measurements (D7: leann= 10, untreatedn= 6 and treatedn= 6, D90: leann= 8, untreatedn= 9 and treatedn= 8).
Body weight, RV and LV weight and pulmonary weight (D7: leann= 7, untreatedn= 10 and treatedn= 10, D90: leann= 11, untreatedn= 10 and treatedn= 9).
Abbreviations: AU, arbitrary units; LV, Left ventricular; ROS, reactive oxygen species; RV, right ventricular.
The ET‐1 injection led to a transient blood pressure reduction followed by a sustained blood pressure increase (−39.3 and +18.0 mmHg compared to baseline) in 7‐day untreated rats (Table2).
Macitentan administration for 7 days abolished ET‐1‐related blood pressure variations.
After ET‐1 injection there was a transient blood pressure reduction followed by a sustained blood pressure increase (−41.9 and +16.5 mmHg compared to baseline) in 90‐day untreated rats.
Macitentan treatment prevented ET‐1‐related blood pressure variations.
Blood pressure assessment after IV endothelin‐1 bolus administration (1 nmol.kg−1) (For each groupn= 3).
Regarding metabolic characteristics, plasma triglycerides, HDL‐C, Galectin‐3 and NT‐ProBNP were increased in 7‐day untreated Zuckerfa/farats but LCL‐C, ET‐1, creatinine and albumin were unchanged compared to lean (Table1).
Macitentan treatment reduced plasma NT‐ProBNP and increased ET‐1 without modifying other biological parameters in the plasma compared to untreated.
Untreated 90‐day rats had increased plasma triglycerides, HDL‐C, Galectin‐3 and NT‐ProBNP compared lean rats, but albumin, ET‐1, creatinine and LDL‐C were unchanged (Table3).
Albuminuria was increased in 90‐day untreated rats, while creatininuria was decreased.
Macitentan 90‐day treatment increased LDL‐C and ET‐1 but reduced plasma triglycerides, NT‐ProBNP and albuminuria compared to untreated.
Note: Plasma level of molecules in lean and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated or treated with macitentan (Plasma; D7: leann= 7, untreatedn= 4 and treatedn= 4, D90: leann= 6, untreatedn= 12 and treatedn= 13.
Urine; D90: leann= 8, untreatedn= 7 and treatmentn= 7).
No changes were seen between the groups for the 7‐day study.
LV tissueBnpmRNA expression was increased in 90‐day untreated rats compared to lean, whileAnpandNox4expression was reduced, andSod2,Sod1andXanthine oxidaseexpressions were unchanged (Table4).
Macitentan decreasedBnpandNox4, which is essential in T2DM‐related cardiac inflammation and increasedSod2compared to untreated.
Note: Cardiac relative expression of various mRNA in lean and Zuckerfa/farats either untreated of treated with macitentan assessed by real‐time quantitative PCR and normalized to three housekeeping genes (GAPDH.tubulin.EEF2) (D7: leann= 5, untreatedn= 7 and treatedn= 8, D90: leann= 4, untreatedn= 6 and treatedn= 6).
This study highlights that obese Zuckerfa/farats, which are a rat model of MetS, develop HFpEF gradually alongside LV and RV diastolic dysfunctions and characteristics of PH.
The efficacy of macitentan in this model confirms the involvement of ET‐1 and its receptors in the deleterious progression of this phenotype.
We also found endothelial dysfunction in coronary arteries from obese Zucker rats, in line with other publications [46,47].
The obese Zuckerfa/farat is an already well‐characterized model of MetS and HF, and our data provide evidence that it can be used as a model HFpEF associated with PH [48,49,50].
Although a limitation of this model is that it is not always associated with hypertension, from our results it appears that our Zuckerfa/farat model mimics the association of PH, LV and RV dysfunctions observed in humans with HFpEF without or associated with MetS [51,52,53].
Moreover, our results clearly demonstrate that ET‐1 is involved is the development of RV, LV and vascular dysfunctions observed in obese Zuckerfa/farats since both 7‐ and 90‐day treatments with macitentan improved blood composition, cardiac and vascular functions.
The plasma biology showed that macitentan increases plasma ET‐1 at both time points confirming the blockade and decreases in plasma NT‐proBNP showing improved cardiovascular function.
Ninety‐day treatment showed more biochemical improvements in the plasma and urine with decreased levels of LCL‐C, triglycerides and urinary albumin, suggesting long‐term treatment may be the most beneficial.
The ability of the macitentan 10 mg/kg/day dose, in accordance to previous macitentan studies, to block ETAand ETBreceptors was confirmed in our study since this dose (1) prevented ET‐1‐induced biphasic response: ETB‐mediated blood pressure decrease, and ETA‐mediated blood pressure increase changes and (2) increased ET‐1 plasma concentrations, which confirms the functional blockade of ET receptors, in agreement with other studies [9,12,54].
It could be considered a limitation that no dose–response experiments were performed in this study, but this has been performed previously, which provided sufficient data for our study without repeating the experiment [9,35].
Although no dose–response experiments were performed in this study, the 10 mg/kg dose has been demonstrated to be the maximal effective dose in models of hypertension [12,35].
Macitentan at 10 mg/kg/day has been shown in current literature to cause a reduction in systolic BP and LV weight in a mouse HFpEF model, successful dual ERA action in rat models, the latter of which showed that an increased dose would not have a bigger therapeutic effect for hypertension [9,12,54].
We selected the estimated lowest possible dose for a therapeutic effect for our study from this literature.
A limitation is that we cannot compare the potential effects of a higher dose in our study and this should be considered for future studies.
Although it is shown that ERAs may exert beneficial effects on PH and RV remodelling, clinical trials on LV failure with ERAs have been disappointing [55,56,57,58,59].
However, in the ENABLE study, death was non‐significantly lower in the bosentan‐treated group than in the placebo‐treated group at the end of the study (160 vs. 173 deaths) despite early fluid retention, while in experimental HF bosentan significantly improved long‐term survival [59,60].
Thus, our data, obtained in a rat model of HFpEF associated with RV dysfunction and PH characteristics, suggest that dual ERAs could exert beneficial effects on LV function and structure in Humans with HFpEF [11,33].
Furthermore, macitentan prevents the progression of HFpEF since, at the initiation of treatment; the model exhibited only early LV diastolic dysfunction with preserved systolic function and then developed RV systolic and diastolic dysfunction.
Whether macitentan's beneficial effects on cardiac and vascular function are associated with an improvement of exercise capacity, described as reduced in this model, remains to be confirmed [61].
Our results show that at least two potential different mechanisms may be involved in the beneficial effects of ET receptor blockade.
First, reduction of ET‐1–mediated vasoconstriction induces an immediate and a sustained reduction of systolic and diastolic BP and of LV EDPVR, potentially participating to the improvement of LV diastolic function [23].
This mechanism could also explain the decrease in RV ESP.
Second, obesity but also ET‐1 are known to induce ROS production and ET‐1 blockade (Table2) resulted in reduced LV oxidative stress as observed by the reduction of ROS levels after both 7‐ and 90‐day treatment [62].
Furthermore, reducing ROS production and consequently oxidative stress could contribute to the improvement of LV diastolic function by enhancing LV relaxation.
This could be due to oxidative stress involvement in abnormal Ca2+handling thus impairing cardiomyocyte relaxation [63].
ROS overproduction has also been associated with exaggerated collagen deposition, which is known to decrease cardiac compliance [64].
Hence, reduction of ROS levels by ET receptor blockade could partially explain the reduction of LV collagen deposition observed after 90‐day macitentan treatment (Table1).
Overall, the prevention of cardiac fibrosis development strongly contributed to the improvement of LV function observed after 90‐day macitentan treatment, as observed with other drugs [63,64,65,66].
Another potential mechanism involved in the improvement of LV diastolic dysfunction could be an increase in nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability.
This was suggested by our improved coronary relaxation results, which would need to be investigated further.
Both experimental and clinical data demonstrate that NO donors or eNOS enhancers reduce LV diastolic dysfunction or LV remodelling [67].
Regarding redox activity, mRNA analysis showed an increase inSod2expression and decreases inBnpandNox4expression showing protective effects but only after 90‐days of treatment.
A limitation was that protein analysis was not performed, which would have provided a clearer explanation to the regulation of these proteins of interest.
Furthermore, drugs targeting ET function for patients with T2DM and HF have been investigated to treat both conditions, for example, SGLT2i showed an improvement in ET flow‐mediated dilation [68].
SGLT2i work by lowering glucose uptake, causing glycosuria, which may improve HF outcomes due to metabolic changes; however; further investigation is required [69].
Due to the difference in mechanisms of action, it would be beneficial to test in the future the effect of combined and comparative macitentan and SGLT2i HFpEF treatment.
Neprilysin inhibitors, which are used in the PARAGON HF clinical trial, have been investigated for T2DM treatment due to its effects on ET and its ability to increase lipolysis and lipid oxidation, which is a key component in glucose homeostasis [70].
This study showed an increase in both treatment time lengths in LV perfusion (Table1), restoration of endothelium relaxation and decrease in plasma triglycerides after 90‐day treatment (Table1).
These results alongside the effect of macitentan on reducing BP (Figure1) at both time points could be considered potentially beneficial for T2DM, which merits further investigation.
Moreover, the reduction in ROS may contribute to the improvement of renal function induced by macitentan, illustrated by the reduction of albuminuria and Galectin‐3 levels at the end of the 90‐day treatment.
The reduction of albuminuria after 90 days in HFpEF rats demonstrates that this could be a model of cardiorenal syndrome, which is improved by dual ET receptor blockade.
Our model has been previously shown as a model of cardiorenal syndrome and MetS by measuring proteinuria which is reduced by finerenone treatment [61,71].
The effects may be due to more than direct ET receptor blockade alone as it could be the reduction in ROS, which is demonstrated when using drugs with a similar profile, for example, finerenone [71].
Another consideration of whether the mechanism of action of macitentan is direct or indirect is that imeglimin also reduces albuminuria after long‐term treatment; therefore, both drugs are likely to be slowing the progression of the kidney dysfunction, which warrants further investigation [61].
It must be noted for translatability that male rats only were used, which is a limitation and a key aim is that this study can provide suitable data for further study and male and female animals.
Furthermore, cardiac remodelling involves inflammation and ET‐1 itself exerts pro‐inflammatory actions [72].
This was interesting for the treatment of macitentan, which showed there was a reduction in the number of cardiac pro‐inflammatory M1 macrophages (Table1) after 90‐day treatment suggesting a decrease in inflammatory signals.
This presents an interesting mechanism of decreasing the pro‐inflammatory effect of ET‐1 by ETR blockade [73].
ETBhas been shown to be key in inflammation in various studies and in a mouse genetic knock‐out model of ETB[73,74,75,76].
While ETAis mainly expressed on the vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC), leading to vasoconstriction, ETBis expressed in the endothelial cells and renal epithelial cells, and both receptors are expressed in the lungs [23,77].
Blocking both of these receptors may be a good solution for targeting inflammatory cardiac remodelling.
In conclusion, in a rat model of HFpEF associated with PH and DM characteristics, dual ET receptor blockade reduced PH and improvement of cardiac and coronary functions.
This suggests that dual ERAs, already used to treat isolated PH in humans, might also exert beneficial cardiac and vascular effects in HFpEF and thus seems to be a promising approach for HFpEF [55,78].