A 9‐year‐old male neutered Labrador Retriever was referred for azotemia and bilateral renomegaly.
An abdominal ultrasound revealed severe bilateral renomegaly with septated subcapsular cystic anechoic lesions, consistent with renal lymphangiectasia.
Despite conservative management, the patient died.
Necropsy and histopathology confirmed dilated subcapsular vascular structures.
Renal lymphangiectasia is a rare, benign dilation of renal lymphatics previously reported in human medicine.
This case represents the first description of sonographic features of renal lymphangiectasia in a canine patient.
A 9‐year‐old male castrated Labrador Retriever dog weighing 26 kg was initially presented to his primary veterinarian to evaluate pelvic limb weakness and difficulty ambulating.
A complete blood count and serum chemistry panel revealed mild anemia and moderate azotemia.
Historic bloodwork was normal prior to this visit.
An abdominal ultrasound was performed by the primary care veterinarian, revealing bilaterally enlarged kidneys with irregular margins and a hypoechoic scalloped rim along the outer margins of the cortex.
Ultrasound‐guided fine needle aspiration of the kidney revealed the presence of a few spindle cells.
However, the sample was nondiagnostic due to low cellularity.
He was then referred to our tertiary referral center 16 days after the initial primary veterinarian visit.
On physical examination, there was diffuse symmetrical muscle wasting, historic grade II/VI left apical systolic heart murmur, and bilateral abdominal pain in the kidney region.
The dog was mildly hypertensive with a systolic blood pressure of 130 mmHg.
The serum chemistry panel revealed mildly progressive and now moderate azotemia, mild hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, and hypochloremia.
Urinalysis collected by cystocentesis revealed isosthenuria, proteinuria, and hematuria.
The proteinuria was not quantified with urine protein:creatinine ratio.
There was no bacterial growth on the aerobic urine culture.
A SNAP 4DX Plus test was performed and was negative for Lyme, Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, and heartworm.
A vector‐borne canine comprehensive profile was submitted and included PCR forAnaplasmaspp,Ehrlichiaspp, Babesiaspp,Bartonellaspp,Hemotrophic Mycoplasmaspp,Rickettsiaspp, as well as serology (immunofluorescence assay and enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay) forBabesia canis, Bartonella spp, Ehlrichia canis, Rickettsia rickettsii, andBabesia Gibsoni.
Rickettsia rickettsiititers were seropositive at the 1:128 dilution.
An abdominal ultrasound was pursued to further characterize the renal changes and document progression during the interim.
An abdominal ultrasound (EPIQ 5, Philips Healthcare, Bothell, USA) was performed with both a microconvex transducer (mC12‐3 with a frequency range of 3–12 MHz, Philips Healthcare) and a linear transducer (eL18‐4 with a frequency range of 2–22 MHZ, Philips Healthcare).
The patient was sedated and restrained in right and left lateral recumbency.
The abdominal region was clipped, cleaned, and prepared with ultrasound gel applied routinely.
Transverse and dorsal images of both the right and left kidneys were obtained.
Both kidneys were moderately enlarged (left Kidney:Aorta ratio = 9.8; right Kidney:Aorta ratio = 9.2; normal is <9.1) but maintained their normal shape.
Circumferential subcapsular cystic anechoic regions with thin hyperechoic septations were observed bilaterally (Figure1).
Color and power Doppler investigation demonstrated the absence of blood flow within these anechoic regions (Figure2).
These anechoic structures were causing inward compression of the renal cortex, resulting in scalloping of the peripheral cortical margin.
The remaining cortex and medulla were moderately hyperechoic with reduced corticomedullary distinction.
Additional findings included mild right‐sided perinephric steatitis, scant perirenal effusion, and mild left‐sided pyelectasia measuring up to 5 mm.
B‐mode images of the left kidney in dorsal (A) and transverse (B) plane.
B‐mode images of the right kidney in dorsal (A) and transverse (B) plane.
Both kidneys are enlarged due to the subcapsular anechoic fluid accumulation with hyperechoic thin septation giving a pattern of multifocal cyst‐like regions.
Both kidneys demonstrated hyperechoic cortex with reduced corticomedullary distinction and peripheral scalloping margins.
Color Doppler of the left kidney subcapsular anechoic region demonstrated a lack of internal blood flow (A).
Power doppler of the right kidney subcapsular anechoic region demonstrated a lack of internal blood supply (B).
A tentative imaging diagnosis of renal lymphangiectasia versus atypical bilateral cystadenocarcinoma was made, and a surgical biopsy was recommended for a definitive diagnosis.
Concurrent underlying acute‐on‐chronic degenerative renal changes were also suspected.
Additional diagnostics, including ultrasound‐guided renal fine needle aspirates with cytologic analysis or laparoscopic renal biopsies with histopathology, were discussed but not pursued by the owner, given concerns for progressive kidney failure and potential morbidity associated with renal sampling.
Empiric treatment with steroids or chemotherapy was discussed but not initiated, given the lack of definitive diagnosis to guide treatment recommendations and the concern that the adverse effects of these drugs outweigh the potential benefits.
Ultimately, it was elected to pursue palliative care with appetite stimulants and antiemetics.
The patient died at home three weeks later after attempting supportive care, and the body was brought in the following day for necropsy.
Necropsy revealed severe bilateral renomegaly and diffuse renal subcapsular expansion by innumerable, coalescing, clear, fluid‐filled cystic spaces partially effacing the superficial cortical parenchyma (Figure3).
Histopathology was somewhat precluded by marked postmortem autolysis but revealed multifocal to coalescing empty cystic spaces that compressed the renal cortical parenchyma and were concentrated in the subcapsular cortex.
Fewer of these cystic spaces extended into and partially effaced the superficial cortical parenchyma.
A discontinuous layer of flat endothelial cells occasionally lined the cystic spaces.
The renal capsule was severely expanded by fibrosis (Figure4).
PROX‐1 (lymphatic endothelial marker) and CD‐31 (vascular endothelial marker) immunohistochemical stains were applied to the affected sections.
The degree of autolysis of the samples precluded the interpretation of PROX‐1 staining.
However, glomerular capillaries and vascular endothelium throughout the sections demonstrated strong, diffuse cytoplasmic staining with CD‐31, while the endothelial cells lining the subcapsular cystic spaces did not stain with CD‐31.
Given these staining characteristics and the absence of blood filling any of these cystic spaces grossly or histologically, the gross and histopathologic findings were most consistent with bilateral renal lymphangiectasia.
Gross necropsy photograph of a sagittal section of the right kidney demonstrating innumerable, coalescing, subcapsular, clear fluid‐filled cystic spaces expanding and partially effacing the superficial cortical parenchyma.
The image is displayed with the cranial aspect toward the right.
(A) Microscopic histopathology photograph (hematoxylin and eosin stain, 2X/20X) of the subscapular region demonstrates an empty cystic space (*) compressing the renal cortical parenchyma (#); the black arrows point at the thickened renal capsule expended by fibrosis.
(B) Microscopic histopathology photograph (hematoxylin and eosin stain, 20X/200X) of the cystic space (square in A) demonstrating a thin discontinuous layer of flat endothelial cells denoted with black arrowheads.
To the authors’ knowledge, there are no reported cases of renal lymphangiectasia in dogs.
There have been sporadic case reports/series of renal lymphangiectasia in human medicine.
Therefore, all of the factual information provided in this section has been derived from human literature [1,2].
The terminology used to describe this condition has varied over time in human medicine, and multiple names have been used, including renal lymphangiomatosis, peripelvic lymphangiectasia, andhygroma renalis[3].
Some researchers believe that, in people, renal lymphangiectasia is a subtype of retroperitoneal lymphatic malformation, and these two terms are used interchangeably [4,5].
However, this is inaccurate, as lymphatic malformation suggests underlying structural abnormalities of the lymphatic tissue that result in different imaging features from the reported renal lymphangiectasia cases [3].
Standardizing nomenclature could improve communication among clinicians and researchers, facilitating earlier diagnosis and better patient outcomes.
Therefore, the term renal lymphangiectasia should be used exclusively in this discussion.
Despite the nomenclature controversy, renal lymphangiectasia has been consistently defined as a rare condition with benign dilation and proliferation of peri‐renal lymphatic vessels across reports in humans [3].
The pathophysiology of renal lymphangiectasia is undetermined.
However, in humans, both congenital and acquired forms have been reported [3].
The congenital form can be unilateral or bilateral.
Occasional familial clusters have been noted that suggest a genetic component.
For example, one study reported cases in siblings, suggesting potential hereditary links [6,7].
There is no age or gender predilection, though a small case series reported human males being slightly overrepresented [4].
The acquired form among human patients has been reported in both native kidneys due to renal venous thrombosis [8,9], as well as in transplant kidneys as a known delayed onset complication [10].
Human patients affected with renal lymphangiectasia show a wide range of clinical signs, from no symptoms to flank pain (as in our patient) and hematuria [11].
Fever, ascites, hypertension, and retroperitoneal effusion have been reported as possible complications in cases of concurrent infection, renal compression, or rupture, respectively [11,12].
Treatment options are based on clinical signs.
For asymptomatic patients, no intervention and active monitoring are recommended.
Patients with mild pain and complications are managed conservatively with symptomatic treatment.
Interventions such as percutaneous drainage, sclerotherapy, and marsupialization are often successful in managing severe symptoms [13].
Radical nephrectomy is reserved for cases with significant functional impairment [14].
The prognosis for most reported cases is good if prompt diagnosis and interventions occur before major complications [13,15].
The sonographic features of this condition are well documented in the human literature through case series and reports.
The key sonographic features have been described as subcapsular cystic anechoic fluid separated by thin hyperechoic septations, identical to this case [3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11].
This characteristic pattern, seen in both humans and this reported canine patient, underscores the importance of similar comparative renal lymphatic anatomy.
In fact, canine renal lymphatics are the most well‐studied mammalian model for human renal lymphatics [15].
In both species, the renal lymphatic system can be divided into two categories: (1) intrarenal and (2) perirenal [15].
Within the perirenal categories, the canine lymphatic systems can be further divided into hilar and capsular divisions [15,16].
Similar to human patients, in dogs, these lymphatic vessels are not visualized on routine sonographic exams [3]; however, in the cases of renal lymphangiectasia, the dilation of the capsular lymphatic vessels creates the characteristic subcapsular cystic fluid accumulation (Figure1).
It is this characteristic circumferential subcapsular septated/cystic fluid accumulation with absent color‐Doppler signal that separates it from other lymphangiectasia mimics such as urinoma (forming one confluent anechoic fluid accumulation without septation), polycystic kidneys (multiple asymmetrically located cysts arising from the renal parenchyma), the hypoechoic subcapsular renal thickening seen with lymphoma (which does not have internal septation and is usually vascular) or hydronephrosis (renal pelvic dilation rather than subcapsular dilation).
Although classic cases of renal lymphangiectasia involve capsular lymphatic vessel dilation, sonographic variations are reported in humans, such as parapelvic lymphatic dilation (suspect from hilar lymphatic vessels), forming cystic lesions adjacent to the renal pelvis [7].
A few descriptive human studies also mentioned reduced corticomedullary distinction and cortical hyperechogenicity of affected kidneys [13], similar to our canine patient.
However, this feature is inconsistent among human patients, and normal renal cortico‐medullary echogenicity has also been reported [5].
The cause for this feature is unclear, but some authors speculated that these changes could be artifactual and due to distal acoustic enhancement caused by subscapular fluid accumulation [17].
This, however, could also represent concurrent renal parenchyma pathology secondary to compression by the dilated capsular lymphatics or unrelated degenerative changes as described in some reports in humans [14].
Concurrent renal parenchyma pathology impairing function is supported by the progressive azotemia that was documented in this patient.
Contrast‐enhanced sonographic features of renal lymphangiectasia have been described in two studies, and both revealed the absence of microbubble contrast within the cystic lesion.
[17,18] This finding helps differentiate lymphangiectasia from vascular lesions such as angiomyolipoma [19], though imaging features of renal angiomyolipoma have yet to be reported in canine patients.
In addition to sonographic investigation, many other imaging modalities have been employed in human medicine to diagnose renal lymphangiectasia, such as computed tomographic urography, which shows the dilated lymphatic vessels as characteristic hypoattenuating nonenhancing perirenal cystic lesions [3,14].
A few case reports described magnetic resonance imaging features of renal lymphangiectasia as nonenhancing T1‐hypointense and T2‐hyperintense cystic lesions with thin contrast‐enhancing septations [3,20].
Emerging imaging techniques in human medicine, such as magnetic resonance lymphangiography, show promise in delineating renal lymphatic structures and improving diagnostic accuracy [3].
Of note, the immunohistochemical results in this case are equivocal.
Both canine vascular endothelial and lymphatic endothelial cells can stain positively with CD31, but PROX‐1 is a more specific immunohistochemical marker for canine lymphatic endothelial cells.
Advanced postmortem autolysis may have contributed to the absence of CD31 staining in the endothelial cell population of interest and the overall lack of PROX‐1 staining throughout the samples, challenging interpretation.
Evaluation of these immunomarkers on patients with similar lesions and better postmortem sample conditions in the future would help to elucidate the definitive origin of these endothelial cells.
Given the rarity of this condition, misdiagnosis in human medicine is common, with erroneous diagnoses including polycystic kidney disease, urinoma, and hydronephrosis [21].
To avoid similar misdiagnosis and help prompt early diagnosis and treatment, veterinary radiologists should be aware of this rare condition and its characteristic circumferential subcapsular septated/cystic anechoic fluid accumulation that is devoid of blood flow.