During the hydrogen evolution reaction, H2gas bubbles form on the electrode surface, significantly affecting electrochemical processes, particularly at high current densities.
While promoting bubble detachment has been shown to enhance the current density, the mechanisms governing gas bubble detachment at the electrochemical interface remain poorly understood.
In this study, we investigated the interplay between electrode surface morphology and electrolyte composition on single H2gas bubble detachment during hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).
Using well-defined Pt microelectrodes as model systems, we systematically modify and enhance their surface roughness through mechanical polishing to investigate these effects in detail.
By modulating the Marangoni effect through variations in electrolyte composition and applied potential, we identified two distinct detachment behaviours.
When the Marangoni force acts towards the electrodes, H2gas bubbles are positioned closer to the electrode surface and exhibit roughness-dependent detachment, with smaller bubbles detaching earlier on rougher surfaces.
Conversely, when the Marangoni force is directed away from the electrode, H2gas bubbles are located farther from the electrode surface and show roughness-independent detachment sizes.
These findings highlight the importance of considering both electrode and electrolyte effects to optimize gas bubble detachment during electrochemical reactions.
Depending on the direction of the Marangoni effects, gas bubble locations and consequently the force balance determining gas bubble detachment can vary significantly.
In this study, we expand previous findings by investigating how variations in electrode surface morphology and electrolyte composition affect gas bubble behaviour at the electrochemical interface.
Our initial observation revealed that gas bubble detachment from a freshly polished electrode surface was inconsistent, likely due to inconsistent contact of the bubble with contamination on Pt.
We found that an electrochemical pretreatment involving potential cycling between oxidative and reductive potentials could provide a well-defined clean surface with consistent gas bubble evolution.
Using this pretreatment, we further studied gas bubble evolution on electrodes with varied surface morphologies.
Our results reveal that the detachment size depends on surface roughness, correlating with the direction of the Marangoni force.
Specifically, when the Marangoni force is directed toward the electrode, gas bubbles detach more quickly and at smaller sizes on rougher surfaces compared to smoother ones, indicating roughness-dependent detachment size.
Conversely, when the Marangoni force is directed away from the electrode, detachment size remains the same regardless of surface roughness, indicating roughness-independent behaviour in these conditions.
These findings highlight the importance of a comprehensive understanding of both electrolyte and electrode effects at the electrochemical interface for optimizing gas bubble detachment.
Relying solely on either electrode or electrolyte properties may not be sufficient; instead, the combined influence of both is essential for achieving optimal gas bubble detachment.
For accurately studying single H2gas bubble evolution, establishing an appropriate surface preparation protocol is essential.
To achieve this, we first focus on how to achieve reproducible electrochemical oscillations during hydrogen evolution reaction in H2SO4, providing insights on the H2gas bubble evolution.
Previous studies using 100 μm-sized microelectrodes in H2SO4have shown that single H2gas bubbles periodically evolve from the electrode surface.30,35–38This process induces periodic oscillations in the current during chronoamperometry and in the potential during chronopotentiometry, with each oscillation peak corresponding to the moment of bubble detachment (ESI Fig. S1†).
By analysing the oscillation period in either chronoamperometry or chronopotentiometry, the time required for bubble detachment (i.e., the period of the bubble evolution,T) of a single gas bubble can be determined under the given conditions.
Furthermore, because the size of the H2gas bubble significantly exceeds that of the electrode, nearly all the generated H2gas is captured by the bubble rather than diffusing into the bulk electrolyte.30,35Under these conditions, the detachment radius of the single H2gas bubble can be estimated by calculating the accumulated charge during each oscillation and applying Faraday's law.
Further details of the oscillation analysis can be found in the Experimental section.
Subjecting the Pt microelectrode to oxidation–reduction potential cycling, a common pretreatment method for cleaning a Pt surface, resulted in well-defined blank voltammogram, with clearly visible hydrogen peaks at 0.125 VRHEand 0.270 VRHE(dark blue curved inFig.
2b).
Following this pretreatment, stable, reliable, and reproducible oscillations were observed during chronoamperometry at a fixed potential (Fig. 2c), indicating consistent single H2gas bubble evolution on the electrode surface after electrochemical pretreatment.
Furthermore, highly reproducible oscillation data were consistently obtained when the same Pt microelectrode was used after undergoing the electrochemical pretreatment steps (Fig. 2c and d).
In the next step, the reproducibility of the oscillation was further evaluated by preparing four different Pt microelectrodes.
After the potential cycling pretreatment, all four electrodes displayed clear blank voltammograms, though with varying ratios between different hydrogen adsorption/desorption peaks (Fig. 3a).
Based on the ratio of the hydrogen peaks corresponding to the (110) and (100) step sites, the electrodes were grouped into two categories: electrodes #1 and #2 exhibited both (110) and (100) hydrogen peaks, while electrodes #3 and #4 showed one strong hydrogen peak, corresponding to the (110) step site.
These variations in peak ratios suggest differences in surface texture among the electrodes, likely caused by the non-homogeneous texture of the original Pt wire used to prepare the Pt microelectrodes.
Despite the differences in surface texture, no significant influence on H2gas bubble evolution was observed in H2SO4(Fig. 3b).
All electrodes exhibited clear oscillation over a wide potential range, regardless of their surface characteristics.
The trends in period and detachment radius were also consistent across all electrodes: as the magnitude of average current (or overpotential) increased, the period followed a V-shaped curve, while the detachment radius kept increasing (Fig. 3c and d).
According to previous studies, the V-shaped behaviour of the period can be explained by two distinct origins of the surface tension gradient that govern the Marangoni effect.31At low current conditions, the surface tension gradient is primarily determined by ion concentration gradients, leading to the dominance of solutal Marangoni forces.
Since H2SO4has a positive surface tension increment,44the resulting solutal Marangoni force is directed toward the electrode.
At high current conditions, the temperature gradient becomes the dominant factor, resulting in the dominance of thermal Marangoni forces, which also act toward the electrode due to the higher temperature near the electrode surface.
Although both solutal and thermal Marangoni forces act in the same direction in the case of H2SO4, their dependence on current differs, leading to distinct relationships: in the solutal-dominant regime, the period is inversely proportional to the current, while in the thermal-dominant regime, the period scales linearly with the current (see the ESI of Parket al.31).
Notably, the attained minimum of the period inFig.
3c, where these two competing factors are comparable, occurs at similar currents of approximately −1.5 mA for all electrodes.
This implies consistent transition behaviour between the two regimes, independent of surface texture.
Although the general trends in period and detachment radius were consistent across all electrodes, the absolute values varied between them.
Considering that the origin of the Marangoni force—ion concentration and temperature gradients—is primarily influenced by the current, the deviations observed between different electrodes under the same current conditions suggest the involvement of additional forces other than the Marangoni force.
Possible contributors to these additional forces include pinning forces at the triple-phase boundary (adhesion forces),45an apparent force arising from the bubble-bubble coalescence, and an electrical force39(ESI Fig. S3†).
While the exact origin of these additional forces cannot be identified at this moment, they appear to be more sensitive to differences between electrodes, such as scratches or slightly different morphologies, rather than surface texture difference.
For example, electrode #3 and #4 exhibited nearly identical blank voltammograms, yet their detachment period and radius values were notably different.
To further investigate how surface morphology affects the detachment of single H2gas bubbles, we prepared two extreme morphologies of electrode surfaces using different polishing procedures (Fig. 4a).
A smoother surface was prepared by polishing the electrode with diamond polishing suspensions of decreasing particle size (smallest particle size: 0.05 μm).
As shown inFig.
4b and c, a symmetrical, circular bright region is clearly visible, confirming the ideal disk-shaped geometry of the Pt microelectrode.
AFM measurements further confirmed the smoothness of the electrode surface, with a root mean square (RMS) roughness of 9.6 nm (Fig. 4dand ESI Fig. S4†).
Several fine lines visible in both the SEM and AFM images are scratches introduced during the polishing process.
In contrast, a rougher surface was achieved by polishing the electrode with SiC sandpaper (average particle size: 10.3 μm), followed by the same electrochemical pretreatment.
The effect of sandpaper polishing is evident in the SEM images (Fig. 4e and f), which reveal a much rougher surface with multiple valleys of varying heights and orientations.
AFM measurements confirm the roughness, showing an RMS roughness of 186 nm.
Furthermore, the roughness factor—defined as the ratio between the electrochemically active surface area and the geometrical surface area—was determined from hydrogen desorption peaks.46,47The rougher surface exhibits a higher roughness factor (4.7) compared to the smoother surface (1.4), further supporting the differences in surface morphology between the two electrodes (ESI Fig. S5†).
The effect of surface roughness on the evolution of single H2gas bubble was investigated using linear sweep voltammetry in two different electrolytes: 1 M H2SO4and 1 M HCl.
Both electrolytes exhibit high microbubble coalescence efficiency but differ in surface tension increment (H2SO4: 0.44 mN m−1mol−1L and HCl: −0.27 mN m−1mol−1L−1).44The opposite signs of these surface tension increments result in the solutal Marangoni forces acting in opposite directions on H2gas bubbles in each electrolyte.
This contrast therefore provides an ideal system for modulating the solutal Marangoni effect while maintaining the evolution of individual H2gas bubbles.
A comparison of the two surface morphologies revealed that the rougher surface exhibited a larger HER current, which is attributed to its larger surface area and distinct bubble-electrode geometry (further discussion will be provided in the context of Fig.6).
Specifically, the minimum point of each oscillation (indicated by dashed lines inFig.
5a and d) is higher for the rougher surface, resulting in a higher average current per oscillation for the rougher surface in both electrolytes (ESI Fig. S6†).
In H2SO4, the periods for both the smoother and the rougher surfaces exhibited a V-shaped curve (Fig. 5b) as a function of the average current per oscillation.
Across the entire parameter range studied, faster detachment was observed from the rougher surface.
The period is determined by both the detachment size of the gas bubble and the rate of gas bubble growth, which is determined by the average current per oscillation.
Analysis of the detachment radius further revealed that the faster detachment on the rougher surface was attributable not only to an increased average current, hence faster reaction and hydrogen generation, but also to a smaller detachment radius on the rougher surface (Fig. 5c).
This reduced detachment radius suggests the retaining force acting on the H2gas bubble in H2SO4is diminished on the rougher surface, facilitating the earlier detachment.
As discussed later, the additional retaining force on the smoother surfaces is primarily attributed to a pinning force at the bubble/electrode contact area.
In the case of HCl electrolyte, the period decreased monotonically with the (absolute) HER current (Fig. 5e).
The absence of an inversely correlating region in this electrolyte can be explained by the direction of the solutal Marangoni force, which is directed away from the electrode due to a negative surface tension increment.44This results in faster detachment in a low current region compared to the case of H2SO4, leading to a continuously decreasing period as the overpotential or current decreases.
In relation to surface morphology, the slope of the detachment period curve was smaller for the rougher surface, indicating faster detachment from the rougher surface, consistent with the result from H2SO4.
However, the detachment radius in HCl showed a trend distinct from that observed in H2SO4.
At lower average current levels, the detachment radius was the same for both smoother and rougher surfaces, with roughness-dependent behaviour (smaller detachment size for the rougher surface) appearing only at higher current conditions (Fig. 5f).
This trend was further clarified by oscillation analysis from chronoamperometry, which provides average values for the period and detachment radius at each potential or current level (Fig. 5g, hand ESI Fig. S7†).
It is noteworthy that the detachment radius obtained from both surface morphologies and two separate electrodes matched at low current, highlighting a roughness-independent behaviour in this regime.
The similar detachment size across smoother and rougher surfaces indicates the reduction or absence of roughness-sensitive retaining forces under these specific conditions.
These observations provide a notable correlation between the detachment radius and the direction of Marangoni force.
In H2SO4, the solutal and thermal effects align, resulting in a Marangoni force directed toward the electrode across all current regions.
In contrast, for HCl, the direction of the Marangoni force would gradually shift away from the electrode toward the electrode as the current increases and the dominant Marangoni effect transitions from solutal to thermal.
Previously, we estimated the boundary conditions (potentials and currents) between these competing effects by comparing surface tension change ratios associated with temperature and ion concentration variations.
In 1 M HCl, the boundary condition was identified around −1 mA.30Using this boundary condition, we provided a visual representation inFig.
5, where regions with a Marangoni force directed toward the electrode are highlighted in yellow, and regions with a force directed away from the electrode are marked in blue.
As illustrated inFig.
5c, f and h, the detachment radius depends on surface roughness when the resultant Marangoni force is directed towards the electrode (yellow region).
However, when the Marangoni force is directed away from the electrode (blue region), the detachment radius becomes independent of surface roughness.
To further examine the geometry of a single H2gas bubble during HER, specifically its size and position relative to the electrode surface, an additional set of chronoamperometric measurements was conducted at various potentials using two new microelectrodes in parallel with image recording using a high-speed shadowgraphy system, seeFig.
1and6and ESI Fig. S2.†Note that each of the two electrodes has been exclusively used for the measurements in either 1 M H2SO4or 1 M HCl.
Furthermore, each of the two electrodes was first polished using the diamond polishing suspensions (down to 0.05 μm) to perform measurements on smoother surface and then re-polished with a SiC sandpaper (10.3 μm) to perform measurements on rougher surface.
Similar toFig.
5, the average current per oscillation is consistently higher across the studied potential range for the rougher surface compared to the smoother surface (see ESI Fig. S8†).
This observation holds true for both 1 M H2SO4and 1 M HCl.
The trends in bubble detachment size (Fig. 6a) and period (Fig. 6b) also align with those observed in Fig.5.
Specifically, for 1 M H2SO4 in Fig.6a and b, both the bubble detachment size and period are consistently larger for the smoother surface across the entire range of average current studied.
In contrast, for 1 M HCl, these characteristics are comparable in the lower range of average current (blue region inFig.5) but become larger for the smoother surface at higher average currents (yellow region in Fig.5).
The higher electrochemical current observed for the rougher surface compared to the smoother surface can be attributed to differences in the geometry of the bubble-electrode system, specifically to differences in the carpet of microbubbles (Fig. 6c and d) that separate the bubble base from the electrode surface.
In the case of 1 M H2SO4(Fig. 6c) at −0.3 VRHE, the similarity inδfor both surfaces results in comparable current and detachment size (see ESI Fig.S8† and Fig.6a).
However, as the overpotential increases, the difference inδbetween bubbles generated on rougher (largerδ) and smoother (smallerδ) surfaces leads to a significant increase in current (e.g., at −0.8 VRHE, −1.3 VRHE, and −1.8 VRHE).
ESI Fig. S10†documents the carpet thicknessδas a function of bubble radius and applied potential.
A similar trend is observed for 1 M HCl, although values ofδfrom smoother and rougher surfaces are more alike in this case.
Note, however, that imaging limitations, such as slight defocusing of the bubble contour, inaccuracies in detecting the position of electrode and bubble base, or image analysis errors, could potentially introduce discrepancies of a few pixels (1 pixel ≈ 1 μm).
The carpet thickness is governed by the balance of forces acting on the growing bubble.
In the case of 1 M H2SO4, this balance can be thought of a competition between upward buoyancy (Fb), and downward forces, such as the Marangoni (FM) and electric (Fe) forces.
The apparent downward force arising from bubble-carpet coalescence has been demonstrated to be negligible (see ESI in Bashkatovet al.13).
BothFMandFehave been shown to depend non-linearly onδ.25,36,39Therefore, as the buoyancy force continues to grow with increasing bubble size, the system adjusts dynamically shifting the equilibrium position to a largerδ(see ESI Fig. S10†for aδ vs. Rdependence).
This leads to an increase in the current,25which in turn affects the downward forces.
However, this process has a limit.FMandFereach their maximum magnitudes at a critical bubble carpet thicknessδ, beyond which they begin to decrease asδincreases further.25,36,39When the buoyancy force exceeds the combined downward forces, the equilibrium can no longer be maintained, resulting in bubble departure from the electrode surface atRd.
Further complexity arises from the solutal and thermal Marangoni effects, which may act in opposite directions—as seen in the case of 1 M HCl—and both dependent on the current.
To strengthen the point, Bashkatovet al.36reported that dynamic changes in the applied potential further influenceδ.
When the potential increases [decreases] during bubble evolution, the stronger [weaker] downward forces bring the bubble closer to [farther from] the electrode, leading to a thinner [thicker] bubble carpet thicknessδaccording to the new equilibrium position.
Bashkatovet al.36also reported that the criticalδdepends on the applied potential (or current).
When the potential is interrupted (set to the level of open circuit potential, OCP), the bubble departs from the electrode rapidly.
The trend observed inFig.6c and d, comparingδbetween 1 M H2SO4and 1 M HCl, aligns with the above discussion on theδ-dependence of the force balance.
In 1 M HCl, the carpet thickness is approximately 2–3 times larger.
This difference can be attributed to the opposing directions of the solutal and thermal components of the total Marangoni force.
In 1 M HCl, the upward solutal Marangoni force counteracts and weakens the downward thermal Marangoni force or even becomes dominant at lower potentials/currents (blue region in Fig.5e–h).
In contrast, in 1 M H2SO4, both solutal and thermal components act in the same downward direction.
Consequently, the net downward force is smaller in 1 M HCl, allowing for a thicker carpet and smaller departure size.
This leads to larger currents and a significantly shorter bubble evolution period (Fig. 6b).
Overall, the quantitative relationship between carpet thickness, electrochemical current, and Marangoni forces remains complex and non-trivial, and its detailed analysis is beyond the scope of the present manuscript.
A closer examination of the region around the bubble base and the smoother electrode in 1 M H2SO4reveals the formation of a neck connecting the bubble to the electrode, as shown in Fig.7a.
This indicates that the large single bubble partially blocks the electrode.
Due to limitations in resolution, the small observation area, and the continuous formation of microbubbles, the neck can only be resolved shortly before bubble detachment.
Fig.7b further demonstrates that the bubble remains attached to the electrode surface even after the potential is interrupted,i.e.set to a level of OCP.
This behavior is consistently observed across all potentials studied for the smoother surface.
In contrast, the bubble detaches rapidly following a potential interruption for the rougher surface in 1 M H2SO4and both surfaces in 1 M HCl.
Additionally, no neck formation was observed throughout the bubble evolution in these three cases (due to its substantially smaller size or absence).
The formation of the neck in 1 M H2SO4may sufficiently explain the observed differences in detachment radius and period between rougher and smoother surfaces seen inFig.
5b, cand6a, b. The bubble-electrode contact is characterized by a contact radiusrc(see inset inFig.
7b) and modifies the force balance by introducing an additional downward pinning force,Fp= 2πrcσsinθ, and an upward pressure correction force,.
Hereσdenotes the surface tension,ρl– the liquid density andg– the gravitational acceleration.
Given the imaging limitations (including poor focus in the neck region) discussed above, we cautiously estimate that the bubble is pinned with a constant contact radius between 3 μm and 5 μm.
Since the bubble radius significantly exceeds the contact radius,Fcorrcan be neglected, leaving the force balance between upwardFband downward pinning forceFp, Marangoni forceFM, and electric forceFe.
In cases where the reaction ceases, as for example in Fig.7b,FMandFeare effectively zero.
Therefore, the force balance is betweenFbandFsonly.
For instance, considering a bubble withR= 290 μm produced at −0.8 VRHEinFig.
7b, the buoyancy force can be estimated as.
Here Δρ=ρl−ρg≈ρlis the density difference between the liquid (ρl) and gas (ρg).
This suggests that the pinning force holding the bubble on the electrode surface, even after the potential interruption, must be at least of the same magnitude.
For a pinned, growing bubble, the contact angleθat the gas–solid-electrolyte interface evolves, reaching at most 90° during the bubble detachment at the pinch-off stage.48Furthermore, since bubble growth inFig.
7bis interrupted prior to detachment, the contact angle is expected to remain well below 90°.
Assumingθ= 30°, 45° or 60° the contact radii can be estimatedvia Fb=Fp, yieldingrc≈ 5 μm, 3 μm or 2.5 μm, respectively.
This estimation aligns closely with a previously estimated contact radius (rc≈ 3–5 μm).
We now address the observed differences in the detachment radius between the smoother and rougher surfaces in 1 M H2SO4.
For rougher surfaces, we assume that neck formation is either absent or significantly smaller than for smoother electrodes.
Using the average detachment radii from ESI Fig. S8†at −0.8 VRHEfor the smoother (Rd= 339 μm) and for the rougher (Rd= 305 μm) surfaces, the corresponding buoyancy forces are estimated asFb= 1.60 μN andFb= 1.17 μN, respectively.
Assuming all other downward forces remain identical, the difference (0.43 μN) can be attributed toFp.
To estimate the pinning forceFp, we arbitrarily selectrc= 3 μm andθ= 90°, yieldingFp= 1.36 μN for a bubble on the smoother surface.
The comparison demonstrates qualitative agreement, though a quantitative discrepancy remains:Fpis approximately three times larger than the difference in buoyancy forces (0.43 μN).
The quantitative differences may arise from inaccurate estimates ofrcandθ, leading to an overestimation ofFp.
For example, if the contact line advances (moves inward) before detachment, the contact angle at detachment might be smaller, for exampleθ≈ 70°.18Further discrepancies likely come from variations in other downward forces between the smoother and rougher surfaces.
Consistent with the numerical simulations,FeandFMmay be smaller when the bubble grows closer to the electrode surface.36,39For example, Bashkatovet al.36(also see Hossainet al.39) estimated a Marangoni-associated hydrodynamic force ofFh≈ 0.40 μN atδ≈ 2 μm andFh≈ 0.70 μN atδ≈ 8 μm for a bubble with similarR= 304 μm but at a larger potential of −3 VPtwire.
The electric force has been reported to be of similar25,39magnitude.
Given these error sources, the estimate gives a reasonable magnitude ofFp.
Finally, it appears possible that the contact patch, settingFp, might vary with the applied potential.
At higher potentials or currents, larger downward forces press the bubble more strongly against the electrode, possibly enhancing the bubble-electrode contact.
Previous studies have demonstrated that an H2bubble produced in 1 M H2SO4, but at a much higher potential, can become fully attached to the microelectrode, covering its surface almost entirely.49Therefore, the increasing difference in detachment diameters at higher potentials, as seen in ESI Fig. S8,†may be attributed to the geometry of the neck.
Overall, the observed contact radius in 1 M H2SO4suggests that the pinning force constitutes an important roughness-sensitive retaining force.
Building on the earlier discussion on the direction of the total Marangoni force (sum of thermal- and solutal Marangoni effects), acting upward at lower potentials and downward at higher potentials in the case of 1 M HCl we could further elaborate on the two distinct regimes observed inFig.
5, marked by blue and yellow regions.
At lower currents or potentials, the Marangoni force acts upward, making bubble attachment to the electrode surface less likely.
In this regime, the pinning force only plays a minor role (if any) in the force balance, resulting in similar bubble sizes on both smoother and rougher surfaces.
However, upon exceeding a threshold current or potential, the Marangoni force acts downward, thus the bubble might stick to the electrode surface (although we were not able to resolve it) and finally cause the roughness dependent detachment features observed.
Fig. 8summarizes the detachment characteristics and bubble locations.
Under the conditions where Marangoni force is directed toward electrode surface, single H2gas bubbles are typically located closer to the electrode surface and their detachment is strongly influenced by surface roughness.
This roughness-dependent detachment is likely due to variations in pinning forces under different surface conditions.
In contrast, when the Marangoni force is directed away from the electrode surface, single H2gas bubbles are positioned farther from the electrode surface and exhibit a roughness-independent detachment radius.
These findings highlight the importance of considering both electrode and electrolyte properties when optimizing H2gas bubble detachment.
Depending on the direction of the Marangoni effects, gas bubble locations and consequently the force balance determining gas bubble detachment can vary significantly.
In this work, we investigated the impact of electrode surface cleanliness and morphology on the detachment of single H2gas bubbles during the hydrogen evolution reaction in different electrolytes using a Pt microelectrode.
We found that reproducible single H2gas bubble evolution is achieved on a well-defined Pt surface, which can be obtained through electrochemical pretreatment involving cycling between oxidating and reductive potentials.
Furthermore, we observed that the effect of surface roughness on bubble detachment depends on the direction of the Marangoni force acting on the bubbles.
When the Marangoni force is directed toward the electrode, the single H2gas bubble remains closer to the electrode surface.
In this configuration, the gas bubble detaches at a smaller size on rougher surfaces compared to smoother surfaces, likely due to roughness-sensitive additional retaining force, such as pinning forces at the triple-phase boundary.
Conversely, when the Marangoni force is directed away from the electrode, the single H2gas bubble is positioned farther from the electrode surface.
In this configuration, the detachment size is independent of surface roughness, likely due to minimal additional retaining forces.
These results highlight the importance of considering both electrode surface properties and electrolyte effects, particularly the Marangoni effect, for optimizing gas bubble detachment thus enhancing the efficiency of water electrolysis.
All chemicals were used without further purification process.
The electrolytes were prepared from H2SO4(96%, Suprapur, Merck), HCl (30%, Suprapur, Merck), and Milli-Q water (≥18.2 MΩ cm, TOC < 5 ppb).
The Pt microelectrode was fabricated by sealing Pt wire (100 μm diameter, 99.99%, Goodfellow) within a soda-lime glass capillary (1.4 mm outer diameter, 1.12 mm inner diameter, Hilgenberg)viaflame annealing.
For electrodes with a smoother surface, the Pt microelectrode was polished mechanically using diamond polishing suspensions of decreasing particle size (3.0, 1.0, 0.25, 0.05 μm, Buehler) on a micropolishing cloth.
For electrodes with a rougher surface, mechanical polishing was performed with SiC sandpaper (P2000, Starcke).
The surface morphology of the prepared Pt microelectrode was characterized using scanning electron microscopy (Apreo, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an acceleration voltage of 2 kV and an electron beam current of 13 pA.
The surface roughness was further characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM, JPK NanoWizard 4) using soft tapping mode cantilevers with a spring constant of 2 N m−1and resonance frequency of 70 kHz.
All measurements were performed in air at ambient temperature and humidity and the data was analysed using the JPK Data Processing software.
AFM images (50 μm × 50 μm) of the smoother surface were taken at 1 Hz and the rougher surface were taken at 0.075 Hz.
Electrochemical experiments were conducted in a homemade PEEK cell with a transparent glass window on the side (ESI Fig. S11†).
The electrochemical cell was cleaned by soaking it in a permanganate solution (0.5 M H2SO4, 1 g L−1KMnO4).
Prior to use, the cell was rinsed thoroughly with Milli-Q water, immersed in diluted piranha solution to remove manganese oxide residues.
Afterward, the cells were rinsed again and boiled in Milli-Q water five times.
Linear sweep voltammetry and chronoamperometry were performed in a three-electrode setup using a Bio-Logic SP300 potentiostat, with a platinum wire (99.9%, MaTeck) as the counter electrode and a leakless Ag/AgCl (ET072-1, eDAQ) as the reference electrode.
Before electrochemical measurements, the polished electrode underwent electrochemical pretreatment, cycling 30 times between reductive and oxidative potentials from 0.05 and 1.35 V (vs.RHE) at a scan rate of 1 V s−1in Ar-purged H2SO4.
The electrochemically active surface area of the prepared Pt microelectrode was determined from the charge of the hydrogen desorption peak in blank voltammogram obtained from H2SO4electrolyte (210 μC cm−2).46,47The total charge for hydrogen desorption was obtained by integrating the current from 0.05 to 0.6 V (vs.RHE) after subtraction of the double layer current.
The roughness factor was calculated by dividing electrochemically active surface area by the geometrical surface area (100 μm diameter disk type microelectrode: 7.854 × 10−5cm2).
To gain insights into individual single H2gas bubble behaviours, electrochemical oscillations observed during linear sweep voltammetry or chronoamperometry were analyzed.
Previous studies have shown a correlation between single H2gas bubble evolution and electrochemical oscillation using synchronized bubble shadowgraph and electrochemical measurements.30,35The detachment period, defined as the time required for a single H2gas bubble to detach from the electrode surface, corresponds to the oscillation period.
For the detachment radius, we combined Faraday's law with the ideal gas equation.
From the ideal gas equation:wherenH2,bubble,R,T,P,P0,V, andRdrepresent the moles of H2in the gas bubble, the gas constant, the temperature, the pressure, the atmospheric pressure, the detachment volume, and the detachment radius of the H2gas bubble, respectively.
Under our experimental conditions, contributions from the hydrostatic (∼0.004P0for 4 cm electrolyte height) and the Laplace pressure (∼0.032P0for 100 μmRd) can be safely neglected when accounting for pressure.
At the same time, the amount of H2gas produced during one oscillation cycle can be described using Faraday's law:wherenH2,produced,Q, andFdenote the moles of produced H2, the total charge during one oscillation cycle, and the Faraday constant, respectively.
Since the diameter of a single H2gas bubble is generally much larger than that of the microelectrode, we can reasonably assume that all generated H2gas molecules are captured by the single H2gas bubble, a condition validated for microelectrode studies:30,35nH2,bubble=nH2,produced.
To further validate our approach, we additionally compared the estimated detachment radius obtained from oscillation data with that determined through image analysis (ESI Fig. S12†).
As shown in ESI Fig. S12,†this comparison supports our approach.
To examine the geometry of the H2bubble throughout its evolution, an additional set of chronoamperometric measurements was conducted in parallel with image recording using a shadowgraphy system.
The experiments have been performed using a three-electrode electrochemical cell, closely resembling that used in earlier studies.13,25,27The microelectrode (∅ 100 μm, Pt) was inserted horizontally facing upward in the base of a cuboid glass cuvette possessing four transparent sides and with dimensions of 10 × 10 × 40 mm3.
The system was completed by the reference electrode (Ag/AgCl) and a counter electrode (∅ 0.5 mm Pt wire) both inserted vertically from the top.
The electrochemical cell was controlled by a potentiostat (BioLogic, VSP-300) at a constant potential of −0.3 to −1.8 V (vs.RHE).
The current was recorded with a sampling rate of 1 kHz over a period of 30 s. The optically transparent cell allows the visualization of the bubble dynamics using a shadowgraphy system.
It consists of LED illumination (SCHOTT, KL 2500) with a microscope, connected to a high-speed camera (Photron, FASTCAM NOVA S16), providing a spatial resolution of 996 pix per mm.
Image recording was performed at either 60 or 125 Hz.