Peripheral nerve blocks are widely used for anaesthesia in upper or lower limb surgery, but the methods used to assess their success vary substantially across randomised controlled trials.
Standardised reporting of how peripheral nerve blocks are tested and how success is defined is essential for ensuring the validity and comparability of clinical research and correct clinical implementation of nerve blocks.
This scoping review aims to map existing research practices and assess the extent to which trials provide reporting on peripheral nerve block evaluation.
This scoping review will adhere to guidelines from the Joanna Briggs Institute and the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic and Meta‐Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA‐ScR).
A comprehensive search will be conducted on the PubMed database for trials published in peer‐reviewed journals of anaesthesia from 2014 onward.
An online tool will be used for screening and data extraction.
Outcomes include the proportion of trials that report whether peripheral nerve blocks were tested, describe testing methods, define successful blocks, and report success rates.
The results of the review will be presented descriptively and with tables where appropriate.
This protocol outlines a review exploring variability in the reporting of methods used to test peripheral nerve blocks.
It aims to assist with the interpretation of clinical trials and possibly guide future research to facilitate comparison of findings between clinical trials.
The success of PNBs can be defined in several ways and there is significant variability in the way blocks are tested, both in clinical practice and research.8Simple sensory and motor function assessments using graded scales remain the most used in clinical practice given their ease of use.8,9In the context of research, even trials assessing blocks using the same measurement tool may do this differently.10Detailed descriptions of how PNBs are tested and deemed successful and the rates of successful blocks are therefore essential to allow valid comparisons between trials, to perform meta‐analysis of results and for clinical applicability of results.
This review aims to determine the proportion of RCTs published since 2014 involving PNBs in the peri‐operative anaesthetic management of upper or lower limb surgery that describe how PNBs are tested.
It also aims to explore the proportion of RCTs that define a successful block and the reported success rates of blocks.
To our knowledge, no reviews have been conducted investigating how commonly RCTs describe the testing method of PNBs and how a successful PNB is defined.
PNBs of isolated nerve structures or nerve plexuses with a well‐defined innervation area suitable for specific testing of success.
If combined with other forms of anaesthesia that would make testing unfeasible (e.g., spinal or general anaesthesia), the PNB must be performed prior to this.
PubMed‐indexed RCTs published in peer‐reviewed journals of anaesthesia.
The proportion of RCTs that state that PNBs were tested.
The proportion of RCTs describing how the PNBs were tested.
The proportion of RCTs using sensory function to test PNBs.
The proportion of RCTs using motor function to test PNBs.
The proportion of RCTs describing how PNB success is determined.
The proportion of RCTs reporting PNB success rates.
The success rate of PNBs is reported by trialists.
The proportion of RCTs that describe how unsuccessful PNBs are managed.
A search string adapted to the PubMed database was developed with a medical librarian experienced in database literature searches.
The search was narrowed to journals listed under the “Anesthesiology” category on Web of Science that primarily focus on general perioperative or regional anaesthesia and publish in English.18This was determined using the journals' overview, aims and scope and by screening publications from the last 24 months from the journals.
Table1lists the journals included in the search.
The developed search string can be found in AppendixA.
Data for each trial will be collected regarding trial information (e.g., year of publication, publishing journal, trial size), anaesthetic management (e.g., type of PNB, surgery performed under PNB only or combined with other anaesthetic techniques) and this review's outcomes as stated above.
An extraction form was made using Covidence's data extraction tool, shown in AppendixB.
Two authors piloted the data extraction form on five randomly selected full‐text articles to ensure the data collected effectively fulfils the review's objectives.
The suitability of a testing method for a given PNB lies outside this review's scope and will therefore not be assessed.
The proportion of RCTs that state that PNBs were tested.
The proportion of RCTs describing how the PNBs were tested.
Chi‐square or Fisher's statistic tests will be used to compare between subgroups.
The protocolised review aims to provide an overview of the reporting of nerve block tests in recent RCTs.
It will also assess the reporting of criteria used to determine PNB success and the reporting of success rates.
This review's strengths include its pre‐defined, published protocol and its adherence to the JBI and PRISMA‐ScR guidelines.
A limitation of the scoping review methodology is the absence of a quality‐of‐evidence assessment of included trials.
However, this scoping review will provide an overview of current regional anaesthesia research, identifying key themes and evaluating methodological approaches.
This protocol presents a scoping review that will investigate variability in how methods for testing PNBs are reported.
This will assist clinicians in interpreting RCTs and identify potential methodological gaps in trial design.
Prioritising and standardising these gaps will facilitate future trial comparisons and improve the quality of evidence.