Dermatophilosis is dermatitis with acute, subacute and chronic courses which is usually exudative and rarely proliferative and can affect cattle, sheep, goats and horses and sometimes in humans.
A 5‐year‐old local breed bull was presented to Professor Feseha Gebreab Memorial Veterinary Teaching Hospital of the College of Veterinary Medicine and Agriculture, Addis Ababa University, with main complaints of dry skin lesions which started before one year of presentation.
Upon clinical examination, the bull was in good body condition, and there was a dry scabby skin lesion on its dorsum and ventral parts.
Impression smear was made from the beneath scabs, and staining was done by Giemsa.
The examined smear revealed typical railroad stack arrangements of organisms by the staining.
The skin lesion was scrubbed with 10% sodium chloride solution; lesions were removed and disinfected with cetrimide 3% and chlorhexidine 0.3% (Cavlon) solution.
Iodine 2% was applied topically for 5 successive days.
The bull was treated with seven doses of long‐acting oxytetracycline (20%) deep intramuscular injection at a dose of 20 mg/kg for 7 days.
After a treatment course of 5 weeks, the removed crusts re‐emerged again and the disease was not responsive to the given drug.
The severity of the lesion might be the cause of disease relapse, and individual animal factors could have influenced the treatment's resistive response and it need further study to determine whether oxytetracycline is beneficial in treating chronic dermatophilosis.
Dermatophilosis is dermatitis of cattle, which is caused byDermatophilus congolensis, a Gram‐positive organism with typical ‘railroad track’ branched with numerous rows of spherical to ovoid cocci.
It is transmitted when zoospores shed from the skin come into contact with susceptible animals.
The disease is more likely to develop when there has been a lot of rain for a long time, and skin damage is contaminated with infectious agents, and treatment at an early stage has a positive reward.
Different skin diseases in Ethiopia cause significant economic losses, especially in the export of skin and hide (Teshome2016).
In addition to affecting the quality of leather, skin illnesses cause economic losses due to decreased body weight gain and milk output, sporadic mortality, decreased performance in draft animals and expenses related to the treatment and prevention of diseases as well as zoonosis (Olkeba et al.2016).
Dermatophilosis, lumpy skin disease, dermatophytosis, photosensitivity, pediculosis, acariasis, ked, sheep and goat pox, orf and warts are the most prevalent ruminant skin diseases identified in Ethiopia (Ambilo and Melaku2013; Teshome2016).
Dermatophilosis is a dermatitis that can have an acute, subacute or chronic course and is occasionally proliferative but typically exudative in animals like cattle, sheep, goats and horses as well as occasionally in people (Aydoğdu et al.2021).
Other names for dermatophilosis include ‘streptothricosis’ in cattle, ‘lumpy wool disease’ in Australian sheep, ‘strawberry foot rot’ in Scottish sheep, ‘mycotic dermatitis’ and ‘rain scald’ (Reddy et al.2020).
Bovine dermatophilosis is a serious disease of cattle in Africa.
It was initially noted in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Belgian Congo) in 1915 and has since been documented throughout the majority of the African nations (Ndhlovu and Masika2016).
Bovine dermatophilosis is a tick‐borne disease caused by the actinomycete bacterium calledDermatophilus congolensis(Ndhlovu and Masika 2016).
A member of the orderActinomycetales,D.
congolensisis a Gram‐positive, non‐acid fast, branching filamentous cocci bacteria (Reddy et al.2020).
The capacity of the strains to produce alkaline ceramidase, phospholipases, proteolytic enzymes and haemolysins is directly related to the cutaneous pathogenicity ofD.
congolensis(Domingues et al.2018).
This organism has typical ‘railroad track’ branched septate filaments with numerous rows of spherical to ovoid cocci (Maruthi et al.2017).
Direct transmission happens when zoospores shed from the skin come into contact with sick or susceptible animals.
Animals are more likely to develop clinical conditions when there has been a lot of rain for a long time and the weather has been warm and humid (Aliye et al.2020).
Additionally, contamination of puncture wounds and implements, fly and tick bites and sores on the animal's body brought on by pointed‐tip grass may put animals at risk for indirect infection.
More humidity could bring back to life dormant skin zoospores, which could lead to active multi‐flagellated zoospores invading the epidermis (Aziz et al.2020).
Tropical and subtropical nations have higher rates of clinical dermatophilosis.
The lesions are composed of papules that, in the early stages, develop into serous exudates, hair that has a tufted appearance, hyperkeratotic, coalescent lesions with an irregular raised crust that resemble ‘paintbrush’ lesions and non‐pruritic lesions that have hardened (Domingues et al.2018).
All body areas may be affected; however, the dorsal midline and inner thighs are most susceptible (Aydoğdu et al.2021).
The intensity of the lesions varies, ranging from minor ones (little paintbrush‐like lesions) and clearly defined scabs to more confluent, progressing lesions.
Acute (or) chronic, local (or) progressive serous exudation, drying to develop hair matting, and scab are the disease's hallmarks (Reddy et al.2020).
Dermatophilosis diagnosed by visible lesions and microbial confirmation below scabs (Vasu et al.2018).
Numerous topical and parenteral antimicrobials (either alone or in combination) have been suggested for treatment; however, topical procedures are acknowledged to be generally useless, and several conventional medications cannot achieve therapeutic concentrations on the skin (Burd et al.2007).
Additionally, the degree and severity of injuries affect the treatment outcome, because disseminated lesions are generally refractory to therapy (Quinn et al.2011).
Typically, the preferred antimicrobials for the parenteral treatment of dermatophilosis are tetracyclines, streptomycin and penicillin (Radostitis et al.2007).
The preferred medication for treating dermatophilosis in cows is gentamicin, which is followed by amoxirum forte, parenteral meloxicam, cleaning the afflicted regions with a solution of sodium bicarbonate and sodium chloride and using a topical spray of 5% povidone‐iodine solution (Reddy et al.2020).
To prevent it, isolating sick animals, culling chronic cases and managing parasites are important (Sagi and Remala2015).
Dermatophilosis can infect humans, especially those with weakened immunity, through direct contact with infected animals.
This is a public health concern as it causes painless pustules on hands and arms, which degenerate into shallow red ulcers, leaving scars.
When handling diseased animals and samples, wear gloves and protective equipment and wash your hands properly afterwards (Reddy et al.2020).
Therefore, this case report describes a chronic dermatophilosis case and its treatment challenges.
A 5‐year‐old local breed bull was presented to Professor Feseha Gebreab Memorial Veterinary Teaching Hospital of College of Veterinary Medicine and Agriculture, Addis Ababa University, Bishoftu on 25 January 2023, from Bishoftu, Kebele 14, with the main complaints of a dry skin lesion that started from the scrotal area before 1 year of presentation.
The bull was brought from a rural kebele surrounding Bishoftu town before its 5‐month presentation.
It was treated at the beginning with an unknown drug.
The owner stated that he advised to feed it with supplement feed, which help its recovery after a few days.
For this reason, the owner separated the bull from the herd and manages it in Bishoftu town before presentation to the hospital.
However, the disease was becoming severe, and the lesion was spreading over the body.
On clinical examination, the bull was in medium body condition, and there was a dry scabby skin lesion on its dorsum parts: back, rump, hump, both sides of the abdomen and ventrally on its scrotum (Figure1).
Grey‐coloured scabs that stick the hair together on the hump area and are painful when tried to remove them manually during examination.
The removed skin lesion is slightly wet beneath.
The lesion is compacted together, and it is not easily break down.
The rectal temperature was 38.8°C, the respiratory rate was 28 breaths per minute, and the heartbeat was 72 beats per minute, which indicates the normal range.
Dermatophilosis was diagnosed, whereas dermatophytosis and papillomatosis were proposed as a differential diagnosis.
The scabs were sampled and transported to the Veterinary Clinical Pathology and Microbiology Laboratories of the College of Veterinary Medicine and Agriculture, Addis Ababa University.
Dermatophilosis case presentation.
(a) Lesion on rump, (b) lesion on scrotal area and (c) lesion on back.
An impression smear was made from the underside of scabs on clean microscopic slides.
The smear was fixed with heat for Gram's staining and with methanol for Gemsa's staining.
The stained smear was examined under a microscope with 100× magnification power.
The examined smear result was revealed as thin, branched and separated multiple filaments with typical railroad stack arrangements of organisms (Figure2a,b).
The skin sample was mixed with 10% KOH and examined for the diagnosis of a skin parasite, mites; the result was negative.
The cytological diagnosis indicated normal blood cells (cells with one nucleus).
From the laboratory results, the cause of the disease was confirmed as D.congolensis.
Laboratory diagnosis result of bovine dermatophilosis.
(a) Giemsa staining ofDermatophilus congolensisand (b) Gram's staining ofDermatophilus congolensis.
The skin lesion was scrubbed with a 10% sodium chloride solution, and the scabby crust was removed from it (Figure3a).
After removal of the scab from the lesion, it was disinfected with cetrimide 3% and chlorhexidine 0.3% (Cavlon) solution, and iodine 2% was applied topically for 5 successive days (Figure3b).
The bull was treated with seven doses of long‐acting oxytetracycline (20%) by deep intramuscular injection at a dose of 20 mg/kg.
The first four injections of long‐acting oxytetracycline were given at a 3‐day interval, and then the treatment course was continued at a weekly interval for 3 weeks.
Long‐acting oxytetracycline was selected depending on its availability and affordability.
The main criteria for the drug of choice were to reduce the frequency with which the owner presents the animal to the hospital.
The owner complained that he could not present the animal daily for treatment.
Diclofenac intramuscular injection was administered at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg for 3 consecutive days at the beginning of treatment.
Ivermectin 1% was given three times per week subcutaneously at a dose of 1 mL/50 kg (0.2 mg/kg) of body weight to control external parasites.
In the middle of treatment, the removed scabs deposited fibrin and became dry; the response was good (Figure3c,d).
After a treatment course of 5 weeks, the removed crusts re‐emerged again on the body of the bull, particularly at the base of the tail and aggressively re‐developed on the scrotum, tail base and rump (Figure3e,f).
The disease was not responded to the given drug.
Because there was no impatient animal care service for large animals in the teaching hospital to closely monitor the case, changing the treatment drug to other treatment option was not done.
Moreover, the owner did not want to bring the animal to the hospital for other treatment options.
So that culling the animal by slaughter for disposal was recommended.
Treatment of dermatophilosis and its outcome.
(a) Skin lesion removed from body, (b) topical iodine application, (c and d) response for the moment (good response to treatment) and (e and f) recurrence of the disease.
Dermatophilosis is an acute, subacute or chronic skin disease affecting primarily cattle, small ruminants,Equidae, humans and certain non‐domesticated species (Dickson et al.2010).
Clinical dermatophilosis lesions consist of non‐pruritic, hardened and coalescent lesions with an irregular elevated crust that are like ‘paintbrush’ lesions (Domingues et al.2018).
The current case agrees with the mentioned idea, which was a chronic dermatophilosis case on a local breed bull with a non‐pruritic, hardened and crusty lesion distributed throughout the body, dominating the rump and inguinal region as indicated in Figure1.
Dermatophilosis diagnosis is mainly based on the appearance of the characteristic skin lesions and confirmed by the demonstration of the causal organism from the lesions beneath the scabs (Vasu et al.2018).
The bacteria have the characteristics of branched, separated multiple filaments with typical railroad stack arrangements (Reddy et al.2020).
The Giemsa stain smear examined under 100x magnification power of the current case results in branched filaments with typical railroad stack arrangements of organisms (Figure2), which agrees with the Reddy idea.
The current case was treated by scrubbing the skin lesion with a 10% sodium chloride solution, and the crust was removed.
After removal, it was disinfected with Savlon solution, and iodine 2% was applied topically for 5 successive days.
The bull was treated with seven doses of long‐acting oxytetracycline (20%) by deep intramuscular injection at a dose of 20 mg/kg.
The first four injections of long‐acting oxytetracycline were given at a 3‐day interval, and then the treatment course was continued at a weekly interval for 3 weeks.
Long‐acting oxytetracycline was selected depending on its availability and affordability.
The main criterion for the drug of choice was to reduce the frequency with which the owner presents the animal to the hospital.
Different protocols for the treatment of bovine dermatophilosis have been reported, although beta‐lactams (penicillin), aminoglycosides (streptomycin) and tetracyclines are reported as the first‐line antimicrobials for the treatment of localized cutaneous lesions of dermatophilosis among livestock (Domingues et al.2018).
The repetition of tetracycline (5 mg/kg) weekly until resolution of clinical signs, or one application of long‐acting tetracycline or oxytetracycline (20 mg/kg), has been described as effective.
Parenteral penicillin‐procaine (22.000 IU/kg) daily for 3 days has also been reported to yield good results by Radostitis et al. (2007).
Salama (2015) reported clinical and bacteriological cures were achieved at the 4th‐week post‐treatment, representing a 100% cure rate after treatment using long‐acting oxytetracycline in addition to topical application of povidone‐iodine 5%.
Salama concluded that treatment using long‐acting oxytetracycline, three doses 3 days apart and keeping treated animals in a dry place gave a 100% cure rate after 4 weeks.
Ndhlovu and Masika (2015) indicated that a double dose of long‐acting tetracyclines given a day apart gave better results than a single dose.
Reddy surveyed farmers’ awareness, perception and attitude towards dermatophilosis and reported that oxytetracycline antibiotic types were the drugs used by most of the farmers for the treatment of dermatophilosis.
In addition, Ndhlovu and Masika (2016) stated that most farmers administer antibiotics four to seven times for cattle, and it takes 3–5 weeks for an animal to fully recover after treatment.
Domingues et al. (2018) reported that three applications of long‐acting tetracycline (20 mg/kg) weekly were effective in solving a case of generalized bovine dermatophilosis with chronic evolution.
In an experimental study conducted by Hamid and Musa (2009) on animals suffering from dermatophilosis, four animals were given intramuscular injections of long‐acting oxytetracycline (20%) at a dose of 20 mg/kg body weight.
In all, 20 mg/kg was administered twice, 3 days apart.
In this group, three of the four animals (75%) were cured.
Four weeks after ending therapy, one of these four treated cows relapsed, and its condition worsened until it died.
The recuperation of individuals affected by dermatophilosis was observed when the disease was detected at an early stage or in bovine subjects that exhibited only mild symptoms.
According to the recommendations put forth by Hamid and Musa, gentamycin represents the optimal pharmacological agent for parenteral treatment.
Nonetheless, the routine administration of gentamicin may pose a considerable challenge in extensive farming environments, whereas the expenditure associated with this therapeutic drug remains significant.
Reddy et al. (2020) recommended gentamicin as a drug of choice for treating dermatophilosis in bovines, followed by amoxirum forte along with parenteral meloxicam, scrubbing of the affected areas with an equal mixture of sodium bicarbonate and sodium chloride, and a topical spray of povidone‐iodine solution 5%.
Hamid and Musa (2009) reported that gentamicin was found to be the most effective treatment, followed by a combination of penicillin and streptomycin and finally, long‐acting oxytetracycline, whereas enrofloxacin was not found to be effective for the treatment of bovine dermatophilosis.
In this case report, the owner complains that he could not present the animal daily for treatment, and long‐acting oxytetracycline was chosen for therapy due to its commercial availability, low cost and reduced number of injections required to conclude the treatment.
The required dose of gentamycin for adult cattle was expensive in comparison with long‐acting oxytetracycline.
There was no impatient animal care service for large animals in the teaching hospital to follow up on the case with close attention.
The owner advised against mixing the bull with other herds and recommended culling the animal by slaughter.
The severity of the lesion (generalized chronic lesion) might be the cause of disease relapse, and individual animal factors could have influenced the treatment's resistive response.
Furthermore, failure to react to therapy may be caused by microorganism resistance to this drug as a result of repeated oxytetracycline usage.
Further study is needed to determine whether oxytetracycline is beneficial in treating chronic dermatophilosis.