Recent advances in avian melanogenesis have pinpointed multiple genetic loci associated with color polymorphisms, predominantly in the plumage of chickens, quails, and pigeons.
However, the genetic basis of melaninization in parrot plumage remains elusive.
Previously, we showed that mutations in the melanosomal ion‐transporter SLC45A2 lead to a complete loss of blue structural color in green parrot feathers, leaving only yellow psittacofulvin.
Yet, several color morphs involving partial or complete melanin reduction are common in captive‐bred parrots that have not been studied.
To bridge this gap, we investigated two new color morphs of parrot plumage: non‐sex‐linked recessivelutino(NSL), which entirely inhibits blue structural coloration, and the sex‐linked recessivecinnamon, which reduces the intensity of blue structural coloration.
Our genotypic analysis revealed that tyrosinase (TYR) variants are responsible for theNSLphenotype in Fischer's lovebird and green‐cheeked parakeet, while tyrosinase related protein 1 (TYRP1) variants are associated with thecinnamonphenotype in the rose‐ringed parakeet.
When transfected into HEK293T cells, the candidate substitutions significantly affected tyrosinase enzymatic activity.
This study underscores tyrosinase and related enzymes' role in parrot feather coloration, enhancing our understanding of avian melanogenesis as well as the conserved functions of melanogenic components across different species.
This study identifies mutations affecting melaninization in parrots, focusing on non‐sex‐linkedlutino(NSL) andcinnamoncolor morphs.
TYR mutations underlie the NSL phenotype in Fischer's lovebird and green‐cheeked parakeet, while TYRP1 mutations drive the cinnamon phenotype in rose‐ringed parakeets.
These findings highlight tyrosinase and related enzymes' role in parrot coloration through the evolutionary conservation of melanogenesis pathways.
Melanin pigments play a pivotal role in determining the coloration of bird feathers, with eumelanin (producing brown and black colors) and pheomelanin (yielding yellow to reddish‐brown hues) being the most common color‐producing pigments in birds and other vertebrates (Jeon et al.2021).
The relative abundance of these pigments not only governs the specific color of a feather, but their distribution contributes to the formation of complex spatial patterns such as stripes and spots, essential for various biological functions, including signaling, photoprotection, and thermoregulation (McNamara et al.2021).
In the order Psittaciformes, commonly designated as parrots, melanin pigmentation combines with a unique pigment called psittacofulvin to achieve the vibrant and diverse plumage across the species.
The green coloration typical of many parrot species actually results from the interaction between yellow psittacofulvin and melanin‐based blue structural color, where brown‐black melanin granules create a blue hue by selectively scattering light within the medullary nanostructure (spongy layer) of the feather barbs (Ghosh Roy et al.2024).
Alterations in either of these processes can lead to various intraspecies polymorphisms, which have become widespread through artificial selection in aviculture.
Over the past decade, these domestic populations of polymorphic parrots have emerged as valuable models for studying genotype–phenotype correlations.
A recessive Mendelian trait known as “blue” was initially characterized, in which the yellow psittacofulvin pigmentation is entirely absent (D'Alba et al.2012).
Two independent studies on budgerigars and lovebirds carrying thebluephenotype revealed the contribution of a previously uncharacterized polyketide synthase (MuPKS) in yellow psittacofulvin, where substitution of a single amino acid residue at the conserved functional domain was found to be disruptive in nature (Cooke et al.2017; Ke et al.2024).
Just recently, a cutting‐edge study identified the enzyme ALDH3A2 as the key factor in altering the oxidation state of the final psittacofulvin product, resulting in a color change from red to yellow (Arbore et al.2024).
Correspondingly, in pursuit of melanogenic contribution, our group discovered causal mutations at the conserved transmembrane domain of an important transporter protein SLC45A2 that lead to a complete absence of melanin‐based blue structural color and cause the manifestation of bright yellow plumage in three different parrot species (rose‐ringed, alexandrine and plum‐headed) carrying the sex‐linked recessive traitlutino(Ghosh Roy et al.2024).
Interestingly, parrots also inherit thelutinophenotype in a non‐sex‐linked manner (referred asNSLhenceforth).
This form resembles the characteristics of the sex‐linked variety but results from an autosomal mutation that entirely blocks the production of melanin‐based structural color while leaving psittacofulvin pigments unaffected (Martin2002).
Certain intraspecific color polymorphisms are also noted in captive‐bred populations, where rather than a complete inhibition of melanin synthesis, altered expression of melanin‐based blue pigmentation influences the final coloration.
One prominent example is thecinnamonphenotype, where feathers display a soft brown or tan hue with lighter green or yellow tones.
This mutation is sex‐linked and recessive to the wild type (Martin2002).
Although both these phenotypes (NSLandcinnamon) are common among several parrot species, the specific genetic mechanisms are yet to be understood.
Thus, we decided to focus on the genetic basis of these two melanogenic defects—NSLandcinnamon, widely expanded due to strong artificial selection for their unique and striking appearances.
Extensive research has demonstrated that both eumelanin and pheomelanin play crucial roles in determining avian plumage colour, with their expression regulated by various genes.
Together, these genes orchestrate the type and distribution of melanin in bird plumage, influencing its diversity and function.
Activation of MC1R promotes eumelanin (Kerje et al.2003), while agouti signaling protein (ASIP) antagonizes MC1R to favor pheomelanin (Hiragaki et al.2008).
Pro‐opiomelanocortin (POMC) encodes precursors for melanocortins that activate MC1R, enhancing eumelanin production (Emaresi et al.2013).
Endothelin receptor B (EDNRB) aids melanocyte migration and eumelanin synthesis (Miwa et al.2007), while KIT facilitates melanocyte survival and distribution (Lecoin et al.1995).
The enzyme tyrosinase (TYR) catalyzes the initial step, converting tyrosine to dopaquinone, a precursor for both melanin types (Chang et al.2006; Tobita‐Teramoto et al.2000; Xu et al.2013).
Tyrosinase‐related proteins TYRP1 (Li et al.2019; Xu et al.2013) and TYRP2 (Sultana et al.2018) further guide the pathway toward eumelanin synthesis.
Microphthalmia‐associated transcription factor (MITF) is a master regulator of melanogenic gene expression, activating TYR, TYRP1, and TYRP2 (Yang et al.2019).
Melanosome structure and maturation are crucial for melanin deposition.
Premelanosome protein (PMEL) contributes to eumelanin‐specific melanosome development.
Melanophilin (MLPH) regulates melanosome transport (Vaez et al.2008), ensuring even pigment distribution.
The solute carriers OCA2 (Abolins‐Abols et al.2018), SLC24A5 (Guo et al.2024), and aforementioned SLC45A2 (Ghosh Roy et al.2024; Gunnarsson et al.2007) regulate melanosome pH and ion balance, affecting pigment type and intensity.
Homologs of all these genes (listed in TableS1) have been identified in the annotated parrot genome of the budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus), and any disruption in their function could potentially lead to melanogenic defects in parrot plumage.
Most of these candidate genes are located on autosomes including MLPH, KIT, EDNRB, POMC, MITF, ASIP, TYR, TYRP2, OCA2, PMEL, and SLC24A5.
Among them, TYR, which encodes the rate‐limiting enzyme tyrosinase, is directly linked in the literature to autosomal albinism in chickens (Tobita‐Teramoto et al.2000) and higher vertebrates (Breimer et al.1994; Damé et al.2012; King et al.2003; Lin, Sanchez‐Bretaño et al.2022; Nakamura et al.2002; Oetting et al.1993; Opitz et al.2004; Passmore et al.1999; Ukaji et al.2016; Utzeri et al.2021; Xu et al.2013).
A recent study linked thepearlphenotype in domesticated canaries, characterized by reduced melanin pigmentation, to a mutation in theTYRgene, suggesting thatacromelanismin other bird species might also result fromTYRmutations (Guimarães‐Moreira et al.2024).
Interestingly, the absence of phaeomelanin in parrot feathers indicates that eumelanin alone plays the fundamental role in creating the final green color (De Oliveira Neves, Galván et al.2020), suggesting functional loci associated with melanogenic defects in parrots are likely to be linked with eumelanin synthesis specifically.
This substantially reduces the potential loci responsible for thecinnamonphenotype.
Pedigree data from the breeders confirmed that thecinnamonlocus is inherited through the Z chromosome.
Since, SLC45A2 has already been characterized for the sex‐linked lutino phenotype in parrots (Ghosh Roy et al.2024), the focus shifts to the sole candidate located on the Z chromosome, TYRP1 (refer TableS1).
Intriguingly, the TYRP1 mutation has already been associated with sex‐linked recessive mutations namedrouxin quails and choc in chickens.
Both mutations exhibit plumage where black is diluted into chocolate color resulting from an abnormal structure of the melanin due to a dysfunction of TYRP1 (Li et al.2019; Nadeau et al.2007).
Moreover, theTYRP1gene is characterized as thebrownlocus across a wide range of mammals such as rabbits, alpacas, mice, cats, dogs, cattle, and humans (Berryere et al.2003; Gautron et al.2021; Hirobe et al.2014; Jia et al.2021; Lyons et al.2005; Melo‐Rojas et al.2023; Schmutz et al.2002), where eumelanin content is modified from black to grey or brown, directly relating to its role in the final step of the synthetic pathway.
To identify the loci of interest (NSLandcinnamon) in parrots, we selected two widely kept pet species from distinct phylogenetic backgrounds that commonly exhibit intraspecific polymorphism within captive populations.
Mapping of theNSLlocus was accomplished in Fischer's lovebird (Agapornis fischeri) from the familyPsittaculidaeand green‐cheeked parakeet (Pyrrhura molinae) from the familyPsittacidae(Figure1a), whereas thecinnamonlocus was investigated in the rose‐ringed parakeet (Psittacula krameri) from the familyPsittaculidae(Figure1b).
Genotyping was conducted on wild‐type and samples carrying phenotypes of interest.
A microstructural analysis was performed on samples with thecinnamontrait to confirm the physical nature.
Finally, a transfected non‐native system was used to examine how these gene mutations affect the functional capacity of the tyrosinase enzymatic activity.
Color morphs analyzed in this study.
(a)NSL(b)cinnamon(WT birds are on the left and mutant morphs are at right).
Phenotypic changes in the mutant feather are illustrated through overlapping colored circles.
Each circle represents psittacofulvin pigmentation or structural color.
[Pictures are taken by Shatadru Ghosh Roy and Moty Abdu or available in public domain].
To understand the physical foundation of the color morphs tested in this study, we compared wild‐type and mutant feather specimens.
Feathers from wildtype and mutant (NSLandcinnamon) parrots were sourced from local breeders and pet shops.
After being washed in distilled water, the feathers were dried overnight at 60°C and then prepared for light microscopy.
The images were captured using a Leica M165 FC microscope.
Melanogenic defects leading to coat color variation in various species, including chicken and quail feathers, depends on the two melanic components, eumelanin and pheomelanin (Gunnarsson et al.2007).
To determine if thecinnamonmutation affects the regulatory mechanism preventing pheomelanin synthesis in parrots, as proposed by De Oliveira Neves, Galván et al.2020, we conducted pigment analysis using Raman microscopy.
We have analyzed intact feathers of wild‐type andcinnamonP.
kramerifor the presence of eumelanin and pheomelanin using a confocal Raman microscope (WITec alpha300 RSA, Oxford Instruments) with a 50× EC Epiplan‐Neofluar (NA = 0.55, Zeiss) objective.
To validate the nature of pigments, we have also measured spectra of black and brown feathers of feral pigeons (C. livia) known to produce either eumelanin (black) or pheomelanin (brown) (Haase et al.1992).
To excite the Raman spectra, we used a 532 nm laser with ~0.3 mW power at the focal plane.
To capture potential spatial pigment variability, we have measured each parrot feather over five 11 μm long and 11 μm deep regions.
We processed the data in WITec Project FIVE Plus (v6.2) software, with steps including advanced cosmic ray removal, cropping spectral edges affected by detector margins, background subtraction, spectral unmixing using the True Component Analysis tool, and averaging spectra per individual scan map to optimize the signal‐to‐noise ratio.
Finally, we compared the melanin spectral shapes to published data (Galván et al.2013).
To illustrate the similarity of the spectra clearly, we have performed Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) analysis, as previously described (Palacký et al.2011).
Briefly, the Raman spectra (n= 19) were decomposed into orthonormal sub‐spectra with associated weights and coefficients.
Then primary spectral variability was visualized using factor scores (the first component for Raman intensity and the second component for chemical composition differences).
In samples containing two spectrally distinct compounds, rescaled scores of the second component were used to estimate relative compound fractions.
Custom Matlab scripts, leveraging the Matlab svd function (based on the LAPACK library), were used for SVD‐based corrections and analysis.
The softer and more pastel green appearance ofcinnamonplumage suggests a marginal defect in melanin‐based structural blue coloration within the feather microstructure.
To test this hypothesis, we performed histological analysis of feather barbs from wild‐type (n= 3) andcinnamon(n= 5)P. krameri.
Pieces of contour and remex feathers were rinsed in 1X PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight, and then washed in a graded series of 50%–100% ethanol followed by xylene.
After dehydration, the tissues were placed in hot paraffin baths at 65°C in a vacuum oven for 1–2 h each.
Subsequently, the samples were embedded in paraffin molds and sectioned into 8 mm slices.
Cross sections were then examined and imaged using a Nikon light microscope ECLIPSE Ci‐L.
At the very beginning of our study, we encountered that genomes are available for all the sample species of our study, but with no annotation data.
Thus, candidate homologs were identified using the annotatedM.
undulatusGenBank assembly bMelUnd1.mat.Z (GCA_012275295.1).
Candidate loci of the studied species were identified using nucleotide BLAST of the respective genome assembly with budgerigar coding as query.
Unannotated genome assemblies used in this study are as follows:A. fischeri: ASM3478289v1 (GCA_034782895.1),P. molinae: ASM1176335v2 (GCA_011763355.2), andP.
krameri: P.krameri1.0 (GCA_002870145.1).
Identity was calculated via the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi).
For pairwise sequence alignment, EMBOSS Needle (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/psa/embossneedle/) was used.
For mapping ofNSLwe decided to check the mutant specimens for non‐synonymous variants in protein‐coding regions of the autosomal candidate homologs listed in TableS1.
Though, forcinnamon, a direct “candidate gene approach” was applied and the coding sequence of TYRP1 was checked as the most evident candidate.
For genotyping, blood samples were obtained first by clipping the toes of healthy birds from breeders, then dried on appropriate filter paper along with relevant details.
The collection was conducted by Sde‐Tzvi Lab (https://dnalab.co.il/) as part of their sex identification services.
For screening candidate variations associated with theNSLphenotype, we checked two species—A.
fischeriandP.molinae.16 individuals of A.fischeriwere tested, where eight of them were wildtypes and eight carryingNSLphenotypes.
Similarly, 15 individuals of P.molinaewere tested, where five were wildtypes and 10 were carryingNSLphenotypes.
For thecinnamonphenotype, nine individuals of P.krameriwere tested.
Three of them were wildtypes and six were carryingcinnamonphenotypes.
The number of specimens with specific phenotypes analyzed using Sanger sequencing in this study is summarized in Table1.
DNA was extracted from whole blood through an alkaline extraction technique.
A portion of the dried blood paper was soaked in 45 μL of 0.2 M NaOH solution and then incubated at 75°C for 5 min.
From this solution, 1 μL was used as a template for a 30 μL PCR amplification mixture.
We start by investigating the possible role ofTYRandTYRP1as the most likely candidates for theNSLandcinnamonmutants.
We Sanger‐sequenced all the exons, including the splice sites and adjacent intronic parts, from wild‐type and mutants of each species and compared them by pairwise alignment.
The coding sequences of candidate homologs were amplified from 50 ng of genomic DNA per reaction using intronic primers (refer to TablesS2andS3) having final concentration of 0.6 mM through PCR amplification using 2x PCRBIO HS Taq Mix Red manufactured by “PCR Biosystems”.
The PCR was run in Bio‐Rad T100 Thermal Cycler according to the manufacturer's instructions.
The concentrations of the PCR products were measured using a spectrophotometer (DeNovix DS‐11 FX) at OD260and verified for integrity by running them on a 1% agarose gel in TBE.
The amplified products were then sequenced using the forward primers listed in the TablesS2andS3via Sanger sequencing.
Sanger reactions are performed using the eBgDy Terminator 3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Epoch Life Science) per kit recommendations on a Biometra Trio (analytik jena).
Reactions are cleaned using HighPrep DTR—DX beads (MAGBIO) and sequenced on a 3500xL Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems).
The genotypes of each bird were determined by manually examining the sequencing chromatograms in Chromas software version 2.6.6.
The first candidate homolog TYR, genotyped for mappingNSLlocus in two species, showed significant changes in cDNA resulting in non‐synonymous substitutions of single amino acid.
The enzyme tyrosinase is a critical oxidase responsible for the first step in melanin production, which can be firmly associated with the severity ofNSL.
Moreover, most examples of complete albinism in higher vertebrates have been due to defects in the tyrosinase gene.
On the other hand, as expected TYRP1 homolog of tested species withcinnamonphenotype displayed cDNA variants causing non‐synonymous amino acid changes.
Thus, we sought to investigate the structural and functional roles of these affected residues in TYR and TYRP1.
To predict the functional impact of the candidate variants, we analyzed the deduced amino acids of homologs of interest:AfTYR(coding sequence ofA.
fischerityrosinase),PmTYR(coding sequence of P.molinaetyrosinase), andPkTYRP1(coding sequence of P.krameriTyrosinase related protein 1).
First, we checked the conservation status of the affected residues.
To identify the conserved sequences, a domain search was done using Jalview version 2.11.2.0 (Tcoffee alignment).
The InterPro webtool (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used to predict the motifs in the TYR and TYRP1 protein sequences.
Examination of the deduced amino acid sequence revealed the presence of all conserved domains that characterize the candidate proteins reported to date.
The secondary structure elements were added using the TYRP1 crystal structure (PDB 5M8L) (Lai et al.2017), retrieved from the PDB database (https://www.rcsb.org/).
The potential effect of the candidate TYR and TYRP1 mutation was predicted by the PolyPhen webtool (Adzhubei et al.2010,http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/), giving a probability score for the mutation to be either “possibly damaging” or “benign”.
To understand the impact of the candidate substitutions on tyrosinase enzymatic activity, first we clonedAfTYRinto a mammalian vector.
For cloning ZsGreen taggedAfTYRinto the pHAGE vector (modified from Plasmid #164432 of Addgene), firstly, total RNA was extracted from wild type greenA.
fischeriusing Norgen Biotek's Total RNA Purification Kit.
Regenerating contour feathers (two pin feathers) were collected with tweezers and treated according to manufacturer's RNA extraction protocol.
Next, total cDNA was prepared from total RNA with the qScript cDNA Synthesis Kit.
The coding sequence of theAfTYRgene was amplified from the total cDNA by PCR and cloned into the pRAT vector by Gibson assembly using the SalI site.
Subsequently, this coding sequence was sub‐cloned into the pHAGE vector under the CAG promoter with the ZsGreen tag using the KpnI site (used primers are listed in TablesS2andS3).
Nucleotide changes found in different species were introduced into pHAGE‐CAG‐AfTYR‐ZsGreenby site directed mutagenesis (used primers are listed in TableS4).
HEK293T cells obtained from ATCC were cultured at 37°C and 10% CO2in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum.
Cells were transfected by PEI 48 h prior to imaging experiments withAfTYR‐ZsGreen(WT) and mutants.AfTYR‐ZsGreentransfected HEK293T cells were fixed with 4% PFA for 15 min.
The samples were then washed thrice in 1X PBS and incubated in Hoechst 33342 (1 μg/mL) for 10 min.
After washing thrice in 1X PBS, the samples were mounted in 50% glycerol.
Images were collected with an Olympus FV1000 laser‐scanning confocal microscope.
Results were obtained from three independent replicates.
To analyse the differences in appearance between the wild‐type and mutant variants selected for this study, we started with conducting a detailed comparison of their phenotypes.
Both sexes of A.fischerihave a green back, chest, and wings.
Their necks are golden yellow, transitioning to darker orange towards the head.
The top of the head is olive green, and the beak is bright red.
The upper surface of the tail includes some purple or blue feathers.
On the other hand,P.molinaeare dull brown from the forehead to the nape, with green cheeks, ashy brown ear coverts, and a creamy white ring of bare skin around the eyes.
Their upper parts are green, the chin, throat, and sides of the neck are scaly brown and whitish, the belly is dull reddish, and the lower flanks and vent area are green.
The wings are mostly green, with bluish flight feathers, and the tail is dull reddish.
No sexual dimorphism is observed in this species either.
TheNSLphenotype in both species results in significant changes, similar to those seen in the sex‐linked inherited lutino phenotype (Ghosh Roy et al.2024).
The predominant green color of the feathers in both species is a result of yellow psittacofulvin combined with blue structural color.
As previously analysed, sex‐linkedlutinovariants, in the non‐sex‐linked variant, the blue structural colour is absent due to a lack of melanin, leaving only the yellow visible.
The overall appearance is characterized by a uniform yellow coloration across the body, except for the beak and legs, which may retain their normal colour.
This mutation also causes a loss of darker colors like black, grey, and brown in different body parts, and results in red eyes instead of the normal black eyes.
There are no visual differences between sex‐linked and non‐sex‐linkedlutinosas such; the only visible difference may be the consistency and intensity of the yellow coloration and eye colour.
The main distinctions lie in the patterns of inheritance and the potential for variability in appearance.
Wild‐type P.krameritypically have bright green plumage with a regular combination of yellow pigments (psittacofulvins) and blue structural colours.Cinnamonmutants, having a sex‐linked recessive inheritance, exhibit a dilution of the normal black or dark grey markings to a brownish color.
The plumage appears paler, being about half the depth of normal green.
The overall effect is a more muted, lighter green or yellowish‐green appearance.
Microstructural assessment from our previous study confirms the complete absence of melanosomes within barb medulla in yellow parrot feathers (Ghosh Roy et al.2024).
However, the underlying mechanism ofcinnamonappearance remained unclear.
In this study, comparison of wild‐type andcinnamonfeathers from P.kramerirevealed interesting details.
First, we sought to verify whether the earlier observation of De Oliveira Neves, Galván et al.2020regarding the regulatory mechanism behind the lack of pheomelanin synthesis in parrots holds true in ourcinnamonmutants.
Using the Raman microscopy, we have confirmed that parrot feathers contain eumelanin but not pheomelanin.
The spectra are depicted in Figure2a–d.
Spectra of black C.liviafeather (Figure2a), wild‐type (Figure2c), andcinnamon P. krameri(Figure2d) show a complex broad band with a maximum at ~1580 cm−1that corresponds to the previously reported spectrum of eumelanin (Haase et al.1992).
On the other hand, the spectrum of brown C.liviafeather (Figure2b) shows a maximum at ~1465 cm−1which roughly corresponds to the previously reported spectrum of pheomelanin (Haase et al.1992).
The difference between pheomelanic brown pigeon feather and all the eumelanic spectra was confirmed by SVD analysis where all eumelanic spectra cluster together.
We then performed a microstructural analysis of thecinnamonfeather to investigate its phenotypic basis.
Detailed examination of green feather under a light microscope showed regular green barbs with barbules having a yellow to black gradient towards the tip (Figure2g).
In contrast, feathers exhibiting thecinnamonphenotype displayed pale green barbs with barbules transitioning from yellow to brown towards the tip.
Notably, the green color of the barb was inconsistent, appearing patchy (Figure2g) and the yellow part of the barbule was mostly changed to light brown.
On investigation of feather cross‐section from green andcinnamonbarbs under a light microscope, we observed the usual outer cortex with yellow psittacofulvin pigmentation (Figure2g) in both the specimens.
Interestingly, the medullary region ofcinnamonbarb exhibited light brown melanin instead of dark black deposition in the wild type (Figure2g).
Pigment characterization ofcinnamonparrot feathers.
Confocal Raman microscopy measurements confirmed the melanin types in (a) black feathers of feral pigeons (C. livia), known for their high eumelanin content and (b) brown pigeon feathers characterized by their pheomelanin content (Haase et al.1992).
Measurements from feathers of parrot P.krameri(c) wild type and (d)cinnamonmutant revealed spectra similar to those of black pigeon feathers.
(e) Multidimensional SVD analysis further demonstrated that the pigment in parrot feathers matches that found in black pigeon feathers.
Panels (a)–(d) display feather details, close‐ups of the measured regions, depth‐resolved virtual feather cross‐sections showing the detected molecular signal, and Raman spectra of the pigments.
(f) Spectral interpretation of the difference between black pigeon,cinnamonand wild‐type parrot spectra versus brown pigeon spectra.
Thus, this differential spectrum illustrates the spectral difference between predominantly eumelanin and predominantly pheomelanin dominant Raman spectra.
Panels show (g) magnified view of light microscope images of wild‐type feathers (top‐left) with green barbs (Brb) and yellow to black barbules (Brbl) andcinnmaonfeather (top‐right) with pale green barbs (Brb) and yellow to light brown barbules (Brbl) from P.krameri.
Vertical sections of a single barb from wild‐type (bottom‐left) feather, showing medullary melanin (Mel) with dark black coloration and fromcinnamon(bottom‐right), showing with light brown coloration.
[Scale bars for light microscope images are 20 μm.]
(h) Biochemical pathway of eumelanin synthesis in feathers.
DHI, 5,6‐dihydroxyindole; DHICA, 5,6‐dihydroxyindole‐2‐carboxylic acid; IQ, Indole‐5,6‐quinone; IQCA, Indole‐5,6‐quinone‐2‐carboxylic acid; L‐DOPA, L‐3,4‐dihydroxyphenylalanine.
These observations establish thecinnamonphenotype in parrots as exclusively a eumelanic variation.
It also indicates that thecinnamonmutation interrupts the eumelanin pathway and prevents eumelanin polymer from reaching its final dark black state (Figure2h).
The lighter eumelanin, not fully converted to black, appeared as a grey‐brown color, inhibiting shades of structural blue or darker black and grey coloration on the bird.
AllNSLspecimens tested in this study showed a single homozygous non‐synonymous substitution (c.736‐737TG>CT) at exon 1 ofAfTyr, changing tryptophan 246 to leucine (FigureS1a).
Subsequent testing ofPmTYRalso revealed a homozygous missense variant (c.1111C>T) at exon 4, changing histidine 371 to tyrosine in all tested specimens carrying theNSLphenotype (FigureS1b).
Comparison of the TYRP1 homolog of wild‐type andcinnamon P. krameriuncovered two defective alleles: one deletion at exon 1 (c.86‐95del) and another missense variant at exon 2 (c.691G>A) (FigureS2a,b).
The former deletion causes a frameshift starting from residue cysteine 29 that leads to an early stop at position 64 (FigureS2a) and is found to be always segregated together with the exon 2 mutation as trans‐heterozygous.
The latter substitutes glutamate 231 by a lysine residue (FigureS2b) and is found to be homozygous (n= 4) or together with the exon 1 mutation (n= 2).
We confirmed our findings by testing a significant number of wild‐type and mutant specimens (Table1and TablesS5–S7).
The results were perfectly consistent with the expected segregation pattern.
To understand the functional impact of the candidate variations, we analyzed parrot TYR and TYRP1 by utilizing the crystal structure of human TYRP1 (HsTYRP1), which is the first available structure of a mammalian melanogenic enzyme.
Both the human enzymes TYR and TYRP1 are metal‐containing glycoproteins and have a single transmembrane α‐helix (Lai et al.2018).
Alignment data showed that HsTYRP1 and PkTYRP1 share roughly 77% amino acid sequence identity and around 88% similarity, whereas HsTYR and AfTYR share roughly 72% amino acid sequence identity and around 84% similarity.
Notably, the two melanogenic parrot enzymes TYR and TYRP1 are approximately 39% identical at the protein level and share 54% similarity with each other (Figure3a).
Thus, we decided to use the HsTYRP1‐based homology model of the two parrot enzymes to map and analyze the effect of the candidate mutations.
TYR and TYRP1 have four conserved regions: an N‐terminal signal peptide, a large intra‐melanosomal domain, a single transmembrane α‐helix, and a small, flexible C‐terminal cytoplasmic domain (Figure3a).
The intra‐melanosomal domain contains a cysteine‐rich subdomain and a catalytic tyrosinase‐like subdomain with two metal‐ion‐binding sites (Figure3a).
The transmembrane domain anchors the protein to the inside of the melanosomal membrane.
The cytoplasmic domain harbors a melanosomal sorting signal that diverts the protein to the melanosomal membrane.
Structural analysis showed that all four variants (W246L, H371Y, C29fs*64, and E231K) found in this study reside on the intra‐melanosomal functional domain (Figure3a).
W246, found to be affected in TYR of A.fishericarrying theNSLphenotype, resides at a loop between a4 and h3 helices of the tyrosinase‐like catalytic subdomain.
The W246L substitution, changing from a bulky nonpolar aromatic residue into a compact positively charged residue, is likely to interrupt the normal TYR function.
This mutation is predicted to be “PROBABLY DAMAGING” with a score of 0.994 by PolyPhen‐2(HumDiv).
Moreover, W246 shows an average Alphamissense pathogenicity score of 0.969.
Another affected residue, H371 in TYR fromNSL P. molinae, is found to be at helix α8, near the active site of the tyrosinase‐like subdomain.
Mutation H371Y changing positively charged residue to nonpolar aromatic residue was predicted to be “POSSIBLY DAMAGING” with a score of 0.816 by PolyPhen‐2(HumDiv).
Non‐synonymous variations found in TYR and TYRP1 homologs.
(a) Position of affected residues on the domain structure of typical Psittaciform TYR and TYRP1 homologs.
A, first metal‐binding site; B, second metal‐binding site; C, cytosolic domain; CR, cysteine‐rich subdomain; SP, signal peptide; TL, tyrosinase‐like subdomain; TM, transmembrane domain.
Secondary structure elements were illustrated using the TYRP1 crystal structure (PDB 5M8L) (Lai et al.2017).
(b) Conservation status of substituted amino acid residues found in TYR (top) and TYRP1 (bottom) homologs.
Helices comprising affected residues are illustrated respectively.
The TYRP1 protein, found to be associated with thecinnamonphenotype, has two metal‐binding domains (Figure3a), and 1st domain A is composed of amino acid residues 214–231.
The E231K substitution, residing at helix α4, changes the last amino acid of metal‐binding domain A from a negatively charged into a positively charged amino acid.
This mutation was predicted to be “POSSIBLY DAMAGING” with a score of 1.000 by PolyPhen‐2(HumDiv).
Furthermore, Glutamate at this position in TYRP1 is conserved in the TYR protein (Figure3b), supporting its disruptive potential.
A multiple sequence alignment of diverse species, including major vertebrate classes, showed that affected amino acid residues W246 and H371 ofNSLand E231 of thecinnamonlocus are totally conserved in other parrot members analyzed in this study, along with zebrafish (Danio rerio), African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis), anole lizard (Anolis carolinensis), chicken (Gallus gallus), and human (Homo sapiens) (Figure3b).
However, the deletion of PkTYRP1 (C29fs*64) is certainly damaging.
The deletion of nucleotides 86–95 leads to a frameshift mutation, causing the protein to be truncated at amino acid 64 instead of the full‐length functional protein (Figure3b).
Our genotypic data identified two non‐synonymous substitutions in the TYR homologs ofNSLspecimens, whereascinnamonspecimens exhibited one frameshift variant and one non‐synonymous substitution in the TYRP1 homolog.
Since the frameshift variant of PkTYRP1 leads to early termination and a much shorter, non‐functional protein, the loss of function can be inferred based on the structural disruption.
However, to elucidate the effect of detected missense variants on melanin formation, we decided to express AfTYR as a characteristic enzyme with conserved domains.
Expression of rate‐limiting mammalian enzyme TYR in non‐melanogenic HEK293T cells has been shown to produce melanin (Song et al.2018).
We cloned AfTYR in a mammalian expression vector under the constitutive CAG promoter and tagged it with a C‐terminal ZsGreen (Figure4a).
Upon transient transfection of AfTYR‐WT in HEK293T cells, ZsGreen expression was observed in the cytoplasmic vesicles (Figure4b).
After 48 h, we detected a significant increase in melanin production in the AfTYR‐WT‐transfected cells (Figure4b) with ZsGreen signal.
Next, we introduced the variations detected inTYRhomologs into the AfTYR‐WT plasmid by site‐directed mutagenesis.
Subsequent transfection of AfTYR‐mutants (W246L and H371Y) into HEK293T cells showed an identical localization pattern as the WT (FigureS3).
However, no melanin deposition was seen even after 48 h of post‐transfection.
Cell pellets were collected and illuminated under white light to compare the colors.
Dark brown‐black color of the melanin deposition was observed in the AfTYR‐WT expressing cells, whereas cells expressing AfTYR‐mutants (W246L, H371Y) were found to be white with no melanin pigmentation, the same as the MOCK transfection.
Expression of all the mutated proteins was confirmed by ZsGreen expression in the pelleted cells under 488 nm blue light (Figure4c).
Effect of candidate substitutions on tyrosinase enzymatic activity (a) Graphical representation of transfecting AfTYR gene into HEK293T cells.
(b) melanin deposition (marked with red dotted lines) upon transfection of wild‐type AfTYR in HEK293T cells (c) Cell pellets after 48 h., expressing wild‐type or mutated AfTYR under illumination of white light (top) or 488 blue light (bottom).
Corresponding AfTYR mutant used for validating PkTYRP1 variant is marked in red (see FigureS2).
Our next step was to assess the potential functional impact of the PkTYRP1 substitution on eumelanin production.
However, we were unable to directly validate the TYRP1 mutation.
Instead, we adopted an alternative approach to gain insight into the functional consequence of this substitution on eumelanin production.
The substituted E231 residue of PkTYRP1 is situated within the conserved tyrosinase‐like subdomain, which shares approximately 57% sequence similarity with AfTYR.
Moreover, this residue of PKTYRP1 is perfectly conserved in AfTYR.
Taking advantage of this fact, we used the same plasmid construct of CAG‐AfTYR‐ZsGreen with the TYRP1 variant E231K as well.
While designing this experiment, we acknowledged the complexities surrounding the functional roles of TYRP1 and did not expect that transfected HEK293T cells with the PkTYRP1 substitution would serve as direct biochemical validation.
Rather, we aimed to demonstrate the impact of E231K on the enzymatic function of TYR, potentially suggesting the importance of this residue in TYRP1.
Notably, upon mutagenesis, E231K of PkTYRP1 corresponds to E227K of AfTYR (FigureS2c).
Upon 48 h of post‐transfection, cells expressing the AfTYR mutant (E227K) also appeared white, lacking melanin pigmentation, like the MOCK transfection.
The expression of this mutated protein was further confirmed by ZsGreen fluorescence in the pelleted cells under 488 nm blue light (Figure4c).
The structural blue color, critical to the green hue of parrot feather, has been attributed to the presence of melanin and the unusual light scattering properties of the spongy layer in the barb microstructure of the feather (Ghosh Roy et al.2024).
Previous hypotheses suggested the involvement of melanin in this process, but the exact mechanisms and genetic components responsible for this coloration were not well understood until we confirmed that mutations in the ion‐transporter SLC45A2, which plays a crucial role in the melanin synthesis pathway, lead to a complete loss of the blue structural color, leaving only the yellow pigmentation (Ghosh Roy et al.2024).
This was the first evidence that highlights the role of melanin altogether in generating the structural blue component in the parrot feather.
Although our first locus of interestNSLshares identical phenotypic features, its inheritance pattern does not align with that of the SLC45A2 mutation.
But, during the initial phase of this study, SLC45A2 stood out as both one of the most intriguing and perplexing factors associated with our second locus of interestcinnamon.
This is evident that the role of SLC45A2 mutations in avian pigmentation is complex and varies across species.
In chickens and quails, these mutations have been linked to sex‐linked imperfect albinism with complete loss of melanin, as well as phenotypes (“silver” and “cinnamon”) that involve partial loss of melaninization (Gunnarsson et al.2007).
This suggests the potential involvement of SLC45A2 in the sex‐linked “cinnamon” phenotype in parrots as well.
But it is essential to highlight that the term “cinnamon” refers to distinct color variations across bird species, and despite sharing the same name, thecinnamonphenotype in parrots differs significantly from that observed in quails.
Differences in coat color across the taxa depend on two features—the relative ratio of two types of melanin pigments—eumelanin (brown–black) and pheomelanin (yellow–red) and the number of melanosomes within melanocytes (Schlessinger et al.2023).
Where “cinnamon” quail feathers have subnormal melanin pigmentation, parrots carrying thecinnamonphenotype exhibit a tint‐shift in eumelanin coloration from dark black to lighter brown resulting in a lighter green or yellowish‐green appearance overall.
In quail, the cinnamon phenotype linked to the SLC45A2 mutation results in significant melanin dilution, but pheomelanin also contributes to the visual impact (Gunnarsson et al.2007).
Here, the question arises: does thecinnamonphenotype in parrots also involve pheomelanin?
Since previous observations by De Oliveira Neves, Galván et al.2020suggested the absence of pheomelanin synthesis in parrots, here, we verified whether the regulatory mechanism behind this absence holds true in ourcinnamonmutants as well.
Using Raman microscopy, we confirmed that wild‐type as well ascinnamonfeathers of the Rose‐ringed parrot contain eumelanin but lack pheomelanin (Figure2a–e).
These findings clarify the fundamental difference between two important locus involving melanin‐defect in parrots.
While mutations in SLC45A2, which lead to melanin loss (Ghosh Roy et al.2024), specifically result in the absence of eumelanin, causing complete albinism rather than partial dilution or a tint shift, thecinnamonphenotype, also aligning with the eumelanin‐only characteristic, shows a clear tint‐shift as demonstrated by our data (Figure2g).
During feather follicle development, melanoblasts migrate from the neural crest to specific locations where they differentiate into melanocytes.
Melanocytes are located within barb ridges and transport their melanosome into adjacent keratinocytes (Lin et al.2013) (Figure5a).
Earlier studies on chickens, quails, or pigeons revealed that avian melanogenesis is governed by a complex interplay of genetic factors and signaling pathways inside these melanosomes that regulate the production and distribution of the final product in developing feather follicles.
Eumelanin synthesis is facilitated through activation of the melanocyte receptor MC1R by melanocyte‐stimulating hormones (MSH) that trigger a signaling cascade ultimately leading to increased TYR activity (Galván and Solano2016).
TYR catalyzes the first and rate‐limiting step in melanin synthesis, followed by the enzymatic function of two analogous transmembrane proteins, TYRP1 and TYRP2 (Galván and Solano2016) (Figure5b).SLC45A2, on the other hand, encodes a membrane‐associated transporter protein that helps in maintaining the proper pH within the melanosome, crucial for the optimal activity of melanogenic enzymes like TYR (Le et al.2020) (Figure5b).
Previous data indicated that this melanosome neutralization is an essential process in the maintenance of eumelanin pigmentation that is controlled at more than one stage throughout melanosome maturation (Le et al.2020).
However, this protein operates independently in the melanogenesis pathway, without interacting with the melanocyte receptor MC1R that regulates the amount of eumelanin (and pheomelanin in other birds), deciding the final fate of melanin hue.
This emphasizes the unique role of diverse factors employed in the eumelanin pathway in parrot feathers, distinguishing it from other avian species where both eumelanin and pheomelanin contribute to color variation.
Therefore, mutations in any of these genes can lead to a variety of melanin‐related defects, resulting in distinct color morphs in parrots.
Current model of key genes known to control melanin pigmentation in parrot feathers.
(a) Diagram illustrating a developing feather follicle and its cross‐section.
Melanocytes are situated within barb ridges and transfer their melanosomes to adjacent keratinocytes (Lin et al.2013).
(b) schematic representation of putative avian melanogenesis.
The enzyme tyrosinase is a critical rate‐limiting factor in converting tyrosine into melanin.
Activation of the melanocortin 1 receptor (encoded by the MC1R gene) by α‐melanocyte‐stimulating hormone (α‐MSH) increases the expression of melanogenic enzymes: Tyrosinase (TYR), dopachrome tautomerase (DCT/TYRP1), and tyrosinase‐related protein 1 (TYRP1), leading to the production of dark eumelanin.
Key factors also include melanosome transporter proteins encoded by the SLC24A5, SLC45A2, and OCA2 genes, which are involved in transporting small molecules, ions, and regulating pH.
The genes SLC24A5, SLC45A2, OCA2, TYR, TYRP1, and TYRP2 exhibit variations in melanogenesis across species.
(c) Identified loci of three melanogenic defects in parrot feathers.
Loss of function mutation in SLC45A2 (marked in blue as previously described) and TYR causeslutino(complete absence of melanin pigmentation) phenotype of sex‐linked and non‐sex‐linked inheritance, respectively.
Loss of function mutation in TYRP1 leads tocinnamonphenotype turning dark black eumelanin into light brown within barb microstructure, that results in pastel shade of green feather.
Here, we identified two important trans‐membrane enzymes TYR and TYRP1, acting at different stages of the eumelanin pathway, that are responsible for two of the prevalent melanin defects (NSLandcinnamon), widely spread through artificial selection.NSLis phenotypically identical to the sex‐linkedlutinovariant, whereascinnamoncan be compared to thechocolatemutant found in other birds and mammals (Li et al.2019; Lyons et al.2005).
In the current understanding, melanogenesis during feather development is initiated by the rate‐limiting hydroxylation of L‐tyrosine to L‐3,4‐dihydroxyphenylalanine (L‐DOPA) through the function of the TYR enzyme.
As illustrated in Figure2h, TYR then also plays crucial roles in catalysing the oxidation of L‐DOPA to dopaquinone and the oxidation of 5,6‐dihydroxyindole (DHI) to indole‐5,6‐quinone (IQ).
Meanwhile, TYRP2 catalyses the conversion of L‐dopachrome into 5,6‐dihydroxyindole‐2‐carboxylic acid (DHICA) and TYRP1 facilitates the oxidation of DHICA to indole‐5,6‐quinone‐2‐carboxylic acid (IQCA).
IQ and IQCA are eventually polymerized into eumelanin (Dolinska et al.2019; Lai et al.2018), the pigment responsible for the structural blue color.
Our study indicates that mutations in TYR interrupt the conversion of tyrosine into dopaquinone, which leads to the complete loss of melanin in barb medulla.
In contrast, disruptive mutations in TYRP1 affect melanogenesis less severely.
In thecinnamonmorph, the loss of TYRP1 function results in a qualitative change in melanin color rather than a significant reduction in melanin quantity.
Although our genotype–phenotype correlation analyses indicate that alteration of functional PkTYRP1 is linked to thecinnamonphenotype, functional validation of the causal substitution demands development of a novel biochemical assay, which is currently beyond the scope of this study.
Instead, our expression analysis emphasizes the significance of the substituted residue within the intra‐melanosomal domain in the enzymatic function of tyrosinase.
This offers a preliminary insight into the functional impact of the TYRP1 mutation.
Our data propose that loss‐of‐function mutations in TYRP1 disrupt the conversion of DHICA to IQCA while TYR continues to produce IQ efficiently.
This may not completely inhibit eumelanin production but interferes with the co‐polymerization of DHI‐derived dark eumelanin and DHICA‐derived lighter eumelanin, altering the intensity of the final polymer and resulting in the pastel blue tint observed incinnamonfeathers (Figure5b,c).
Previous studies (Dolinska et al.2019; Lai et al.2018) have shown that TYRP1 contributes to the stabilization of TYR and may regulate melanin production.
It is also plausible that the shift in eumelanin tint is influenced by altered TYR stability and reduced enzymatic activity in the overall eumelanin pathway.
However, the exact catalytic role of TYRP1 in avian melanogenesis still needs more light.
Understanding the downstream effects of TYRP1 mutations on melanin polymerization will require advanced spectrophotometric analyses using melanocyte‐specific systems with TYRP1 overexpression.
All the causal substitutions found in this study reside at the conserved intra‐melanosomal domain of TYR and TYRP1 homologs in parrots.
Investigation on the functional impact of these variants reveals significant insights into the melanogenic role of these proteins.
Through genotyping and biochemical assays, we uncovered two parrot variants associated with theNSLphenotype and two with thecinnamonphenotype, with homologous residues in other species linked to pigmentation defects.
Variant W246L, found in the tyrosinase‐like subdomain ofNSLAfTYR, corresponds to a mutation hotspot in HsTYR, where adjacent mutations (W236X, W236S, W236L, R239W, and R239Q in human) have been implicated in Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) in diverse populations, including African, German, Japanese, and Chinese patients (King et al.2003; Nakamura et al.2002; Oetting et al.1993; Passmore et al.1999).
Notably, this conserved tryptophan was previously reported to be deleted in autosomal albino chicken tyrosinase when compared with Black Silky chicken protein and speculated as responsible for the inactive tyrosinase in this line of albino chickens (Tobita‐Teramoto et al.2000).
Whereas the H371Y variant ofNSLPmTYR parallels an identical substitution (H367Y) in humans, known to cause tyrosinase‐negative oculocutaneous albinism by producing an inactive enzyme (Breimer et al.1994).
Interestingly, the E231K mutation, found incinnamonPkTYRP1, is situated at the end of the first metal‐binding site of the tyrosinase‐like subdomain.
A previous study showed that a missense mutation (H214N) altering the first amino acid of the metal‐binding domain of the TYRP1 protein causes the sex‐linked recessivechocolatemutation in chicken, suggesting the necessity of metal ion coordination in the function of TYRP1.
Although how metal ions cooperate with TYRP1 needs additional investigation, this cooperation is likely to be functionally crucial because all three members of the tyrosinase protein family (TYR, TYRP1, and TYRP2) have this copper or zinc‐binding sites (Lai et al.2018).
It is important to note that quails and chickens having mutated TYRP1 showed an abnormal melanin morphology, characterized by immature melanosomes leading to diluted plumage color (Li et al.2019).
It suggests that the enzymatic function of TYRP1 at the final step of melanogenesis has a significant role in melanosome maturation and pigment packaging, which decides the final hue of melanin.
Concordantly, our histological investigation exhibits a shift in color from black to brown among melanin granules hue, suggesting an altered light scattering within the barb medulla due to the loss of normal morphology.
Therefore, this study not only reinforces the critical roles of TYR and TYRP1 in pigmentation but also introduces novel insights into the consequences of intra‐melanosomal mutations in conserved domains across taxa.
Our results here primarily deepen the understanding of avian melanogenesis by identifying the genetic basis of eumelanin pigmentation in a relatively less studied member—parrot, that highlights their value as a model for genotype–phenotype correlation studies.
Moreover, by linking key mutations in melanogenic enzymes to popular parrot phenotypes, the research underscores the significance of conserved melanogenic domains of tyrosinase in studying related enzymes across species.