The International Association for the Study of Pain defines 3 pain types presumed to involve different mechanisms—nociceptive, neuropathic, and nociplastic.
Based on the hypothesis that pain types should guide the matching of patients with treatments, work has been undertaken to identify features to discriminate between them for clinical use.
This study aimed to evaluate the validity of features to discriminate between pain types.
Subjective and physical features were evaluated in a cohort of 350 individuals with chronic musculoskeletal pain attending a chronic pain management program.
The analysis tested the hypothesis that,iffeatures nominated for each pain type represent 3 different groups,then(1) cluster analysis should identify 3 main clusters of patients, (2) these clusters should align with the pain type allocated by an experienced clinician, (3) patients within a cluster should have high expression of the candidate features proposed to assist identification of that pain type.
Supervised machine learning interrogated features with the greatest and least importance for discrimination, and probabilistic analysis probed the potential for the coexistence of multiple pain types.
Results confirmed that data could be best explained by 3 clusters.
Clusters were characterized by a priori specified features and agreed with the designation of the experienced clinician with 82% accuracy.
Supervised analysis highlighted features that contributed most and least to the classification of pain type, and probabilistic analysis reinforced the presence of mixed pain types.
These findings support the foundation for further refinement of a clinical tool to discriminate between pain types.
The experience of pain involves an array of inputs and outputs and diverse biological mechanisms influenced by factors, including emotions and cognitions.7Although activation of nociception by actual or threatened tissue damage is one input, many other mechanisms interplay and differ between individuals.8The International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) defines 3 mechanistic pain types (nociceptive, neuropathic, and nociplastic pain; Table1).
hypothesized to relate to different mechanisms,6requiring different treatments.
Biomarkers (ie, features or clusters of features across biological, psychological, and social domains) that enable discrimination between these pain descriptors might predict responses to targeted treatments for chronic pain.
There is no “gold standard” to discriminate between pain descriptors.
Instead, methods have been proposed using multi-modal data (eg, quantitative sensory testing [QST], questionnaires) to identify features suggesting the predominance of one type.
Questionnaires proposed to identify features of neuropathic pain (eg, Neuropathic Pain Questionnaire [NPQ],9painDETECT10) and nociplastic pain (eg, Central Sensitization Inventory [CSI]11) include features present in multiple pain types limiting their capacity to discriminate between them (eg, neuropathic questionnaires identify hyperalgesia which is expected in nociplastic pain; CSI includes poor sleep and depression which are possible across pain type).
Opinions diverge regardinghowpain types are identified12,13andifthis is possible.14Systematic reviews6,15and expert consensus16identified and refined candidate measures to discriminate between pain types.
Other work defined clinical criteria for the identification of a single type (eg, nociplastic,17,18neuropathic19).
Validation has been challenging.
One alternative to evaluate the validity of the discrimination between pain types is to collect data for a cohort of individuals with diverse presentations of chronic pain and test the hypothesis that,iffeatures nominated for each pain type represent 3 different groups,then(1) cluster analysis should identify 3 clusters of patients, (2) clusters should align with the pain type allocated by an experienced clinician, and (3) patients within a cluster should have high expression of the candidate features proposed for that pain type.
This study aimed to: (1) test these hypotheses using a cohort of individuals with chronic musculoskeletal pain attending a pain management clinic; (2) interrogate which features had the greatest/least importance for discrimination; and (3) probe the potential for coexistence of multiple pain types.
This study evaluated a cohort of individuals with diverse presentations of chronic pain using the highest-ranked features allocated by expert consensus16to aid discrimination between the IASP pain types.
For this study, all features were assessed with simple subjective and physical examinations that were feasible in a clinical setting without specialized equipment.
All items were assessed for all participants (with some limited exceptions).
The natural tendency for the data to cluster into 3 groups was evaluated first.
If 3 clusters were present, we then interrogated the relationship with the predominant pain type allocated based on the review and scoring of the examination results by an independent, experienced clinician.
Because the data assessed as “typical features” of each pain typeandthe classification of the participant’s predominant pain type use the same data, it might be argued that the analysis step is biased in confirming the hypothesis.
This outcome cannot be assumed because the clustering algorithms (unsupervised machine learning models) do not use the dependent variable (pain type) for modelling or prediction, that is, neither the score-derived nor examiner-derived pain type was used in generation of clusters.
Second, we employed supervised machine learning to understand the relative importance of test items to the pain-type clusters.
Third, we considered probabilistic models to provide insight into the coexistence of multiple pain types, which remains hidden in deterministic analysis.
Features were assessed as part of the clinical examination.
Items were selected from the highest ranked items from the recent expert consensus study,16and refined using the clinical criteria reported to identify nociplastic17,18and neuropathic19pain.
The full list of features considered for each pain type are presented in Supplemental Data 1–3, Supplemental Digital Content 1,http://links.lww.com/CJP/B184.
From the candidate items, a list of subjective and physical examination items was generated that was possible to apply in a clinical setting as subjective or physical tests.
Table2presents the final list of features.
The 31 items included 11 for nociceptive pain, 8 for neuropathic pain, and 12 for nociplastic pain.
For nociplastic pain, physical item 3 was only completed if item 2 was negative.
All items were scored on a scale of 0 to 100, anchored with “not present” at 0 and strongly present at “100,” except for questionnaires where scores above the prespecified cut-off was identified as 100.
Although all items were used as independent items in the analysis, we also calculated the average score for the questions for each pain type separately.
The dominant pain type was allocated based on that with the highest average score (score-derived pain type).
If a participant presented with multiple pain locations, only the “main pain location” was scored.
An experienced clinician independently reviewed the patient’s medical record, including the response to the pain type questions, and assigned a likely predominant pain type (examiner-derived pain type).
The quality of data was assessed in several ways depending on the data type.
Independent variables: The data set contained responses on a scale from 0 to 100.
Missing data were analyzed through a graphical distribution analysis of the percentage of missing data.
We assumed that missing metrics were ignored by the examiner because they were not necessary to allocate a pain type to the participant (eg,nociplastic physical 3was not performed if features 1 or 2 were positive).
For this reason, missing values were imputed with zeros to avoid losing sample size.
Dependent variables: Dominant pain mechanisms were analyzed using a distribution plot to consider the model's generalization ability and class balance or imbalance for the selection and configuration of the clustering algorithm.
This was undertaken separately for pain types derived from pain scores and those diagnosed by an examiner.
The unambiguous diagnosis was present in 80% of cases.
A preclustering analysis was performed to ensure the independent variables contained sufficient information to distinguish between the 3 types of pain by way of validating the potential to consider a clustering approach.
First, a correlation analysis of the independent variables was performed using the Pearson correlation, visualized through a correlation plot, and arranged by nociceptive, nociplastic, and neuropathic criteria.
To support the clustering approach, a high correlation within categories and a low correlation between categories would be expected.
Second, a heatmap was created, ordering data by pain type obtained from scores and visualizing the “intensity” of responses to corresponding criteria to identify patterns.
To support the clustering approach, patients within a cluster should have a high expression of relevant features.
Third, before clustering we also computed the Hopkins statistic,23to measure the natural cluster tendency in the data.
Values close to 1 indicate that the data are highly clustered and close to 0.5 indicates that the data are randomly distributed.
Values below 0.75 suggest that the clusters are sparse and with fuzzy borders between them.
For this analysis, data were reduced using principal components analysis for visualization purposes as it allows projecting n-dimensional data into 2-dimensions.
The clustering tendency was computed with the original features.
The clustering tendency was presented using a scatter plot with the first and second principal components on thexandy-axes, respectively.
A 2-dimensional density plot was included to visualize the concentration of pain types.
To determine whether analysis would identify 3 clusters and, if so, whether these were aligned to the 3 pain types, we analyzed the data in several ways.
First, the number of clusters was evaluated, considering clusters between two and ten.
Three common clustering methods were assessed: k-means, Gaussian mixture models (GMM), and Hierarchical clustering.24The silhouette coefficient was calculated for each scenario.
This coefficient provides an indication of how well each data point was clustered, with positive values indicating better classification.25We determined the optimal number of clusters as that which maximized the silhouette coefficient.
To support our hypothesis that the clinical features relate to 3 pain types, the optimal number of clusters would be 3.
Second, using the 3 clusters, the consistency of each clustering method was evaluated by comparing each point’s clustering against the pain type derived from score-derived and examiner-derived pain types.
Each of the 6 resulting comparisons was evaluated using the true positive rate (TPR), which accounts for the percentage of cases that were correctly classified according to the average score (score-derived classification) and the experienced examiner (examiner-derived classification).
This value is from 0 to 100%.
Third, for hierarchical clustering (which provided the second highest TPR, see results, but enables investigation of the internal structure), a dendrogram was generated to graphically analyze the hierarchical structure, showing the model’s clusters and allocation to predominant pain type based on highest scores.
Within this approach, the Euclidean distance and averaged linkage grouping criteria were used to allocate participants to each cluster.
If the unsupervised analysis confirmed the presence of 3 clusters, we planned to use supervised machine learning to explore the possibility of extracting relevant information to understand the relative value of individual test items to the classification.
Because of the small sample size we applied a logistic regression model, which has fewer parameters than other models, allows the prediction of pain type based on the independent variables, and interprets the importance of the features.
This approach was applied to the classification of the predominant pain type deduced from the highest scores and that allocated by the independent examiner.
We used 80% of the data for model training.
The coefficients of both models were evaluated, analysing the sign of these coefficients to determine each variable’s contribution to the prediction.
The accuracy of both models was also evaluated using the TPR, ensuring consistency with the previous clustering comparison.
Finally, a probabilistic analysis was conducted to explore the uncertainty in model predictions, both supervised and unsupervised.
This analysis was undertaken because it is expected that many individuals could have mixed pain types.6GMM and logistic regression were used to output probabilistic classifications, and a probabilistic variation of k-means called c-means was also used to generate cluster membership likelihoods.
The likelihood of the dominant pain type for each model is presented as a boxplot.
Values that are concentrated around 100% show the model is more certain about the prediction (ie, that most participants could be clearly allocated to one pain type), whereas sparse values show higher uncertainty (ie, high probability of mixed pain types).
Each comparison is presented with the Fuzzy Partition Coefficient (FPC), which evaluates the degree of uncertainty in the predictions, with values closer to 100% indicating well-defined and distinct clusters (ie, if all pain types were mutually exclusive, the FPC would be 100% for all pain types).
Data were available for 350 participants presenting for pain management with a primary report﻿ of chronic musculoskeletal pain.
Participants (62.7% female; 37.3% male) had an average (SD) age, height, and weight of 46 (12) years, 167 (11) cm, and 84.2 (20.9) kg, respectively.
Regarding the duration of pain, 1.7% of individuals had experienced pain for <3 months (at the time of completion of the questionnaire, but >3 mo at the time of testing), 22.3% for 3 to 12 months, 33.9% for 12 months to 2 years, 29.8% for 2 to 5 years, and 12.4% for more than 5 years.
When asked to describe their pain, 0.4% reported that it was rarely present, 4.7% said it was occasionally present, 8.5% described it as often present, 75.3% stated it was always present with varying intensity, and 11.1% reported it was always present with consistent intensity.
In all cases, the patients met the criteria for chronic pain of >3 months, but with variation in the trajectory of pain, which is consistent with a contemporary view of conditions such as chronic low back pain.
The main sites of pain reported were the low back (28.3%), shoulder (22.2%), and neck (19.1%), with other less common sites including the mid back (5.7%), knee (4.8%), foot (3.9%), hip (3.5%), wrist (2.6%), hand (2.6%), and other areas (7.4%).
The average total Pain Disability Questionnaire Score was 104 (27). From the possible data 265 data points contain at least one variable with missing values.
Figure1shows the distribution of missing values which indicates that most metrics have <15% of missing data.
As expected, metrics such as “nociplastic subjective 3” (see Table2for item definitions) and “nociplastic physical 3” have the highest percentage of missing values, exceeding 30%, because no data were collected if the preceding item was positive.
Pain type derived by the examiner was unavailable for 20% of participants.
In this case the experienced examiner had identified the pain type as ambiguous.
Percentage of missing values for the different variables of the study.
Blue bars represent metrics with <15% missing data, whereas red bars represent metrics with more than 15% missing data.
See Table2for description of variables.
The available sample is unbalanced for the different pain types (Fig.2).
According to the pain type (both score-derived or examiner-derived), most cases were classified as nociplastic (score-derived, n=190), followed by nociceptive (n=117) and neuropathic (n=41) with the least cases.
In the case of the examiner’s unambiguous classification, all nociceptive participants are available, but the availability of classification of the other pain types was reduced by diagnostic uncertainty.
Distribution of participants across 3 different pain types.
They-axis represents the patient count for each pain mechanism, and the red outline box indicates the examiner’s available classification for each pain type.
In the cases where the experienced examiner did not allocate a classification it was indicated as ambiguous, this uncertainty was higher in participants with higher neuropathic scores.
This might bias the results using examiner-derived pain types, particularly for underrepresented groups such as those with neuropathic pain.
As we were required to proceed to the clustering step, the correlation among variables was higher and positive within the criteria for each pain type than between pain types (Fig.3; high correlation expected within each red box).
This finding demonstrates strong internal consistency.
The highest correlation (R=0.82) was betweennociceptive subjective items 2and3, which both relate to the relation of pain to aggravating factors.
Subjective and physical features of nociceptive that address similar constructs are highly correlated.
Negative relations can be seen between features of different pain types, such as nociceptive and nociplastic, where negative values are present in almost all comparisons.Nociceptive subjective 5andneuropathic subjective 6have the strongest negative correlation, which is expected as these items relate to low or high scores, respectively, on the same neuropathic questionnaire.
This neuropathic questionnaire was modestly correlated with nociplastic features, suggesting its items reflect both pain types.
Correlation plot between the study's independent variables.
Each cell represents the Pearson correlation coefficient between pairs of variables, with the color indicating the strength and direction of the correlation.
Red boxes group specific questions for each pain mechanism.
See Table2for description of variables.
The pattern of expression of each feature across participants is shown as a heat map in Figure4.
As expected, the density of blue, determined by the intensity of expression of each feature, is high, with the red boxes that are bounded on thex-axis arranged by pain type classified according to the scoring and on they-axis by the features for each pain type.
In some cases (eg,nociceptive physical 6, ornociplastic comorbidities 1) there is stable expression across all pain types, which suggests limited value in discrimination between the pain types.
Note thatnociplastic physical 3is commonly scored as 0 because it is only tested ifnociplastic physical 2is negative.
Heatmap of all the independent variables.
Each cell represents the value of the participants' answers to a given question, with the participants arranged by dominant pain type allocated by the largest score.
Red boxes group specific questions for each pain mechanism with participants with corresponding dominant pain types.
See Table2for description of variables.
When analyzing the clustering tendency of the data, the Hopkins statistic was 60%.
This indicates some degree of natural clustering is present in the data, but we should not expect perfectly defined clusters.
The data distribution presented in Figure5shows that the density curves for pain types overlap between each other, suggesting that many points may be classified with more than one pain type.
Consideration of the weightings for each of the features in the principal components demonstrates that principal component 2 distinguishes neuropathic from the other 2 and, as expected, is weighted by neuropathic features.
Further, nociceptive and nociplastic are distinguished by principal component 2, which is weighted by features of these pain types.
Cluster tendency of the independent variables.
The upper panel demonstrates the Hopkins Statistic.
Thex-axis andy-axis represent the first and second principal components of the data.
For each pain type, a density map is depicted to illustrate the differentiation of the pain type’s distribution.
The bottom panel shows the features that contribute to the 2 principal components.
Note thatnociceptive subjective 5is a low score on the neuropathic questionnaire.
See Table2for description of variables.
When testing the clustering algorithms, the optimal number of clusters was analyzed as shown in Figure6.
The 3 clustering models minimize the share of the negative silhouettes at the 3 clusters.
At this point, the overall silhouette is maximized for the hierarchical approach, and for GMM and k-means, it is only beaten by the silhouette of using 2 clusters.
Combining both metrics would suggest using 3 clusters.
Cluster silhouette analysis for different numbers of clusters.
Silhouette indicates how well each data point was clustered, so it should be maximized.
Three clustering methods were tested, varying the number of clusters between 2 and 10.
Low values for the share of negative silhouette also serve as an overall metric of proper clustering.
When predicting pain type using clustering methods, results differ depending on which version of the ground truth (score-derived or examiner-derived pain type) was used, as shown in Figure7.
For interpretation of this analysis, the pain type that was most likely to be represented by each cluster was identified by inspection of the heat map which showed the features that were commonly expressed in each cluster.
As shown for the hierarchical cluster method in Figure8, the largest cluster was dominated by high expression of features of nociplastic pain, and so on.
When prediction accuracy was analyzed using both versions, the best model was the GMM.
The examiner’s diagnosis achieved a TPR of 82%, and the score-derived pain type achieved a TPR of 89%.
Clustering prediction accuracy.
Each of the 3 clustering algorithms were tested against the dominant pain type as computed with the score, and against the pain defined by the examiner.
Each comparison shows the percentage of predictions from one pain type that were classified as any pain type.
The diagonal represents the correct predictions, and the sum of the diagonal is the true positive rate (TPR).
Heatmap of all the independent variables for the clustered data.
Each cell represents the value of the participants' answers to a given question, with the participants arranged by the 3 clusters.
Red boxes are bounded by the allocation of the participants to a cluster on thex-axis and the pain type-specific questions on they-axis.
See Table2for description of variables.
The hierarchical method achieved close to 80% TPR, and we can observe the structure of this model’s predictions in a tree structure (ie, dendrogram) shown in Figure9.
It shows that the nociplastic predictions are the most consistent.
Cluster dendrogram.
The tree structure represents the closeness between data points, where they merge iteratively until only one cluster is formed.
The distance to the center represents the difference between the merging branches.
The color of the branches represents the predominant pain type as defined by the model, and the color of the points at the end of each branch represents the predominant pain type defined by the pain score.
Note the high degree of consistency.
The sign of coefficients from application of supervised machine learning using logistic regression models, were in the expected direction with positive values for features of corresponding pain type (Fig.10), and negative values for other pain types.
The coefficient magnitudes were greater for the pain-derived score model than for the examiner.
This was expected as the score was directly derived from these measures.
No features had significant positive magnitudes for more than 1 pain type.
Several features show nonsignificant values for the 3 predicted pain types, which means they contributed little to the prediction of pain type (Table2).
Features such asnociplastic comorbidities 2,neuropathic subjective 6,nociceptive physical 2, physical 6,andsubjective 3contributed little to the prediction and were redundant.
Coefficient heatmaps from logistic regression analysis for score-derived and examiner-derived pain types.
The heatmap displays coefficients for each feature based on the observed pain type.
Blue indicates a positive relationship, whereas red indicates a negative relationship with the pain mechanism categories.
The outlined boxes on both heatmaps highlight the grouped coefficients for each pain mechanism.
See Table2for description of variables.
After performing predictions, the supervised classification models were evaluated with the TPR and can be compared with previous results from cluster analysis.
Figure11shows that the model for the score-derived pain type achieves a TPR of 94%, whereas the model for the examiners' pain type achieves a TPR of 87%.
Supervised classification accuracy.
Each of the pain types, as computed with the score, and against the pain defined by the examiner, were tested against a multiclass logistic regression model.
Each comparison shows the percentage of predictions from one pain type that were classified as any pain type.
The diagonal represents the correct predictions, and the sum of the diagonal is the true positive rate (TPR).
Both supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques were used to generate probabilistic outcomes.
This was used to address the complexity of pain type classification by giving insight into the coexistence of multiple pain types (that remains hidden in deterministic analysis).
Figure12shows the comparison of 4 different probabilistic models, where the dominant cluster likelihood is represented as boxplots.
The GMM has a high concentration of values close to 100%, which is consistent with the FPC of 95%, the highest of the sample.
In contrast, the supervised models (score-derived or examiner-derived pain types) have FPC in the range of 72% to 80%, and in both cases, the neuropathic pain type presents the lowest likelihood values among all pain types.
Supervised clustering highlights the probability of the coexistence of pain types and the greatest uncertainty for the neuropathic type.
Probabilistic classification analysis.
Each color represents the dominant pain type, and the values represent the model likelihood for each participant.
The top panels show the results of probabilistic clustering (unsupervised), and the lower panels represent the probabilistic predictions of the supervised models already analyzed.
Each model is accompanied by the Fuzzy Partition Coefficient (FPC) which measures the degree of uncertainty in the model predictions.
The results of this study support the validity of clinical features to discriminate between pain descriptors defined by IASP.
Data were explained by three clusters; logistic regression demonstrated items that contribute substantially or little to the classification; and probabilistic analysis suggested some co-existence of pain types.
This provides the foundation to refine a tool to discriminate between pain types.
We considered pain types defined by the IASP and identified in a systematic review.6Features used for classification are derived from items identified through a rigorous systematic review,15expert consensus16and consideration of clinical criteria for neuropathic19and nociplastic17pain.
Although additional pain types might have been identified if other features were included, the current literature does not support this possibility.
Supervised machine learning highlighted positive relationships for all features for each pain type but with variation in coefficients.
Coefficients from the examiner-derived pain type identify features that contributed substantially or little to classification (Table2).
This could refine the relevant features.
There are no clinical criteria for nociceptive pain.
The most important features included theexclusionof other pain types.
Features that shouldnot bepresent were regional distribution (nociplastic), hypoesthesia (neuropathic), and generalized hypersensitivity (nociplastic).
The positive feature contributing to classification was pain provoked by specific postures/movements, which implies a response to tissue loading.
This concurs with alternative terms for nociceptive pain—“movement evoked” or “mechanical.”6Unhelpful features included signs of inflammation and absence of autonomic signs which presented across pain types.
The distribution of pain types is not generalizable.
Participants were attending a chronic pain management program and might be biased toward nociplastic pain.
There a no prior data for the distribution of the contemporary mechanistic pain types because; (1) the term nociplastic pain was only recently introduced and defined (note that although some data might be extracted from studies that refer to “chronic primary pain”36or “central sensitization pain”37this would be problematic as the terms are not synonymous with nociplastic pain), and (2) there have not been accepted methods to discriminate between pain types (hence the motivation for the present work).
Probabilistic analysis identified mixed pain types.
An FPC of 100% indicates all patients allocated to a pain type couldonlybe allocated to that pain type.
This was not achieved for any pain type.
Although consistent with reports of mixed pain types,6it is not completely consistent with nociplastic clinical criteria which require “no evidence that nociceptive/neuropathic pain (1) is present or (2) if present, is entirely responsible for the pain.”17Although, this implies another mechanism can co-exist if it is not “entirely responsible” for the presentation, what that means is not clear.
Identification of mixed pain types is important because this would enable tracking of changes in pain type over time—for example, the pain might begin as predominantly nociceptive pain, and transition to nociplastic features,38and if the classification of pain types is used to match patients to treatments,6mixed pain types might impact their success.
Probabilistic analysis suggested the greatest uncertainty for neuropathic pain, which could reflect the frequent presence of “sensitivity” in neuropathic pain.6,39,40A motivator for “nociplastic” pain as the third pain type was the change in the definition of neuropathic pain from “dysfunction” to “disease or lesion” of nervous system pain.13It became necessary to account for patients who presented with sensitivity and symptoms unexplained by tissue or nervous system damage or lesions.13Overlap of neuropathic and nociplastic could reflect some lack of clarity of this distinction.
A tool is needed to discriminate between pain types, not only to provide insight into the plausible mechanisms underlying a patient’s pain but also to match patients with treatments.
This study applied a preliminary version of a tool, based on outcomes of expert consensus regarding features to support this decision.6This study provides initial insight into features that are most important to inform classification.
Features of a tool to discriminate between pain types will differ from those for clinical criteria for a specific pain type because their purpose differs.
Clinical criteria specify the features that must be present to confirm the presence of pain type.
As this includes features present across pain types, they are not designed to exclude other pain types or identify their co-existence.
In contrast, a tool designed to discriminate between pain types is limited to features that are present in one (or 2) pain types to operationalize the exclusion or co-existence of other pain types.
Further refinement of the pain type discrimination tool is required.
First, features were judged clinically—objective operationalization of items would support interpretation and consistency.
Second, feature weighting will be necessary.
Third, the tool’s psychometric properties require evaluation.
Fourth, it will be critical to evaluate whether patient outcomes are improved by matching treatments with the pain mechanisms identified using this tool.
There are several methodological considerations.
First, features were scored using clinical judgment, and we did not assess the psychometric properties.
Second, we studied a diverse group with chronic musculoskeletal pain recruited from 6 sites, within a single clinical practice group and might not be representative of other cohorts or environments.
The group included a small percentage who experienced pain for more than 3 months, but only occasionally.
These individuals might be more likely to reflect nociceptive pain.
The smaller proportion of individuals with neuropathic pain might have influenced the accuracy of some estimates.
Third, features were based on a preliminary version of a tool and are likely to differ from the final feature specification.
Fourth, the experienced clinician used the clinical data to classify the pain types.
Although initial cluster analysis did not use this information and is unbiased in its classification, these data were used for the supervised models with the potential for bias.
Fifth, additional clusters might be identified with additional features.
In summary, this study provides initial validation of the approach to discriminate between pain types based on features of a patient’s pain presentation.
This forms a foundation for future work to refine and a test tool to deploy in clinical practice.