Mechanically ventilated patients are unable to verbally communicate due to the endotracheal tube or tracheostomy, rendering them temporarily ‘voiceless’.
More and more patients are conscious during mechanical ventilation because of a new paradigm based on mild/no sedation.
Communicating with conscious voiceless patients can be complex and frustrating, leading to negative outcomes and experiences for patients, family members and health care professionals.
To explore the negative effects of the inability to communicate verbally among voiceless patients in intensive care units (ICUs), considering the perspectives of voiceless patients, health care professionals and family members.
This qualitative study uses Interpretive Description methodology.
Semi‐structured interviews were conducted with patients, family members and health care professionals.
Data were collected at three ICUs in Italy over 3 months.
Data were analysed using the Rapid and Rigorous qualitative data analysis.
Forty‐three people were interviewed (10 patients, 13 caregivers, 13 nurses and 7 physicians).
Three major themes were identified: perception of communication difficulties, negative impacts on relationships and emotions, and negative effects on care.
These findings indicate that communication difficulties in ICU have negative emotional and psychological consequences for all participants and the health care provided.
Effective communication with voiceless patients is essential for their well‐being and quality of care.
Future research should focus on identifying and evaluating tailored communication methods for voiceless patients.
This study emphasizes the importance of interventions improving voiceless communication, including training health care professionals and critical care nurses in alternative communication strategies, providing psychological support to voiceless patients, and encouraging extended family presence.
More and more patients are conscious during mechanical ventilation, although they are temporarily ‘voiceless’ because of the endotracheal tube or tracheostomy.
Communicating with conscious voiceless patients can be complex and frustrating, leading to negative outcomes.
Communicating with conscious voiceless patients is associated with perceptions of communication difficulties, negative impacts on relationships and emotions, and negative effects on care, from patients, families and health care professionals' perspectives.
Attention should be paid to designing and implementing interventions to improve voiceless communication, including training health care professionals and critical care nurses in alternative communication strategies, providing psychological support to voiceless patients, and encouraging extended family presence.
Communication in the intensive care unit (ICU) has undergone significant transformations in the last two decades, marked by a shift from traditional practices of heavily sedating patients towards a new paradigm characterized by minimal sedation and regular patient awakening, which has been found to be associated with improved outcomes such as shorter time to extubation and lower tracheostomy rate in chronically ill mechanically ventilated adults.1This led non‐sedated patients to receive mechanical ventilation.
This way, they cannot speak due to factors such as intubation, ongoing treatment and illnesses,2which render them temporarily voiceless.
The negative effects of voicelessness identified in previous studies highlighted the complexity of the phenomenon.
Existing literature underscores the need to gain a deeper understanding of the impact of communication with voiceless patients, which could lead to the development of more efficient and alternative communication strategies.
Research should encompass the perspectives of all those involved in the interaction to provide a better understanding of the complexity of communication.12Research should also focus on exploring the experiences of family members involved in the communication process, not only patients and HCPs.13However, as far as our knowledge extends, there are only a few studies in the literature that concurrently investigate the perspectives of all participants involved in communicating with ICU patients: one study explored communication challenges among patients, family members, and nurses and highlighted that, to an external observer, communication might seem smoother than it really is.12The perception of nurses has often been investigated,7,14,15,16,17but this does not apply to the perspective of physicians, which has often been disregarded.10,18Hence, qualitative studies are needed to explore patients' communication experience while awake and on an invasive mechanical ventilator, and to gain the perspectives of different health care professionals to comprehensively depict the phenomenon of communication in voiceless patients.9Having this information will help uncover issues that may inform the development of more effective communication strategies and improve patient care in the ICU setting.
Therefore, the objective of this study is to explore the negative effects resulting from the inability to communicate verbally among voiceless patients in ICU, considering the perspectives of voiceless patients, HCPs and family members.
This qualitative study uses Interpretive Description.19This design was selected to generate in‐depth and contextually rich understandings of a complex phenomenon, with a particular emphasis on generating practical, applied knowledge that can inform health care practice.19This study is reported in accordance with the Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research of the EQUATOR Network.
This study's sample consisted of three subgroups: patients, family members and HCPs.
We used purposeful sampling to recruit individuals (≥18 years old) who had previously been admitted to the ICU, had a minimum ICU stay duration of 48 h, had undergone mechanical ventilation either through a tracheostomy or an endotracheal tube, and had been discharged from ICU at least 48 h before the interview.
Patients who receive mechanical ventilation without deep sedation often include those with conditions like pneumonia, where prolonged intubation and ventilation are required to support breathing.
In such cases, deep sedation may not be necessary, allowing patients to remain conscious while still benefiting from ventilatory support.
Regarding the use of analgesia, while there is no specific threshold defining ‘strong analgesia’ in this context, many awake patients receiving mechanical ventilation commonly receive low doses of fentanyl, either through IV or transdermal patches.
This approach is used primarily to manage discomfort associated with the presence of the endotracheal tube.
Patients who received such low‐dose fentanyl were included in the study, as this level of analgesia is generally compatible with consciousness and communication attempts.
Exclusion criteria for patients were having psychiatric conditions or not remembering their ICU stay, as full recollection was necessary for meaningful participation in the study.
After enrolling patients, we recruited their family members.
Inclusion criteria for family members were being ≥18 years old and a family member of one of the study participants.
The last subsample consisted of HCPs (nurses or physicians) working in the General, Neurosurgical or Cardiothoracic ICUs at a single Italian hospital.
The inclusion criterion for HCPs was having been working in ICU for at least 6 months.
Participants were contacted either through face‐to‐face interaction or via telephone communication and informed about the possibility of participating in the study.
Initially, we estimated a sample size of 45 of 60 participants divided as 15 of 20 patients, 15 of 20 family members, and 15 of 20 health care professionals.
These estimates were made based on the phenomenon of interest in order to recruit a sample that could provide enough information power.20In our case, in‐depth exploration of its underlying subjective experiential nature was needed.
Thus, we looked for a sample size adequate to answer the research question to produce something worth documenting.
Additionally, as specified by Thorne,19the sample should be precisely crafted based on the knowledge that is needed, the options available for getting as close as possible to the phenomenon, and the most respectful approaches regarding ethical research guidelines.
Data were collected through semi‐structured interviews, one per participant, over a three‐month period.
The interviews were conducted by a single research team member, an ICU nurse (SB), trained in qualitative interviewing and supervised by an expert nurse researcher in qualitative research (ML).
Patients and family members were interviewed either through face‐to‐face or telephone interviews after the patient's discharge.
For HCPs, face‐to‐face semi‐structured interviews were conducted.
In the interviews, patients were asked to describe their methods of communication during their ICU stay, along with any associated feelings.
Questions for patients focused on their ability to communicate needs, the methods and challenges they faced, what they wanted to convey to staff and family, and how communication difficulties affected their care.
They were also asked to share examples of successful communication.
Similarly, family members and HCPs were asked about their interactions and communication strategies with their relatives or patients, with a particular emphasis on evaluating the effectiveness of these methods.
Questions for family members explored their ability to communicate with the patient, how well they understood the patient's needs, and any challenges they faced.
They were also asked to describe both successful and unsuccessful communication examples and reflect on how these interactions affected them and the health care team.
Questions for health care professionals addressed how they interacted with conscious, mechanically ventilated patients, the types of patient requests they understood best, and their reactions to communication challenges.
They were also asked to describe both successful and unsuccessful communication attempts, how communication barriers affected patient care, and the techniques they used to facilitate understanding.
To enrich our understanding, all participants were encouraged to provide specific examples of their experiences.
On average, the interviews lasted 30 min (16–72 min).
Interviews were audio‐recorded and anonymized.
Then, they were analysed using theRapid and Rigorous qualitative data analysis—RADaR.21We chose the RADaR technique for its ability to provide a rapid yet systematic approach to qualitative data analysis.
This technique allowed us to use straightforward tools, such as tables in word processing, to organize and progressively condense the data.
Through its step‐by‐step data reduction process, RADaR enabled us to transform raw, textual data into a more manageable and structured format.
This approach was particularly beneficial as it allowed us to analyse the data rigorously while accelerating the process by focusing on the most relevant segments in each phase.
In summary, RADaR provided an efficient, practical method that facilitated both in‐depth and timely analysis of the interviews.
Following this approach, two researchers (SB, ML) listened to the interviews multiple times and transcribed the sections relevant to the study question.
The information considered most significant was extracted and organized within tables by two researchers.
A review process of raw data contained in the tables was undertaken and only the relevant information aligning with the study's objective was kept.
This process reduced data volume, resulting in progressively shorter and more concise tables, where essential data were arranged in a precise and schematic manner.
Two researchers (SB, ML) identified the main themes that provided an explanatory framework for the phenomenon of interest.
Then, the entire research team reviewed this framework of findings, where also relevant quotes were incorporated.
The process of interpretation involved a dynamic discussion on the thematic structure of the findings.
The interviews were initially analysed separately for each group (patients, family members and health care professionals) to avoid cross‐influence and capture each group's unique perspective.
Subsequently, the analyses were combined to identify commonalities and differences across the groups, allowing us to highlight both shared themes and distinct experiences related to communication.
A total of 43 participants were interviewed: 10 patients, 13 family members and 20 HCPs.
Most patients were males, with a mean age of 59.9 years.
Most family members were females and visited their relatives in the ICU in person.
Among HCPs, there were 13 nurses and 7 physicians, with a mean age of 29.7 years (Table1).
Note: Data are presented as number (%), except for age and length of stay that are presented as number [CI].
Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; ICU, intensive care unit.
Three major themes were identified.
The first theme was the perception of communication difficulties, which is how participants perceived and experienced voicelessness.
The second theme was the negative impacts on relationships and emotions, which delves into the repercussions of voicelessness, encompassing aspects of patient isolation and limited interaction, and psychological and emotional distress experienced by patients and their families due to these circumstances.
The last theme was the negative effects of voicelessness on care, including issues such as unpersonalized care and missed care and overtreatment (Figure1).
Abbreviations: FM, family member; NU, nurse; PH, physician; PT, patient; Q, quote.
HCPs, on the other hand, primarily focus on the patient's clinical needs (Table2, Q4).
Nevertheless, the interviews highlighted the importance the HCPs placed on identifying patients' needs correctly through effective communication (Table2, Q5).
All participants reported experiencing negative emotions when they were unable to communicate or understand each other.
Patients mainly reported anger, irritation, and frustration (Table2, Q6).
Family members mentioned a sense of helplessness and sadness (Table2, Q7).
HCPs reported feeling inadequate, uncomfortable, upset and frustrated (Table2, Q8).
The second theme referred to the negative impacts of communication difficulties and voicelessness on relationships and emotions.
This theme delves into the repercussions of voicelessness, encompassing aspects of patient isolation and limited interaction, and psychological and emotional distress experienced by patients and their families due to these circumstances.
Participants stated that during the first days of hospitalization, communication challenges induced them to seek alternative communication methods, such as lip‐reading, gestures or alpha‐numeric boards.
After several unsuccessful attempts, patients, family members and HCPs reported becoming fatigued and angry, and stopped trying to communicate (Table2, Q9–Q11).
The distancing and the negative emotions experienced due to repeated failures in communication and the lack of understanding led patients to isolate themselves, feeling alone.
Without social interaction, participants felt estranged from reality, as a patient reported: ‘Not being able to speak excluded me from reality.
I no longer knew what day it was, I lost track of time.
I didn't know what my children were doing, how my grandchildren were’ (PT06).
The absence of communication and social interaction affected the psychological and emotional state of patients, who are already in a vulnerable condition.
Many patients described the discomfort they experienced in the ICU (Table2, Q12, Q13).
Patients have found themselves in a stressful situation, negatively impacting their well‐being and humour (Table2, Q14).
Some individuals reported a difficult‐to‐explain feeling of ‘something missing’ as if they were lost without the ability to communicate (Table2, Q15).
HCPs also perceived the negative influence of communication barriers on patients (Table2, Q16).
These negative feelings sometimes persisted in patients even after the discharge, indicating the presence of post‐traumatic symptoms, as a patient stated: ‘Even today, I still have nightmares at night about not being able to breathe and not being able to tell anyone’ (PT06).
Both family members and HCPs confirmed the deterioration of the mood and emotional state of the individuals due to social isolation and the absence of effective interactions: ‘After the frustration, day after day, patients gradually close off, shut down, isolate themselves, and no longer interact’ (NU08).
The third theme referred to the negative effects of voicelessness and the consequent communication difficulties on care, especially the resulting un‐personalized care, missed care and overtreatment as perceived by participants.
HCPs described that the inability to comprehend the true needs of patients may lead to standardized and detached care, resulting in it being inadequate (Table2, Q19).
On the contrary, they described effective communication as essential to understand patients' worries and problems, and find the underlying causes of clinical alterations and patient agitation (Table2, Q20).
HCPs stated that the lack of communication with voiceless patients increases the likelihood of providing inadequate care, because the patients might be misunderstood (Table2, Q21, Q22).
It was underlined that this is particularly true for agitated patients who are challenging to understand (Table2, Q23, Q24).
In fact, HCPs emphasized the difficulties encountered in their job when interacting with voiceless patients, and how crucial it is to fully understand patients' requests to meet their needs and offer the best care possible.
A patient described a situation of missed care, where their need was not addressed: ‘It was a situation of great frustration and discomfort because it was clear that something was hurting me, and I couldn't communicate how they should have moved and readjusted me, and the discomfort persisted’ (PT08).
A situation of overtreatment was explained by a nurse: ‘You can't understand their needs.
Sometimes patients get so agitated, and you have to take action with medications or restraints’ (NU10).
This study investigated the negative effects of the inability to verbally communicate among non‐sedated, mechanically ventilated patients in the ICU, through the perspectives of voiceless patients, health care professionals and family members.
We found that all participants experienced communication difficulties, although at varying degrees, and that such difficulties had negative consequences in all three groups.
The main insight provided by this study is that the lack of communication due to voicelessness has a negative impact on health care, resulting in missed care or overtreatment.
This is relevant because it highlights the opportunity for developing interventions aimed at mitigating communication barriers associated with voicelessness.
Implementing such interventions has the potential to enhance the quality of care provided while reducing situations of missed care or overtreatment.
To the best of our knowledge, this study is among the first to investigate the perspective of family members, and it is among the few that consider the perspectives of both nurses and physicians, which is relatively uncommon in the existing literature.
A previous study provided an important description of the phenomenon of communication impairments in voiceless patients by exploring the perspectives of patients, families and nurses.12We built upon that knowledge by also including the perspectives of other health care professionals who still play a role in the phenomenon and by doubling the sample size to ensure a thick description and increase the internal validity and reliability of our findings.
Our results show that family members approach the situation and interact with their relatives in two opposite ways.
A portion of family members reported experiencing positive emotions due to the opportunity to connect with their loved ones, despite them being voiceless.
On the contrary, the other portion declared experiencing negative emotions due to communication difficulties and numerous misunderstandings.
Similar results were highlighted in previous literature where family members often showed ambivalent attitudes,29with some of them feeling such intense negative sensations that they wished for greater sedation for the relative to no longer feel helpless.11However, in our study, a subset of patients also reported that they found it easier to communicate with their family members because they seemed to grasp things more quickly and effectively than HCPs.
Participants identified their relatives as a resource: they assisted in improving communication and understanding, supported the patient, and provided emotional support, transmitting familiarity, strength and courage.
These results align with previous studies in which patients stated that family members are better than HCPs at interpreting what they wanted to express30and that they would have liked their family members by their side to receive their emotional support.31In fact, longer visits and the presence of a relative are considered protective factors for patients because they increase patients' connection with the ‘real’ world.32Our research suggests that promoting family presence in ICU settings could be crucial in improving communication with voiceless patients.
We found that patients experience negative emotions due to voicelessness, such as anxiety, anger, frustration and helplessness, which are consistent with those described in other studies.7,30,33,34,35,36,37These negative effects still affected patients even months after discharge from the hospital, resulting in symptoms of post‐traumatic stress, such as nightmares and unpleasant memories.
This is coherent with previous studies, where authors reported that being hospitalized in an ICU can readily lead to psychological issues, negative emotions and post‐traumatic stress disorders for the majority of patients.9,13,38,39Our findings could further support the role of communication difficulties in shaping post‐intensive care syndrome.
By highlighting the negative emotions and psychological distress experienced by patients and the negative effects on the care provided due to voicelessness, our study underscores the need for improved communication strategies.
This study has some limitations.
Firstly, our sample was recruited from a single hospital.
Secondly, we conducted the study during the COVID‐19 pandemic, when visits from family members were partially restricted (e.g., limited visiting hours and mandatory face masks).
However, a strength of this study is that our sample is composed of participants from three different intensive care wards with diverse characteristics in terms of age, gender, average length of stay in the ICU for patients, or profession and experience for HCPs, ensuring a high information power of this sample for a meaningful clinical understanding.
Future research should focus on testing new communication strategies tailored for voiceless patients in intensive care settings, as well as exploring if the presence of family members could help patients cope with voicelessness.
The results of this study could be particularly useful to health care professionals and critical care nurses as they highlight the need for implementing strategies to enhance and improve communication between HCPs, voiceless patients and their families.
Based on that, the necessity to train HCPs and critical care nurses in alternative communication strategies stands out.
We conducted a qualitative study to investigate the negative effects of the inability to verbally communicate among voiceless patients in the ICU, considering the perspectives of patients, HCPs and family members.
We found that voicelessness has negative effects on the well‐being of patients, job satisfaction of HCPs, and the health care provided in the ICU, with missed care or overtreatment linked to the inability to comprehend patients.
Our findings highlight the need for interventions aimed at enhancing communication between HCPs, voiceless patients and their families, contributing to improving patient well‐being and potentially reducing their time in intensive care settings.
Based on our results, it is imperative to train HCPs in alternative communication strategies to engage effectively with voiceless patients.
Moreover, providing psychological support for both patients and their family members throughout the recovery is essential to help them cope with these challenges.
Lastly, the presence of family members should be encouraged beyond regular visiting hours to support the patients.
Prof. Giacomo Bellani declares equities in DICO Technologies SRL.
All the other authors declare no conflict of interest.