Recent pre‐clinical evidence suggests that the tryptophan metabolite 3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid (3‐HAA) and the related enzyme activity along the kynurenine metabolic pathway (KP) are associated with lifespan extension.
We aimed to translate these findings into humans and expose exercise training as a potential non‐pharmacological intervention to modulate this metabolic hub.
To explore whether recent pre‐clinical findings might also be of relevance for humans, we analyzed the evolutionary conservation of KYNU and HAAO, the two core KP enzymes associated with 3‐HAA.
In a cross‐sectional analysis of young‐to‐middle‐aged adults (N= 84), we examined potential associations of serum 3‐HAA and its precursor anthranilic acid with age.
We then investigated whether 26 weeks of endurance exercise (increasing intensity (INC) during the intervention period (n= 17) vs. conventional moderate continuous training (CON) matched for energy expenditure (n= 17)) impacted 3‐HAA levels, related metabolic ratios, and other KP metabolites.
We demonstrate that the core KP enzymes associated with 3‐HAA are evolutionarily conserved in humans.
Serum 3‐HAA and its precursor anthranilic acid were consistently associated with age in young‐to‐middle‐aged adults.
Both exercise modes tested induced an increase in 3‐HAA levels of 134% (p< 0.001) and 85% (p< 0.001) compared with baseline, respectively, without a significant time*group interaction effect.
We translate the association between systemic 3‐HAA levels and age from animal models into humans and highlight longer‐term exercise training as an efficient strategy to boost systemic 3‐HAA levels in middle‐aged adults.
Our findings open promising research avenues concerning the mediating role of 3‐HAA in training adaptations, health, and longevity.
Recently, the KP downstream metabolite 3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid (3‐HAA) has been shown to slow down aging and promote longevity in animal models.
Dang et al.9demonstrated that knockdown of the 3‐HAA 3,4‐dioxygenase gene 1 (haao‐1), which encodes for the enzyme that further catabolizes 3‐HAA, leads to a lifespan extension of ~30%, and contributes to healthy aging inCaenorhabditis elegans(C. elegans).
The authors then investigated this observation in mice and reported that both supplementing the diet with 3‐HAA in male mice as well as knocking downhaao‐1in female mice significantly extended lifespan compared with wild‐type mice.9These results point to the KP enzyme HAAO and the KP metabolite 3‐HAA as potential therapeutic targets for age‐related health decline.
Many epidemiological studies show that physical fitness is related to longevity.10In this context, endurance exercise training is a widely accepted strategy to effectively promote healthy aging.11The only large‐scale randomized controlled trial (n= 1567), theGeneration 100 study, investigated the effect of high‐intensity interval training (HIIT) versus moderate‐intensity continuous training (MICT) versus a control group on all‐cause mortality over 5 years as the primary endpoint.
The results of this trial point to the superiority of HIIT compared with conventional MICT in lowering aging‐associated all‐cause mortality, but there was only a non‐significant trend reported for effects between HIIT and MICT.12Moreover, epidemiological evidence shows that former elite athletes live substantially longer than the general population,13,14suggesting that training at greater volumes and/or higher intensities may contribute to longevity.
Endurance training improves fat oxidation15and increases cardiovascular fitness (i.e., V̇O2max)16which leads to higher performance capacity and lower risk of lifestyle‐related diseases (e.g., type 2 diabetes).
However, more exploratory translational trials are needed to improve our understanding of the mechanisms linking exercise training adaptations to the aging process, health, and longevity, and finally optimize population‐specific exercise recommendations.
Here, we aimed to translate the findings from Dang et al.9into humans and investigated whether (i) the KP enzymes KYNU and HAAO are evolutionarily conserved using sequence alignment, (ii) serum levels of 3‐HAA are associated with age, and (iii) exercise training can boost 3‐HAA levels in middle‐aged adults.
To explore exercise intensity as a potentially relevant factor, we tested continuously increasing exercise intensity (INC) throughout a 26‐week exercise intervention period versus maintaining moderate‐intensity continuous training (CON, corresponding to MICT).
To explore whether the pre‐clinical findings by Dang et al.9might also be of relevance for humans, we analyzed the evolutionary conservation of KYNU and HAAO, the two core KP enzymes associated with 3‐HAA.
KYNU catalyzes the cleavage of 3‐hydroxykynurenine (3‐HK) into 3‐HAA, and HAAO catalyzes the oxidative ring opening of 3‐HAA to 2‐amino‐3‐carboxymuconate semialdehyde, which spontaneously cyclizes to quinolinic acid (QA).
Multiple sequence alignment of both KYNU and HAAO revealed high evolutionary conservation betweenC.
elegans, zebrafish, mouse, and human (Figure1).
For KYNU, multiple sequence alignment revealed excellent conservation, as indicated by a total consistency value of 99 (with 100 meaning full agreement between the considered alignments and the associated primary library).23Evolutionary conservation was also apparent for amino acid residues involved in the enzymatic cleavage of 3‐HK, with most residues showing strict identity across the investigated taxa (Figure1A).
These included active site residues like Tyr‐226, Tyr‐275, Trp‐305, and Phe‐31420,24as well as residues His‐102 and Asn‐333, which were previously described to determine the substrate specificity of KYNU for 3‐HK over kynurenine21(see green triangles in Figure1Aand Supplement2).
Similarly, multiple sequence alignment revealed excellent conservation for HAAO, with a total consistency value of 99.
Since docking of 3‐HAA at the active site of HAAO is dependent on iron,22both residues interacting with the iron ion and residues interacting with 3‐HAA directly were assessed for evolutionary conservation.
Interestingly, all residues demonstrated strict identity between the investigated taxa (see green triangles in Figure1B).
This suggests that KYNU and HAAO are evolutionary highly conserved enzymes.
More importantly, the evolutionary conservation also applies to the active sites involved in substrate binding and cleavage.
This places the findings obtained inC. elegansby Dang et al.9in an interesting light and warrants evaluation of potential similar effects in humans.
To contextualize the evolutionary conservation of KYNU and HAAO, it is worth noting that, to the best of our knowledge, data on a potential change in gene expression during aging are lacking.
To evaluate a potential relationship between systemic 3‐HAA concentrations and age in humans, we determined serum concentrations of 3‐HAA and the complete KP metabolite profile (Figure2A) in a cohort ofN= 84 adults (44 females) with an age range of 20–60 years (see Table1for participant characteristics), using a targeted metabolomics approach.
We first compared systemic levels of 3‐HAA, its direct precursor anthranilic acid (AA), and the 3‐HAA/AA ratio between young (20–29 years of age) and middle‐aged (30–60 years of age) adults.
Levels of 3‐HAA were twice as high in the young adults compared with the middle‐aged adults, while levels of AA were substantially lower in the young adults (Figure2B).
Accordingly, the 3‐HAA/AA ratio emerged as the marker that best discriminated between young and middle‐aged adults.
The association between the AA‐3‐HAA axis (refers to AA, 3‐HAA, and the ratio 3‐HAA/AA) and age is also persistent when using both metabolite levels and their ratio as continuous variables across allN= 84 participants, as reflected in consistent significant correlations of 3‐HAA (r= −0.493;p< 0.001), AA (r= 0.502;p< 0.001), and 3‐HAA/AA (r= −0.656;p< 0.001) with age, respectively (Figure2C).
Conventional markers of inflammation, that is, IL‐10 and IL‐6, did not correlate with age or with components of the AA‐3‐HAA axis (Figure2D), suggesting an inflammation‐independent mechanism may underlie the age‐associated decline in 3‐HAA concentrations, although further research including more markers of the complex picture of inflammation is needed to support this hypothesis.
However, in line with the literature, both markers, IL‐10 and IL‐6, as well as neopterin correlated with the kynurenine‐to‐tryptophan ratio (KTR) as an indicator of KP activation and with quinolinic acid levels, presumably due to increased activity of the inflammation‐responsive KP enzymes, IDO‐1 and kynurenine 3‐monooxygenase (KMO), respectively.25,26The observed significant associations of the macrophage‐derived neopterin and the KP metabolites reflect the well‐established interconnection between neopterin and KP regulation in the present cohort of investigation.
Tryptophan metabolite 3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid (3‐HAA) associates with age in young‐to‐middle‐aged adults.
A: Schematic overview of the kynurenine pathway (KP) of tryptophan metabolism.
B: Age‐related differences in the level of 3‐HAA, anthranilic acid (AA), and 3‐HAA/AA ratio between young (20–29 years of age,n= 30) and middle‐aged (30–60 years of age,n= 54) adults, illustrated by boxplots with 95% confidence intervals as whiskers.
C: Scatter plots illustrating correlations (r: Pearson's coefficient;CI: 95% confidence interval) between age and level of 3‐HAA, AA, and 3‐HAA/AA ratio (pooled cohorts,N= 84).
D: Heatmap showing correlations (Pearson's coefficient) between all KP metabolites, age (N= 84), and conventional serum inflammation markers (IL‐6:N= 47; IL‐10:N= 43).
Significant correlations (p< 0.05) were indicated in bold.
E: Sex‐related differences in levels of 3‐HAA, AA, and 3‐HAA/AA ratio (males:N= 40; females:N= 44) illustrated as boxplots with 97.5 and 2.5 percentile as whiskers.
*p< 0.05; **p< 0.01; ***p< 0.001, based on independentt‐tests.
CON = control group; INC = intervention group; IL‐6 = interleukin‐6; IL‐10 = interleukin‐10; Neopt = neopterin; Trp = tryptophan; Kyn = kynurenine; KTR = kynurenine‐to‐tryptophan ratio; KA = kynurenic acid; Qld = quinaldic acid; 3‐HK = 3‐hydroxykynurenine; XA = xanthurenic acid; AA = anthranilic acid; 3‐HAA = 3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid; QA = quinolinic acid; Pic = picolinic acid; 3‐HAA/AA ratio = 3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid/anthranilic acid ratio; QA/3‐HAA ratio = quinolinic acid/3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid ratio; Pic/3‐HAA ratio = picolinic acid/3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid ratio.
yrs: Years T0‐T1: All participants completed 50 min continuous walking/cycling at 55% heart rate reserve (HRR)).
Randomization to CON/INC was performed after 10 weeks (T1).
CON participants continued 50 min continuous walking/cycling at 55%HRRfor 16 weeks (T1‐T3).
INC participants completed 50 min continuous walking/cycling at 70% HRRfor 8 weeks (T1‐T2) and high‐intensity interval training (4 × 4 min at 95% HRR) for 8 weeks (T2to T3).
KTR is given in μmol*L−1by mmol*L−1.
3‐HAA/AA ratio, QA/3‐HAA ratio, and Pic/3‐HAA ratio are given in nmol*L−1 by nmol*L−1.
Participant characteristics of the cross‐sectional investigation.
Note: Sex is given as total number and percentage (%).
All other data are given as mean (standard deviation).
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; V̇O2peak, peak oxygen consumption during cardiopulmonary exercise testing by kilogram body weight.
Mechanistically, a physiological consequence of the age‐dependent decline in systemic 3‐HAA levels could be a decreased competence in oxidative stress response.
Oxidative stress is closely linked to aging and several age‐related diseases.
In this context, age‐associated functional impairments are attributed to an imbalance between reactive oxygen and nitrogen species production and antioxidant defense capacity.27Given that 3‐HAA has been described as a context‐dependent redox regulator,9,28chronically decreased systemic 3‐HAA concentrations might contribute to aging processes, and interventions to counteract this decline are worth investigating.
Additionally, we evaluated potential sex differences in the systemic concentrations of the AA‐3‐HAA axis and observed significantly higher levels of 3‐HAA and the 3‐HAA/AA ratio in male compared with female participants (Figure2E).
Of note, the significant correlation between 3‐HAA level and age persisted when dichotomizing the participants by sex (Supplement4).
In their recent article, Dang et al.9report that the knockout ofhaao‐1, the gene mediating the metabolic degradation of 3‐HAA, significantly extended the lifespan of female mice, whereas no significance for lifespan extension was observed in male mice.
Our findings confirm a sex‐dependent metabolic regulation of systemic 3‐HAA levels in humans.
The observed differences in metabolite concentrations can be explained by several potential mechanisms, such as increased/decreased enzyme activity (e.g., via post‐translational modifications or epigenetic regulation) or hormonal differences that might influence the kynurenine pathway regulation between males and females.
However, based on the current investigations, the source organ of the observed KP metabolite differences between sexes remains unknown and it is thus crucial for future research to elucidate the underlying mechanisms on a tissue level.
Replicating the association between age and 3‐HAA levels in young‐to‐middle‐aged humans, we next asked whether long‐term endurance exercise training, as an evidence‐based strategy with multi‐dimensional health effects across the lifespan and KP modulating properties, could restore the age‐related decline in systemic 3‐HAA levels.
We analyzed serum KP metabolite levels ofn= 34 middle‐aged adults who participated in a randomized endurance exercise trial over 26 weeks at four different measurement time points (baseline: T0; 10 weeks: T1; 18 weeks: T2; 26 weeks: T3).
The study was designed to compare the effects of two different exercise intensity groups (INC vs. CON) that were matched for caloric demand over the entire intervention period (Figure3A).
Markers of inflammation and systemic tryptophan metabolite levels along the kynurenine pathway in response to 26 weeks of either increased intensity exercise (INC) or moderate‐intensity exercise (CON).
A: Study design of the randomized controlled trial investigating serum KP modulating effects of a 26‐week endurance exercise training (conventional moderate‐intensity continuous training (CON,n= 17) versus increasing exercise intensity training (INC,n= 17)) at baseline (T0), 10 weeks (T1), 18 weeks (T2), and 26 weeks (T3).
The first 10 weeks of the intervention period (indicated as gray zone in the figures) were implemented as exercise familiarization phase during which all participants conducted the conventional moderate‐intensity exercise training.
*Energy expenditure for INC was matched to CON by adjusting the training time per session for intervention 2 (mean duration, 42 min per session) and intervention 3 (mean duration, 35 min per session).
B‐R: Results for the separate markers and metabolites.
Levels of 3‐HAA increase over 26 weeks of INC by 134%, while CON induces a descriptively smaller increase (85%).
Repeated measures analyses of variance (ANOVA) and Bonferroni‐corrected post hoc comparisons (in case of significant ANOVA main effects) were conducted for all analytes.
Sample sizes weren= 17 for INC versusn= 17 for CON for all analytes except for IL‐10 (INC:N= 12; CON:N= 15) *significant between group post hoc comparison; #significant within group post hoc comparison.
*p< 0.05; #p< 0.05; ##p< 0.01; ###p< 0.001.
Values are reported as mean ± standard error of the mean.
CON = control group; INC = intervention group; KTR = kynurenine‐to‐tryptophan ratio; 3‐HAA/AA ratio = 3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid/anthranilic acid ratio; QA/3‐HAA ratio = quinolinic acid/3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid ratio; Pic/3‐HAA ratio = picolinic acid/3‐hydroxyanthranilic acid ratio.
T0‐T1: All participants completed 50 min continuous walking/cycling at 55% heart rate reserve (HRR)).
Randomization to CON/INC was performed after 10 weeks (T1).
CON participants continued 50 min continuous walking/cycling at 55%HRRfor 16 weeks (T1‐T3).
INC participants completed 50 min continuous walking/cycling at 70% HRRfor 8 weeks (T1‐T2) and high‐intensity interval training (4 × 4 min at 95% HRR) for 8 weeks (T2to T3).
KTR is given in μmol*L−1by mmol*L−1.
3‐HAA/AA ratio, QA/3‐HAA ratio, and Pic/3‐HAA ratio are given in nmol*L−1 by nmol*L−1.
Speculating about other factors than inflammation potentially underlying the observed exercise‐induced increase in 3‐HAA, gut microbiota‐mediated changes in tryptophan metabolism might be one key mechanism.
Exercise training has been described to alter gut microbiota in mice31and humans,32,33and tryptophan metabolism is regulated by gut microbiota.34Indeed, two studies have reported that acute (single) bouts of endurance exercise affect tryptophan biosynthesis and metabolism in fecal samples,35,36but no specific conclusions on the generation of 3‐HAA or enzyme activity along the KP can be drawn.
Future translational studies on exercise‐induced changes in tryptophan metabolism driven by gut microbiota are warranted to improve our mechanistic understanding of alterations in KP metabolite serum levels.
In the study by Dang et al.9the inhibition ofhaao‐1in female and 3‐HAA supplementation in male mice extended the lifespans compared with the wild types, respectively.
Mechanistically, the authors argue that the accumulation of physiological 3‐HAA levels prolonged life by mediating anti‐inflammatory effects and protecting against oxidative stress.9In fact, the lower and thus more physiological dose of 3‐HAA supplementation investigated in the mouse model was more effective in lifespan extension compared with the higher dose.9To test whether the exercise training‐induced increase in 3‐HAA is driven by an overall upregulation of the KP metabolic downstream towards its end products, we evaluated the ratios between 3‐HAA and its downstream metabolites QA and picolinic acid (Pic) (Figure3P,R).
Both ratios, QA/3‐HAA and Pic/3‐HAA, considerably decreased after the 26‐week exercise training program (more than 100% relative to baseline values in INC and CON, Supplement5).
These findings suggest that an increased upstream metabolism yielding greater 3‐HAA production coupled with decreased activity of the downstream enzymes HAAO or ACSD‐1 occurs in response to endurance exercise training in humans.
The physiological accumulation of 3‐HAA, induced by 26 weeks of endurance exercise, is similar to accumulated systemic 3‐HAA levels reported in the mouse model by Dang et al.9after inhibition ofhaaoor 3‐HAA supplementation, which extended lifespan in mice.
Taken together, both the effect of 3‐HAA supplementation on lifespan in mice as well as the association of age with 3‐HAA and the boosting effect of exercise training on 3‐HAA levels in middle‐aged adults build a solid basis for large‐scale human trials investigating 3‐HAA and its role for healthy aging.
The findings of this study should be considered in the context of its limitations.
First, the time‐of‐day standardization of the blood sampling was only done within each subject for the longitudinal exercise trial and not between the subjects, thus potentially leading to variations in the outcome measurements.
Second, the small sample sizes represent a limitation and the results of this study need to be reproduced by powered trials.
Third, we did not control for dietary intake of tryptophan, which potentially could influence the results.
In conclusion, we show that (i) KYNU and HAAO are evolutionarily conserved in humans, (ii) systemic 3‐HAA concentrations are associated with age in young‐to‐middle‐aged adults, and (iii) 3‐HAA levels differ between sexes.
We also demonstrate that (iv) longer‐term energy‐equivalent endurance exercise training, independent of exercise intensity, can substantially restore age‐related declines in systemic 3‐HAA levels.
Coupled with the work of Dang et al.9our observations lend support to basic and clinical research aimed at elucidating tissue‐specific mechanisms underlying the dysregulation of tryptophan metabolism during aging and examine the therapeutic potential of exercise for healthy aging in humans.
Evolutionary conservation of kynureninase (KYNU) and HAAO—the two core KP enzymes associated with 3‐HAA—was assessed by retrieving the amino acid sequences from UniProt37for the following organisms: human (Homo sapiens), mouse (Mus musculus), zebrafish (Danio rerio), and nematode (C.elegans).
These taxa were chosen based on their evolutionary distance to evaluate whether KYNU and HAAO are conserved across large evolutionary timespans.
All amino acid sequences were then uploaded to T‐Coffee,23and multiple sequence alignments were computed using the Expresso server.38The resulting alignment was then transferred to the ESPript server (https://espript.ibcp.fr)39to visualize evolutionary conservation.
Secondary structures and relative accessibility of different amino acid residues were plotted above and below the aligned sequences, respectively.
To explore the evolutionary conservation of the active site of both proteins, we extracted amino acid residues involved in substrate binding and cleavage from previous publications and highlighted these residues with green triangles throughout the figures.
For KYNU, an in‐depth characterization of the active site of human KYNU was taken as reference.20For HAAO, a recent characterization of the active site inCupriavidus metalliduranswas used22and the residues involved in substrate binding were aligned with a human sequence of HAAO to identify the corresponding residues in humans.
We first cross‐sectionally compared systemic tryptophan metabolite levels from a cohort of participants aged between 20 and 29 years to the levels from a cohort of participants aged between 30 and 60 years.
The age span of the young adults was chosen in order to ensure a reliable comparator group that is free of initiated biological aging processes and age‐related declines in cardiorespiratory fitness.
Detailed participant characteristics are provided in Table1.
We then pooled the participants from both cohorts (age range from 20 to 60 years) to calculate correlations between age, markers of inflammation (IL‐6, IL‐10, neopterin), and tryptophan metabolites.
Finally, a cross‐sectional comparison was used to evaluate possible sex‐related differences in 3‐HAA levels, AA levels, and the 3‐HAA/AA ratio.
Next, we aimed to investigate the effects of longer‐term endurance exercise training on tryptophan metabolites along the KP and related inflammatory markers.
For this purpose, we analyzed serum samples fromn= 34 participants with an age between 30 and 60 years who participated in a two‐arm randomized controlled trial.
The primary endpoint of this interventional trial was cardiorespiratory fitness as indicated by maximum oxygen consumption and previously published elsewhere.40Included were 30–60 years old and untrained (last 6 months: < 1 h·wk−1endurance‐type physical activity) non‐smokers.
Exclusion criteria were BMI > 30 kg·m−2, resting blood pressure (RRrest) ≥ 160/100 mmHg, total cholesterol ≥300 mg·dl−1, maximum oxygen uptake (VO2max) > 50 mL·kg−1·min−1for men; > 45 mL·kg−1·min−1for women, iron deficiency (Ferritin ≤34 ng·mL−1), thyroid dysfunction (TSH ≤0.34 mU·l−1≥ 4.0 ng·mL−1), and medications with potential influence on target parameters (e.g., beta‐blockers) and pregnancy.
Participants (see Table2for characteristics) in one arm performed continuous moderate‐intensity endurance training for 26 weeks (CON), while those in the other arm increased their training intensity from moderate to vigorous intensity after 10 weeks and to high‐intensity interval training after 18 weeks (INC).
The CON group was designed to meet the WHO guidelines for aerobic physical activity, representing the current standard care as recommend by the WHO.41Considering the accumulating evidence on the superior effects of high‐intensity training on various health‐related outcomes, we tested the CON group versus a group in which exercise intensity was increased throughout the intervention phase (INC) as novel intervention.
Within‐subject energy expenditure was kept constant throughout the study by measuring oxygen uptake at training heart rates and subsequent adjustment of training durations (see Supplement1for energy expenditure data).
Measurement time points were implemented at baseline (T0) and after 10 (T1), 18 (T2), and 26 (T3) weeks of training.
The subjects were allocated to either CON or INC using a minimization technique.
Stratification characteristics were age, sex, baseline V̇O2max, V̇O2maxresponse at T1(yes/no), and the magnitude of V̇O2maxresponse at T1.
All participants provided written informed consent.
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Association of Saarland (registration number 219/19), and the study procedures complied with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Participant characteristics of the longitudinal exercise trial.
Note: Sex is given as the total number and percentage (%).
All other data are given as mean (SD).
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CON, control group; INC, intervention group; V̇O2peak, peak oxygen consumption during cardiopulmonary exercise testing by kilogram body weight.
Venus blood samples were collected under resting conditions (participants were strictly instructed to refrain from any exercise or physical activity inducing cardiovascular arousal for at least 24 h prior to the testings) at baseline, T1, T2, and T3from a median cubital vein in the forearm after local skin disinfection in a lying position using serum tubes.
After clotting for 10 minutes, samples were centrifuged at 4300gfor 10 minutes and isolated serum was stored at −80°C until further analysis.
The training program was conducted 3d wk−1for a duration of 26 weeks.
For the initial 10 weeks, all participants trained 50 minutes per session at 55% heart rate reserve (%HRRES).
We implemented the 10‐week familiarization phase due to several reasons.
First, to investigate conventional endurance training as recommended by the WHO physical activity guidelines (CON group) versus a promising novel training method (increasing intensity, INC group), it is plausible to train all participants initially at one similar intensity in order to create a similar baseline level.
Second, all participants were familiarized with the training sessions and context conditions itself.
Third, the familiarization phase was used to accurately stratify the randomization (“change in VO2max” and “response/non‐response” were used as stratification factors).
After the initial 10 weeks, CON continued to exercise 3d wk−1for 50 minutes per session at 55%HRRESuntil the end of the study.
INC increased the intensity to 70% HRRESafter 10 weeks and performed a high‐intensity interval training (HIIT 4 × 4 protocol) after 18 weeks.
The HIIT program consisted of a 10‐minute warm‐up at 70% HRmax, followed by 4 intervals of 4‐minute at 95% HRmax, interspersed with 3‐minute rest intervals at 70% HRmax, and a cool‐down at 70% HRmax.
We decided to use heart rate reserve to control exercise intensity because this parameter is integrative as it includes both the maximum heart rate as well as the resting heart rate, while the latter represents an indicator of cardiorespiratory fitness.
The duration of the training sessions was adjusted after T1to maintain constant within‐subject energy expenditure.
Il‐6 and IL‐10 were measured using commercial high‐sensitive ELISA kits (R&D Systems).
Assays were conducted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
Neopterin and the KP metabolites were measured by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) as described previously43at the Bevital laboratory (https://bevital.no).
The lower limit of detection (LOD) for the assay ranged from 0.01 to 8 nmol/L, and within‐ and between‐day coefficients of variation (CVs) ranged from 3% to 8% and 4% to 10%, respectively.
Correlations between serum analytes and age were calculated using Pearson's coefficient.
Independent t‐tests were conducted for comparisons between young‐ and middle‐aged adults as well as between females and males.
Repeated measures analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were used for statistical evaluation of within‐ and between‐group changes in all serum analytes over the intervention period.
In case of significant ANOVA effects, Bonferroni‐corrected post hoc comparisons were applied.
Level of significance was set at 5% for the α‐error.
Two‐sided tests were used for all statistical analyses.
All statistical tests were conducted using IBM SPSS statistics version 29.
Line charts and box plots were created with GraphPad (version 9.1.2, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).