Patients undergoing cardiac resynchronization therapy with a defibrillator (CRT‐D) often experience improvements in the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF).
This study aimed to identify predictors of ventricular tachyarrhythmias (VTA) in patients with CRT‐D devices and LVEF improvement beyond guideline recommendations for a defibrillator.
Patients randomized to the CRT‐D arm of the Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial With Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy trial who improved their LVEF to > 35% at 12 months following CRT‐D implant were included in this analysis (N= 651).
Predictors of an appropriate implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) Rx VTA were evaluated by Cox proportional hazards regression modeling.
We identified three predictors of VTA among patients treated with CRT‐D subsequent to LVEF improvement > 35%: Lower range improvement in LVEF 36%–40% versus improvement to > 40% (HR, 1.97; 95% CI, 1.21–3.20;p= 0.006); Baseline non‐LBBB ECG morphology (hazard ratio [HR], 1.93; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.23–3.04;p= 0.004); Occurrence of VTA during the first year post‐CRT‐D (HR, 4.91; 95% CI, 2.99–8.07;p< 0.001).
We identified a sub‐group of patients with risk factors who remain at high risk of VTA despite improvement in LVEF following CRT implant.
These patients require close monitoring despite improvement in LVEF beyond guideline recommendations for an ICD.
In CRT‐D patients with LVEF above guideline indications, LVEF 36%–40%, absence of LBBB, and a history of VTA increase the risk for future VTA.
These patients require close monitoring despite improvement beyond guideline recommendations.
Cardiac resynchronization therapy with a defibrillator (CRT‐D) has been established as an effective treatment for the reduction of heart failure events and mortality in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction, symptomatic heart failure, and a wide QRS duration (Moss et al.2009; Bristow et al.2004).
The American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology/Heart Rhythm Society and European Society of Cardiology guidelines provide a class I recommendation for an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) for the primary prevention of sudden cardiac death (SCD), based on LVEF and New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class (ischemic cardiomyopathy: LVEF ≤ 35% and NYHA functional class II or III heart failure; or LVEF ≤ 30% and NYHA functional Class I; nonischemic cardiomyopathy: LVEF ≤ 35% and NYHA functional Class II or III) (Epstein et al.2012).
Recovery of LVEF beyond the 35% guideline threshold for an ICD has been well documented in patients following CRT (Moss et al.2009,2005; Bristow et al.2004; Cleland et al.2005).
This is likely due to left ventricular reverse remodeling in the months and years after CRT placement (Sutton and Keane2007).
LVEF after CRT placement is an important metric in assessing risk for life‐threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias (VTAs).
We have previously shown decreased risk of VTAs in CRT‐D patients with improved LVEF above guideline indications of LVEF > 35% (Sherazi et al.2019).
However, there is a paucity of data regarding the risk factors that predispose these patients to sustained risk of VTA despite LVEF improvement.
To address this question, we designed this study to identify predictors of VTAs in a subset of the MADIT‐CRT (Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial with Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy) population whose LVEF improved > 35% at 12 months after CRT implantation.
The MADIT‐CRT trial was approved by the institutional review boards at the participating centers.
The protocol and primary results have previously been published.
The study enrolled 1820 patients with NYHA class I or II ischemic or nonischemic cardiomyopathy, LVEF ≤ 30%, and QRS duration ≥ 130 ms. Patients were randomly assigned in a 3:2 ratio to receive CRT plus an ICD (n= 1089) or an ICD alone (n= 731) from 110 European and North American centers from December 22, 2004, to June 24, 2009, with follow‐up until September 10, 2010.
Patients with an existing indication for CRT, with an implantable pacemaker, ICD, or resynchronization device; with NYHA III or IV symptoms, previous coronary artery bypass grafting, percutaneous coronary intervention, or an enzyme‐positive myocardial infarction within 3 months before enrollment; or with atrial fibrillation within 1 month before enrollment were excluded.
Among 1820 patients who were enrolled in MADIT‐CRT, 1089 received a CRT‐D device of whom 651 (60%) improved their LVEF to > 35% at 12 months following device implantation and comprised the study population (Figure1).
Study population.
Of the 1820 patients enrolled in the MADIT‐CRT trial, our study comprised 651 patients who received CRT‐D had paired echocardiography data 1 year after device implantation, and LVEF recovery to > 35% at 12‐month follow‐up.
Two‐dimensional echocardiography was performed at baseline and at the 1‐year follow‐up to assess changes in the left ventricular volumes and ejection fraction in the two study groups.
Baseline and 12‐month echo images were analyzed by blinded investigators at the echocardiographic core laboratory at Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Volumes were estimated by averaging those derived from the two‐chamber and four‐chamber views according to Simpson's method, and the ejection fraction was calculated in the usual fashion.
Commercially available transvenous devices were used in the MADIT‐CRT trial.
Qualified physicians used standard techniques to implant the CRT‐D devices.
Device testing and programming were performed as reported previously (Moss et al.2005).
Devices were programmed to monitor therapy, with a protocol recommendation to a setting of the ventricular tachycardia (VT) zone at 180 beats/min and the ventricular fibrillation (VF) zone at 250 beats/min.
Sensitivity was programmed according to physician discretion.
Detection was 2.5 s for the VT zone and 1.0 s for the VF zone.
The protocol recommended programming the VT zone first therapy to burst‐type antitachycardia pacing with eight pulses at 88% of the measured cycle length with a 10‐ms decrement between bursts, then shock therapy; the second therapy had to be shocked at the defibrillation threshold plus at least 10 J (if possible).
The remaining therapies had to be maximal energy shocks.
All shocks had to be biphasic.
The ICDs were interrogated quarterly, after which ICD shocks and disks were sent to the core laboratory for categorization and final evaluation of detected arrhythmias.
An arrhythmia episode was defined as any type of therapy that was rendered, including antitachycardia pacing and shock.
VT was defined as a ventricular rate up to 250 beats/min; VF was defined as a ventricular rate > 250 beats/min with disorganized ventricular electrograms.
Only appropriate therapy delivered for VTA (i.e., VT, VF) was considered in the present study.
The primary endpoint of this study was appropriate ICD treatment for VTA (defined as ventricular tachycardia or VF) ≥ 170 bpm.
The secondary endpoint of this study was appropriate ICD treatment for VTA (defined as ventricular tachycardia or VF) ≥ 170 bpm or death.
The tertiary endpoint of this study was the presence of fast‐VTA, which was defined as VTA ≥ 200 bpm.
All outcomes were evaluated subsequent to the 12‐month visit (land‐mark analysis).
Baseline characteristics by the presence versus absence of VTA during follow‐up were compared using the Wilcoxon rank‐sum test for continuous variables and the chi‐square test for categorical variables.
The cumulative probability of VTA and fast‐VTA by groups was analyzed using the Kaplan–Meier method, with the comparison of cumulative events by the log‐rank test with follow‐up beginning at 1 year after device implantation.
The relationship between cardiovascular risk factors and the occurrence of VTA was analyzed using multivariable Cox proportional‐hazards regression analysis.
The covariates used for adjustment were selected using the best subset selection methodology.
Among 651 study patients whose ejection fraction improved to > 35% at 12 months post‐CRT‐D implantation, (12%) experienced VTA after 12 months over a mean follow‐up length of 2.04 ± 0.83 years.
Among patients who experienced VTA, 44 (56%) had fast‐VTA ≥ 200 bpm.
The baseline characteristics of study patients by the occurrence of VTA during follow‐up are presented in Table1.
Patients who experienced VTA had a higher proportion of males, a shorter mean QRS, a higher proportion of patients with non‐LBBB, a higher frequency of VTA within the first year after CRT‐D placement, and a lower proportion of patients who improved their LVEF to > 40%.
There were no other significant differences in baseline clinical characteristics between study groups, including age ≥ 65, smoking status, heart failure etiology, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, systolic blood pressure, electrocardiographic parameters, and medications (Table1).
Clinical characteristics by ventricular tachyarrhythmia event.
Bolded values indicatep< 0.05.
Multivariate analysis showed that LVEF 36%–40% versus > 40%, non‐LBBB versus LBBB, and the occurrence of sustained VTA during the first year post‐CRT‐D were the most significant predictors of future risk of VTA among study patients who improved their LVEF to > 35% at 1‐year post‐CRT‐D implant (Table2).
When compared to patients who improved their LVEF to > 40%, those who improved their LVEF to only 36%–40% had a nearly a twofold higher risk for VTA (p= 0.006).
Similarly, patients with non‐LBBB had a nearly a twofold increase in the risk for VTA as compared to those with LBBB (p= 0.004).
The most powerful predictor of VTA during follow‐up was the occurrence of a prior episode of VTA within the first year after device implantation.
This risk factor was associated with nearly a fivefold increased risk of VTA during follow‐up as compared to no VTA during the 1 year after CRT‐D implant (p< 0.001) (Table2).
Predictors of ventricular tachyarrhythmia and fast ventricular tachyarrhythmia.
Bolded values indicatep< 0.05.
Consistent results were seen in Kaplan–Meier survival analysis, which showed that the cumulative probability of VTAs at 2 years was significantly higher among patients who improved their LVEF to 36%–40% versus > 40% (18% vs. 7%,p< 0.001 for the overall difference during follow‐up) (Figure2a).
Similarly, the cumulative probability of VTAs at 2 years was significantly higher among non‐LBBB versus LBBB patients (22% vs. 9%,p< 0.001 for the overall difference during follow‐up) (Figure2b).
The cumulative probability of VTAs at 2 years was also significantly higher among patients with a prior episode of VTA within the first year after CRT‐D implantation versus those without a prior episode (48% vs. 9%,p< 0.001 for the overall difference during follow‐up) (Figure2c).
(a) Cumulative rate of ventricular tachyarrhythmia after 12 months CRT‐D by left ventricular ejection fraction.
Cumulative probability of ventricular tachyarrhythmia at 2 years was 18% for patients with LVEF recovery ≤ 40% versus 7% for patients with LVEF recovery > 40% 1 year after CRT‐D implantation.
(b) Cumulative rate of ventricular tachyarrhythmia after 12 months CRT‐D by left bundle branch block.
Cumulative probability of ventricular tachyarrhythmia at 2 years was 22% for patients with non‐LBBB versus 9% for patients with LBBB.
(c) Cumulative rate of ventricular tachyarrhythmia after 12 months CRT‐D by prior ventricular tachyarrhythmia.
Cumulative probability of ventricular tachyarrhythmia at 2 years was 48% for patients who had aa episode of VTA within the first year of device implantation versus 9% for patients who did not have an episode of VTA within the first year of device implantation.
Factors associated with increased risk of life‐threatening fast VT/VF (≥ 200 bpm) among patients who improved their LVEF to > 35% were consistent.
LVEF 36%–40% versus > 40%, non‐LBBB versus LBBB, and a prior episode of VTA within the first year after CRT‐D implantation versus those without a prior episode were predictive of fast‐VTA in our study population (Table2).
At 2 years, the cumulative probability of fast‐VTA was significantly higher among patients with LVEF 36%–40% versus > 40% (10% vs. 3%p= 0.006 for the overall difference during follow‐up) (FigureS1a), non‐LBBB versus LBBB (12% vs. 4%p< 0.001 for the overall difference during follow‐up) (FigureS1b), and with a prior episode of VTA within the first year after CRT‐D implantation versus those without a prior episode (22% vs. 5%p< 0.001 for the overall difference during follow‐up) (FigureS1c).
In an exploratory analysis, we sought to assess the cumulative association of the three factors we identified for predicting the risk of future VTA among patients who improve their LVEF to > 35% at 1 year post‐CRT‐D implant.
Patients without these risk factors (LVEF 36%–40% vs. > 40%, non‐LBBB vs. LBBB, and a prior episode of VTA within the first year after CRT‐D implantation vs. those without a prior episode) remained at a lower risk of VTA.
Multivariate analysis showed that patients with > 2 risk factors had nearly an eightfold increased risk of VTA when compared with patients with no risk factors (HR, 7.93, 95% CI, 4.03–15.58,pvalue < 0.001); and patients with one risk factor experienced nearly a threefold corresponding increase compared with patients without any risk factors.
Similar results were seen when data was analyzed for a combined endpoint of VTA or death as shown in.
In the present study, we provide several meaningful insights on risk factors for VTA in patients with LVEF improvement > 35% at 1 year post‐CRT.
First, we identified three predictors of VTA in this population: LVEF 36%–40%, non‐LBBB, and VTA within 1 year of CRT‐D implantation.
Second, we identified that patients who experience VTA following CRT‐D implant have a very high risk of subsequent VTA events (including life‐threatening fast VTA) regardless of improvement in LVEF and therefore may warrant early intervention.
Third, we demonstrated that the absence of these risk factors is associated with a very low rate of VTA events in patients who improve their LVEF to > 35% following CRT‐D implant.
These results may help further stratify and guide monitoring and management of patients who improve their LVEF beyond guideline indications for an ICD at 1 year following CRT implant.
Our study showed that among patients with CRT, LVEF improvement to 36%–40% was associated with a significantly higher risk of VTA as compared with patients with LVEF > 40%.
We describe the inverse relationship between LVEF recovery and risk of VTA in heart failure patients with CRT, and these findings are consistent with the existing body of literature.
We have previously shown a lower risk of VTA in patients who had LVEF and NYHA class symptoms improvement beyond guidelines > 35%.
This risk attenuation was most pronounced among patients with non‐ischemic cardiomyopathy and left bundle block morphology (Sherazi et al.2019).
In another study, Schaer et al. (2010) found that patients who had LVEF recovery > 35% had fewer ICD interventions than those who did not have LVEF improvement (23% vs. 38%,p= 0.03).
There is also evidence that suggests very low rates of VTA in patients who experience near normalization of LVEF after CRT implantation, deemed super‐responders.
A study by Ruwald et al. (2014) demonstrated a very low risk of VTA in super responders in the MADIT‐CRT population who had LVEF normalization > 50% (HR, 0.24, 95% CI, 0.07–0.82,p= 0.023).
Similarly, Manfredi et al. reported that the risk of appropriate ICD therapy among patients with post‐CRT and LVEF 55% was 1.9% as compared with 3.3% (95% CI, 0–7.3) and 2.5% (95% CI, 0–6.1) among patients with LVEF 45% and 50%, respectively (Manfredi et al.2013).
Other studies have also reported risk reduction for future VTA post‐CRTD and LVEF recovery in various LVEF subgroups including LVEF ≥ 40% LVEF ≥ 50% (Killu et al.2018; Schaer et al.2016).
Although the exact mechanism is not entirely understood but it is possible that LVEF recovery is inversely related to the scar burden.
It is also possible that lack of LVEF recovery relates to a higher risk of heart failure that subsequently increases the risk of further arrhythmias.
Future studies are needed incorporating cardiac imaging modalities including MRI, the study of scar burden, and its relationship with LVEF recovery.
In our study population, patients with a non‐LBBB pattern continued to have a high risk of VTA despite the LVEF improvement.
The mechanism for this higher risk of arrhythmias in non‐LBBB is not entirely understood.
In our study population, 81% of non‐LBBB patients had ischemic etiology for heart failure, which could have contributed to this higher risk.
It has also been suggested that the increased risk of arrhythmia in this population may be due to a proarrhythmic effect of CRT among nonresponders, an effect that is offset by LVEF improvement in responders (Deif et al.2018).
MADIT‐CRT non‐LBBB patients who were randomized to CRT‐D therapy had a 3.6‐fold increase in VTA as compared to those randomized to ICD alone (Ouellet et al.2012).
We found the most pronounced increase in vulnerability to VTA in patients with prior arrhythmias.
In this population, we found a near eightfold increased risk with event rates of VTA that approached 50% at 1 year.
Multiple studies have noted prior history of NSVT as a statistically significant predictor of future VTA and SCD, particularly in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction (de Sousa et al.2008).
Similarly, Jiménez‐Candil et al. (2016) reported a near twofold increase in cardiac death and need for appropriate shock in patients who experienced NSVT in the 6 months following ICD implantation, as compared to patients who did not.
This effect seems to be amplified in patients with multiple risk factors, as shown in our study population.
A similar trend was seen in a study by Younis et al. (2021) which found that prior NSVT was associated with a notably higher, fourfold increase in VTA risk among non‐LBBB patients who underwent CRT‐D.
These data suggest a need for early intervention, potentially with VT ablation, in patients who experience VTA following CRT‐D implantation, despite LVEF improvement with this device.
Finally, our study assessed the cumulative effects of these three risk factors (LVEF 36%–40%, non‐LBBB, and a prior episode of VTA within the first year after CRT‐D implantation) on the rates of VTA in patients who improve their LVEF beyond guideline indications at 1 year post‐CRT.
As compared to patients with no risk factors, patients with one of these risk factors had a near threefold increase in the risk of VTA.
The highest risk for VTA was found in patients with > 2 risk factors.
These patients had a near eightfold increase in VTA as compared to patients with no risk factors.
These results may be used to stratify patients who experience appropriate LVEF recovery into risk categories to guide further therapy.
This may include medication optimization, close monitoring including scar and VT/PVC burden using cardiac MRI and echocardiographic studies, or early VT ablation.
This study was a subgroup analysis from the MADIT‐CRT trial.
The original trial was not designed to answer this study question.
Therefore, the possibility of residual or unmeasured confounding on the observed results could not be excluded, and the present findings need to be further validated in prospective studies designed to assess which patients with the identified risk factors benefit from CRT‐D.
While we did observe a cumulative effect in patients with multiple risk factors, having VTA in the first year post‐CRT‐D remains the most significant predictor for future risk of arrhythmia.
It is also of note that the landscape of contemporary treatments for heart failure is different than the time the MADIT study was conducted.
Medications such as mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, ARNI, and SGLT‐2 inhibitors may have had an impact on VTA risk in these patients.
Future studies are needed in more contemporary patient populations to answer these questions.
In summary, our study provides insight into clinical predictors of ventricular arrhythmias among heart failure patients 12 months after CRT implantation and LVEF improvement > 35%.
Patients with LVEF between 36% and 40%, non‐LBBB, and having VTA in the first year post‐CRT remain at higher risk of having VTA in the future.
Risk stratification using risk factors may be used to guide further therapy in patients who are beyond guideline recommendations for an ICD.
Furthermore, these findings generate hypotheses for future studies designed to identify patients with LVEF > 35% who may benefit from an ICD for the prevention of SCD.