The recent increase in pet food recalls due to contamination and the increased risk of disease has highlighted the need for the screening of canine and feline pelleted food.
Heavy metals, an often‐overlooked contaminant, has been highlighted for its role in the development of companion animal disease.
Therefore, it is imperative that heavy metal content in these commercially available pet foods is investigated.
In this study, premium (n= 14) and supermarket brands (n= 17) of extruded cat and dog food were analyzed for the presence of As, Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Pb, Hg, Ni and Zn using ICP‐OES and Hg by HGAAS.
Collectively, extruded dog food brands produced mean concentrations of 7.47 (As), 6.23 (Cd), 4.01 (Co), 16.72 (Ni), 3.99 (Pb), 0.47 (Hg), 35.59 (Cu), 529.53 (Fe) and 25.25 (Zn) mg/kg, whilst cat food brands contained 2.92 (As), 3.15 (Cd), 2.44 (Co), 4.26 (Ni), 7.24 (Pb), 0.16 (Hg), 38.08 (Cu), 389.14 (Fe) and 195.12 (Zn) mg/kg.
Canine brands exceeded maximum tolerable limits (MTLs) more than feline with red meat proteins containing higher total heavy metal levels followed by poultry, fish and meat medley formulations.
Furthermore, premium brands displayed higher levels of heavy metals exceeding MTLs than supermarket brands which were lower priced.
Heavy metal content in commercially available dog foods exceeded the maximum tolerable limits compared to cat foods.
Higher priced, premium brands contained higher levels of heavy metals compared to the cheaper supermarket brands.
There is a need for more stringent monitoring and regulation of heavy metal content in pet foods.
In South Africa, pet food revenue has risen exponentially to 226.70 million US dollars in 2024 with a revenue change of 16.2% (Statista2024).
Owners look for affordable, nutritional diets based on cost, recommendations and the dietary needs of their pets, from among the many brands that are readily accessible (Singh et al.2017; Weaver2012; Zicker2008).
The consumption of convenience pet food, such as kibble, has been linked to various ailments in pets (Raghavan et al.2006).
In 2018–2019, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) received multiple reports regarding pet food contamination resulting in several recalls (Dunham‐Cheatham et al.2019; Yukawa et al.2019).
Ingestion of kibble formulations containing contaminated constituents, such as animal proteins, increases the risk of heavy metal exposure.
Since animal proteins make up a significant portion of kibble formulations, they were identified as important sources of heavy metals for this study.
Quality kibble manufacture must be prioritized for safer consumption, particularly with regard to diets that involve frequent feedings (Funaba et al.2005).
While several studies have investigated kibble palatability, there are few studies that focus on ingredient interactions at various stages of during manufacture and the overall nutritional value of kibble, with a focus on heavy metal content (Gibson and Sajid2013).
As contaminants, heavy metals are implicated in the development of several disease pathologies, due to both during short‐term and long‐term exposure.
Kibble formulations do incorporate essential heavy metals or trace elements such as Fe, Cu and Zn (micro‐nutrients) that are necessary for proper growth and development.
However, exposure to feeds which exceed maximum tolerable levels (MTLs) can lead to severe toxicity.
For example, zinc deficiencies can be linked to skin and reproductive disorders, as well as impact fatty acid metabolism (Pereira et al.2021).
High concentrations of Cu and Fe (oxidants) contribute to the production of reactive oxygen species resulting in free radicals that damage cell membranes, oxidize cellular proteins and reduce product shelf‐life (Abd‐Elhakim et al.2016).
Non‐essential heavy metals, such as Cd, As, Pb and Hg, are toxic and have severe neurological implications (Kim et al.2018).
Excessive consumption of Pb is concerning since it has been linked to neurological diseases, gastrointestinal symptoms, hematopoietic system damage, renal damage and haemolysis (Berny et al.1992; Zook1972).
In recent studies, lead‐shot game meat trimmings were found to pose higher risks of lead intoxication (Hogasen et al., 2016).
Kim et al. (2018) revealed that fish‐based dry dog food contained greater concentrations of Hg, Cd and As in comparison to red meat or poultry‐based diets.
Dogs that are exposed to As may develop ulcerative dermatitis and acute symptoms of Cr poisoning which are diarrhoea and lethargy (Evinger and Blakemore 1984).
In addition, naturally occurring water systems are rich in methylmercury, which biomagnifies in the food chain, particularly in fish, which are included in some pet food formulations (Luippold and Gustin2016).
Livestock and poultry are exposed to heavy metals via diet, intense agricultural practices and anthropogenic activities that lead to bioaccumulation (Mottalib et al.2016).
Methylmercury toxicity in cats can result in symptoms such as anorexia, hypothyroidism, weight loss and nervous system impairment (Grubes et al. 1978).
The species, age and geographic location of the animals—fish, cattle and poultry—used to produce pet food all affect the amount of heavy metals present in their proteins.
The cumulative effect of heavy metals in protein, feed dyes, cheap substitutions and the extrusion process contribute to significant heavy metal exposure, where dietary intake can exceed the limits specified by the FDA, National Research Council (NRC) and the European Pet Food Industry Federation (FEDIAF) (Abd‐Elhakim et al.2016; Kim et al.2018).
Most pet food brands contain animal by‐products and fillers in their top five ingredients.
According to Dunham‐Cheatham et al. (2019), fillers are added to pet food to increase its fibre content but have little nutritional value.
Due to their grain‐based nature, fillers tend to absorb heavy metals from the soil and from intensive agricultural methods, such as the use of fungicides and pesticides (Fan et al.2017).
By‐products, or leftover meat from protein sources (excluding muscle meat), are considered unsuitable for human consumption and often contain fatty tissues and diseased tumours that are possible sites for heavy metal accumulation.
The absence of stricter laws and regulations allow for the misrepresentation of pet food nutritive values as a result of poor‐quality ingredients (Okuma and Hellberg2015).
Despite the known toxicity of heavy metals, there are a few studies that discuss exposure levels via ingestion for cats and dogs (Abd‐Elhakim et al.2016; Davies et al.2017; Duran, Tuzen, and Soylak2010; Kim et al.2018; Mumma et al.1986; Squadrone et al.2017).
At present, there is a paucity of research studies and literature on heavy metal exposure via extruded cat and dog food in the South African market.
This brings about the need to investigate the extent of heavy metal contamination in pet foods in South Africa and the potential impact of exposure.
The aim of the current study was to investigate heavy metal concentrations (essential and unessential) in premium and supermarket brands of extruded feline and canine food available in the South African market by microwave digestion and ICP‐OES analysis.
The objectives of the study were to quantify the heavy metal content in selected feline and canine kibble in South Africa, by a quartering sampling method with comparison to MTLs (see TableS2).
Thirty‐one samples of extruded cat food (CF) and dog food (DF) were purchased comprising 14 premium brands (PB) and 17 supermarket brands (SB).
These brands were selected based on popularity at the supermarket and consumer preference.
All brands contained varying amounts of protein (fish, poultry, red meat, special diet and medley of meat).
Concentrated nitric acid (70%) purchased from ACE chemicals (South Africa) was diluted to digest all samples in triplicate.
Double distilled water (Aquatron Water Still A4000d) was used for all dilutions.
Multi‐element standards were prepared from 1000 ppm mono‐element stock solutions purchased from LabChem and Polychem supplies (South Africa).
A 1 ppm Hg standard was prepared separately for HGAAS cold vapour analysis.
The kibble samples were quartered, and a grab sample of ∼250 g was taken from sub‐samples (Campos and Campos2017).
Each sample was milled individually to prevent cross‐contamination and stored in labelled re‐sealable plastic bags for acid digestion.
A grab sample of ∼0.3 g of each milled sample was weighed into Teflon vials in triplicate.
A 7‐mL volume of 1 M nitric acid was added to each vial and left to pre‐digest for 1 h at room temperature in the fume hood (Noël et al.2005).
All samples were subjected to a 15‐min ramp to 180°C, digested for 10 min and cooled for a further 15 min using a CEM Mars 6 microwave digestion system.
The samples were filtered using a 0.45‐µm Nylon filter and diluted to 25 mL with double distilled water.
Diluted samples were further filtered through a 0.45‐µm Nylon filter into 15 mL ICP vials.
A five‐point calibration was prepared for elements; Cu, Cd, Fe, Co, Ni, Pb, As and Zn using multi‐element standards.
All analyses for heavy metal quantification were completed using a Perkin Elmer Optima 5300DV ICP‐OES spectrometer system for simultaneous detection with operating conditions in Table1.
Operating conditions for Perkin Elmer Optima 5300DV ICP‐OES.
A procedural blank was prepared and analyzed with the samples.
Emission lines were selected based on correlation coefficients >0.99 and detection of analyte in the samples.
The limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) were calculated using the standard error of the calibration slope.
All samples and analyses were performed in triplicate, and the mean results were presented.
The results for the LOD, LOQ andR2have been presented in Table2.
LOD, LOQ and linearity for ICP‐OES heavy metal analysis in extruded cat and dog food samples available in the South African market by microwave digestion.
A Perkin Elmer A Analyst 200 atomic absorption spectrometer equipped with a PerkinElmer (Perkin Elmer, CT, USA) mercury hydride system (MHS 15) using a sodium borohydride reductant was used for Hg analysis.
A hollow cathode lamp was used at a wavelength of 253.7 nm for Hg detection.
A five‐point calibration curve was prepared using a 1 ppm Hg solution as per the recommended analytical conditions shown in Table3with the corresponding Linearity data represented in Table4.
Each sample (5 mL) was inserted into the hydride system, and readings were taken after 10 s in triplicate.
Recommended analytical conditions for Hg calibration for HGAAS analysis.
Linearity data for multi‐element heavy metal analysis by ICP‐OES for extruded cat and dog food.
y= Intensity,m= slope, x= concentration and c = y‐intercept.
The results obtained in this study is presented in the Discussion below.
Extruded diets play an important role in pet nutrition and general well‐being, being the most easily accessible form of nutrition for companion pets.
It is peremptory that they are free from contaminants that can exhibit adverse effects on canine and feline health.
Commercial diets, formulated from natural ingredients, are susceptible to heavy metal exposure from anthropogenic activities and natural sources.
Heavy metals in natural ingredients are potentially hazardous and affect food quality and its suitability for immediate and long‐term feeding (Demirözü et al.2003; Leiva et al.2019; ul Islam et al.2007).
Supermarket brands, sold at cheaper rates, are least recommended by vets than premium brands sold at high costs, presumed to be of higher quality (Fox2012).
Non‐essential metals pose numerous adversities due to their level of toxicity to both feline and canine health.
Although MTLs are available, the hazards associated with instantaneous and continuous exposure through repetitive diets are concerning (see TableS1).
In particular, Pb, Cd, As and Hg cause liver toxicity, neurotoxicity, nephrotoxicity and genotoxicity.
In this study, seven brands were found exceeding MTLs for Co, four for Pb and two for Hg out of the 16 samples analyzed in the feline range.
The maximum value noted for Co, Pb and Hg were 3.52, 11.94 and 0.60 mg/kg, respectively, for CF samples.
Canine brands display a range of heavy metals exceeding MTLs at higher concentrations.
The results (Table5) indicate that dogs consuming popular kibble brands could be at risk of acute and chronic health implications.
In the canine range, one sample exceeded the MTL for As, one for Cd, 15 for Co and two for Ni.
Mercury levels in extruded dog food are much higher than expected considering associated pathological conditions (Dunham‐Cheatham et al.2019).
Non‐essential metal concentrations (mg/kg) in selected extruded cat and dog food brands available in South Africa.
Note: Heavy metal concentrations were compared to maximum tolerable levels (MTLs).
National Research Council reference level for the most sensitive mammal.
Reference level for most sensitive mammal according to the Food and Drug Administration.
Ten brands violated MTLs with the highest containing 26.6 times the MTL for mercury.
The SD, mean and relative standard deviation of the overall heavy metal analysis of the dog and cat food samples are presented in TablesS3 and S4.
The complete elimination of toxic metals from kibble is difficult.
Exposure levels must be minimized to reduce acute and chronic toxic effects which can result in arthritis, kidney failure, liver diseases, congestive heart disease, deficiencies in pancreatic enzymes and endocrine disfunctions, fungal, viral and bacterial infections (Dunham‐Cheatham et al.2019).
Apart from protein, fat, carbohydrates and vitamins, essential metals are required for sustenance and optimal growth and development performance.
Trace metals such as iron, copper and zinc are positively associated with cell signalling, enzymatic reactions and muscle contraction (Duran et al.2010).
The ingestion pathway (aside from dermal and inhalation) can expose pets to a deficit or surplus of nutrients.
Pet foods contain essential metals in their formulations that should meet minimal requirements and not exceed tolerable limits, becoming potentially toxic.
Raeeszadeh et al. (2022) evaluated the heavy metal content of different meat sources.
While the average levels of selenium, nickel, cobalt and chromium in the different meats were within the maximum permitted limits (MPL), and the levels of lead, cadmium, arsenic, zinc, copper, chromium and nickel exceeded the MPL.
All metal concentrations in the meats under evaluation were higher than MPL, with the exception of cobalt.
This finding also further substantiates the extent to which heavy metal contamination within animal meat can also contribute to high levels of heavy metals in cat and dog kibble since they are the primary sources of protein and the need for surveillance and regulation of this area of feed manufacture.
Essential metal concentrations (Table6) show accelerated levels of Cu in 14 brands of CF, the maximum concentration being 72.11 mg/kg.
All cat food samples contained Fe concentrations below the European Union (EU) MTL nutritional guidelines put forward by the FEDIAF in 2019 (FEDIAF2024).
For Zn, 31.25% of the samples exceeded MTLs for cat food brands, while 86.67% exceeded MTLs in dog food brands, respectively.
Although CF did not exceed MTLs for Fe,n= 1 brand of DF contained 1588.62 mg/kg.
High tolerable limits for essential metals accommodates for the nutritional requirements of cats and dogs.
Hence, pet foods in general will contain high amounts of micro‐nutrients.
Essential metal concentrations (mg/kg) in selected extruded cat and dog food brands available in South Africa.
Minimum recommended limit for cats/dogs by FEDIAF 2011.
E.U.
maximum as per FEDIAF nutritional guidelines 2019.
However, an excess of metals (above MTLs) indicates the use of contaminated ingredients that accelerate these concentrations, and hence of sub‐standard quality.
Studies have shown significant concentrations of heavy metals in primary farm animal species in Sanandaj, Kurdistan province, making it imperative to monitor and eliminate heavy metal pollution (Raeeszadeh et al.2022).
Figure1displays heavy metal levels found in SB and PB of DF and CF.
All samples contained total essential metals above the MRL for cats (115.5 mg/kg) and dogs (160.0 mg/kg) (Paulelli2018).
Premium brands of cat food contain higher amounts of heavy metals with over 50% of the data lying above the 75th percentile of CF‐SB.
The mean of DF‐PB is above the maximum values obtained for cat food samples.
Dogs are exposed to higher levels of heavy metals than cats with the total heavy metals (THM), essential and non‐essential, lying between ∼630 and 950 mg/kg.
An outlier of 1034.54 mg/kg (SB) was observed in the canine range.
Although the minimum requirements of these nutrients are met, food samples should not contain undesirable toxic metals and nutrients in excess.
The higher the dietary intake of heavy metals, the larger the bio‐accumulation rate commonly associated with the risk of adverse health issues.
Total heavy metals (essential and non‐essential) in premium (PB) and supermarket (SB) brands of extruded dog (DF) and cat (CF) food in the South African market.
Data are present as a median and IQR (n= 7 for CF‐PB; 9 for CF‐SB; 7 for DF‐PB; 8 for DF‐SB; MRL‐D = 115.5; MRL‐C = 160).Note: Box and whisker plots depict the total metal exposure in mg/kg of dry matter in extruded cat and dog food in premium and supermarket brands in South Africa.
The results presented in Table7show that premium brands of dog food containing red meat proteins contained higher mean THM concentration than all brands of both cat and dog food analyzed.
Supermarket brands of dog food flavoured with poultry meat contained ∼830 mg/kg of THM, followed by supermarket brands of dog food containing red meat with ∼812 mg/kg.
Cat food brands comprising poultry and fish contained THM with concentrations between 539 and 827 mg/kg.
Dog food brands for special diets, categorized as other, produced high amounts of THM ∼700–775 mg/kg as presented in Table8.
The sources of protein for these brands were not specified on the packaging.
Total heavy metal concentrations (mg/kg) in selected supermarket (SB) and commercial (PB) brands of dog (DF) and cat food (CF) in South Africa by protein source.
Total heavy metal concentrations in selected supermarket (SB) and commercial (PB) brands of dog (DF) and cat food (CF) in South Africa by protein source containing a combination of proteins sources.
Over‐nutrition often leads to toxicity and malfunctions in enzymatic systems, specifically those associated with copper, iron and zinc (Da Silva et al.2009; McDowell2003).
High amounts of micronutrients, exceeding MTLs, result from fillers comprising a large percentage of pet food formulations (present in the first five ingredients) (Kore et al.2009).
Moreover, red meat proteins contain myoglobin and haemoglobin, which can accelerate iron levels overall.
Fish are exposed to anthropogenic activities, specifically waste disposal, chemical and oil spills becoming more susceptible to heavy metal exposure (Fatima and Usmani2013).
Heavy metal concentrations in fish proteins are additionally dependent on fish species and source (fresh or salt‐water) (Sary and Mohammadi2012).
Carnivorous fish consume smaller fish and crustaceans leading to heavy metal bio‐magnification (Ali and Khan2019).
Exposure to contaminated feed, anthropogenic activities and the natural occurrence of heavy metals equally contributes to high THM in poultry (Mottalib et al.2016).
Therefore, ingredients, such as proteins, should be tested for consumption prior to their inclusion in pet food formulations (Thompson2008).
Pet food mislabelling and the presence of unspecified proteins/animal derivatives on packaging have been highlighted in recent studies (Maine et al.2015).
Not only are derivatives cheaper alternatives, but fats, kidney and liver tissues are known sites of heavy metal accumulation (Hashemi2018; Zhuang et al.2009).
Pets are exposed to heavy metals via dermal, inhalation and ingestion routes.
Hence, the cumulative effect of heavy metal exposure is a cause for concern considering ingestion levels highlighted in this study.
Routine and targeted tests for toxicity will ensure that feeds promote good health, proper growth and development (Tomza‐Marciniak et al.2012).
Aside from the assessment of heavy metals in kibble, the potential health risk and hazard quotient should be evaluated to understand the effects of metal exposure.
A study investigated the concentrations of aluminium, cadmium, copper, ferrous iron, Hg, manganese, nickel, lead and zinc in commercially canned and pouched cat foods (salmon, tuna, liver, fish and other aquatic products) and evaluated any possible health risks to kittens and adult cats.
With the exception of the mean Fe in all and the Pb levels in salmon and kitten diets, the observed amounts of the metals were lower than the findings from earlier studies.
The values of the total target hazard quotient (TTHQ) and target hazard quotient (THQ) did not exceed 1 (Altınok‐Yipel et al.2022).
The study shows that heavy metal levels in canned foods and pouched meals may have lower heavy metal levels than those found in extruded cat and dog food thus posing fewer health risks.
While this study highlights the need to investigate heavy metal content in commercially available pet foods, there are a few limitations to be considered.
For this study, animal proteins were considered the main contributor to heavy metal levels since they comprise a large percentage of pet food formulations.
Since pet foods of different brands were purchased, heavy metal levels observed could be representative of a specific batch and possibly demonstrate batch to batch variation.
Additionally, heavy metal exposure to determine the bio‐availability of these metals post consumption was not investigated.
It is therefore critical that clinical trials are also conducted to evaluate the bioaccessibility of heavy metals and the associated health implications on pets.
This study evaluated the concentrations of essential and non‐essential metals in selected dry premium (n= 14) and supermarket (n= 17) cat and dog food brands with varying animal proteins available in South Africa.
The results show that all dry cat and dog food brands meet the minimum recommended nutritional requirements for essential metals (Cu, Fe and Zn).
Fourteen cat food samples exceeded the MTL for Cu and five for Zn, while nine dog food brands exceeded the MTL for Cu, one for Fe and 13 for Zn.
Dog food brands were found to exceed MTLs for non‐essential metals more than cat food brands.
Ten brands of dog food and two brands of cat food exceeded MTLs for Hg.
Ten brands of dog food and seven brands of cat food exceeded MTLs for Cobalt.
Dog food brands containing red meat proteins contained higher THM levels followed by poultry, fish and meat medley formulations.
Furthermore, PB displayed higher levels of heavy metals exceeding MTLs than SB sold at lower prices.
This study highlights the need for regular monitoring to ensure extruded diets sold in South Africa are safe for immediate and prolonged consumption with minimal health risks.