Dysphagia is independently associated with adverse outcomes in intensive care units (ICU).
Early identification through dysphagia screening does not occur routinely, negatively impacting optimal patient management.
This study aimed to validate the Swedish version of the Gugging Swallowing Screen—Intensive Care Unit (GUSS‐IVA).
This is a prospective multicentre study of 56 adult ICU patients with endotracheal intubation exceeding 48 h at three hospitals in Sweden.
The GUSS‐ICU was translated into Swedish (GUSS‐IVA) and used to screen all prolonged intubated patients (>48 h) once extubated.
The GUSS‐IVA screen was conducted by ICU nursing staff and then compared with a gold standard Flexible Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing (FEES) within 2 h of the GUSS‐IVA screen.
Fifty‐one of 56 patients underwent FEES (where assessors were blinded to the GUSS‐IVA screen results).
Sensitivity and specificity were calculated, as was the area under the receiver operating characteristic curves (AUC) with 95% confidence intervals (CI).
For inter‐rater reliability, within 2 h of the initial screen, 29/56 patients were GUSS‐IVA screened a second time by a nursing staff blinded to the first GUSS‐IVA results.
Among the 56 patients, 38 (67.9%) were identified as dysphagic using the GUSS‐IVA screen.
With FEES, 42 of 51 patients (82.4%) were diagnosed with dysphagia; of these, 16 (31.4%) were classified as aspirating.
Compared to FEES, GUSS‐IVA showed high sensitivity and specificity values (81% and 89%, respectively) with an AUC of 0.85 (95% CI: 0.71–0.95) and a positive predictive value of 97%.
High convergent validity was obtained for GUSS‐IVA compared with the Dysphagia Outcome Severity Scale (ɸ = 0.57,p< .001) and the Functional Oral Intake Scale (ɸ = 0.52,p< .001) and moderate validity with the Penetration‐Aspiration Scale (ɸ = 0.30,p= .033).
The inter‐rater reliability showed moderate agreement (Cohen's kappaκ= 0.501,p= .006).
This study indicates that the Swedish GUSS‐IVA is a valid and reliable screen to identify dysphagic ICU patients.
Given the negative impact of dysphagia on short and long‐term patient outcomes, the Swedish GUSS‐IVA is recommended as an essential first step by nursing staff for early identification of dysphagia for further diagnostics and subsequent patient management.
Dysphagia is common in adult intensive care patients and is an independent predictor of mortality.
Despite this, dysphagia remains an often overlooked medical condition.
These findings support the idea that systematic assessment for possible dysphagia in all intensive care patients is meaningful.
Approximately 40%–60% of intensive care unit (ICU) patients in Sweden experience respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, often initially achieved via endotracheal intubation.1Although endotracheal intubation sometimes is a necessary, life‐saving procedure, it is associated with complications that persist after extubation including, but not limited to, swallowing dysfunction (i.e., dysphagia).2,3Post‐extubation dysphagia is a common condition with a varied prevalence, depending on the timing and method of dysphagia assessment.
Most recent meta‐analyses indicate a pooled incidence and combined weighted incidence of 36% and 41%, respectively.4,5In contrast, the prospective DYnAMICS study by Schefold et al.6found a lower incidence of 18% when systematically screening for dysphagia using a water swallow test in a large, multicentre cohort across multiple mixed ICUs.
There are currently no best practice guidelines for dysphagia management in ICUs in Sweden and no screening tool in Swedish to ensure early dysphagia identification.
This study aimed to translate the GUSS‐ICU19(English version) to Swedish and then validate the Swedish translation (now referred to asGUSS‐IVA).
The original GUSS‐ICU version,18using water only (rather than multiple consistencies), is used in this study since the later version19was not available when this research commenced.
This prospective multicentre study involving Swedish‐speaking adult (≥18 years) patients was conducted across three mixed‐ICUs in Sweden (two regional‐ and one university hospital) with heterogenic ICU populations, between April 2022 and February 2024.
Inclusion criteria were conscious patients who could provide informed consent, intubated for >48 h (including those requiring continued mechanical ventilation via tracheostomy tube) and who had waited for 24 h post‐extubation in accordance with the test criteria.18Excluded patients were those with previously diagnosed dysphagia, cognitive impairment, and those unable to sit for at least 15 min with 45° bedhead elevation (for the FEES examination).
This research was approved by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority (2019–06546) and all participants provided written informed consent before study inclusion.
All patients meeting inclusion criteria were consecutively identified by a research nurse.
Patients were informed about the study, and if they agreed to participate, the study coordinator was then contacted.
The coordinator identified the nurse or assistant nurse who was directly involved in the patient's daily care, and an explanation and demonstration of theGUSS‐IVAprocedure were given.
No formalGUSS‐IVAtraining was conducted before the commencement of the current study.
The screen was performed by one person only.
To evaluate inter‐rater reliability, a second GUSS‐IVA screening was conducted within 1 h by another ICU nurse or nurse assistant, blinded to the initial screening results.
The assessment results were documented in a case report form.
Clinical information was obtained from medical records, including age, sex, admission diagnoses, and intubation time.
GUSS‐ICU was translated into Swedish using a forward‐backward multistep process.
Details of the translation process and the English and Swedish versions can be found in the supplementary files1,3and4.
Similar to the original GUSS‐ICU, the SwedishGUSS‐IVAconsists of an observational test and a direct swallow test.18,21The observational test consists of 10 items: Intubation >48 h, extubation >24 h, level of alertness (Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale: ±0 and + 123), absence of confusion (a negative result on the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU24or <2 on the Nursing Delirium Screening Scale25), nasogastric feeding tube in situ (or no tube), ability to cough, ability to swallow saliva.
Each item is evaluated and rated by the assessor with 1 point for yes/present and zero for no/not present.
A further three items, indicating the presence of stridor, drooling, and voice change, are oppositely rated.
If the maximum of 10 points is not obtained in part one (observational test), the test is failed and the patient is keptnil by mouthfor the next 4 h. After this period, a repeated screening is recommended.
A score of 10 points allows continuation to part two, which is the direct swallow test.
Part two consists of five sequential swallow tests in a fixed order, starting with a 3 mL water swallow test, followed by careful observation.
The assessment is terminated if the following signs of dysphagia/aspiration are observed: no/delayed swallowing, coughing, drooling, or voice changes.
If these risk signs are not observed, the test continues with a gradual increase in water amounts to 5, 10, 20, and 50 mL, with careful observation between each increase.
In the current study, the water swallow test was administered to participants using a spoon or a cup for small volumes (3, 5, and 10 mL) and a cup for larger volumes (20 and 50 mL).
All volumes were pre‐measured with a syringe to ensure accuracy.
A successful swallow test scores one point, and a failed test zero points.
If a patient passes the direct swallow test, they are recommended to proceed with thin liquids and a soft/easy to chew diet (IDDSI 0 and IDDSI EC7, respectively).26If the patient fails the direct swallow test, they are recommended to be keptnil by mouthand referral to a speech‐language pathologist (SLP) is advised.
Within 2 h of theGUSS‐IVAscreening, a FEES assessment was conducted to complete dysphagia diagnostics.
FEES was used as the reference standard to validateGUSS‐IVAdue to FEES being (a) considered a gold‐standard assessment for dysphagia and (b) able to be performed bedside in the ICU.27,28,29,30Six experienced SLPs, working in pairs, performed and evaluated the FEES (two in each participating ICU) at the bedside according to a standardized protocol.30No topical anaesthesia was used during the assessment.
The SLPs performing FEES were blinded to the patient'sGUSS‐IVAresults and medical records.
The FEES was carried out using endoscopy systems (Supplementary File2).
Three consistencies were tested: IDDSI levels 0, 3, and 7 according to the International Dysphagia Diet Standardisation Initiative (IDDSI) framework.26Boluses were tinted with green or blue food colouring to improve visibility during the examination.
The protocol began with administering three teaspoons of liquid and then three more tablespoons of the same consistency (IDDSI 0) followed by semi‐solids (IDDSI 3) in a consecutive sequence.
The patient was then instructed to chew and swallow a piece of a cracker (IDDSI 7).
The protocol was modified or ceased if significant aspiration or other respiratory symptoms posed a risk to patient safety.
Based on the FEES, dysphagia was classified according to the Dysphagia Outcome Severity Scale (DOSS) scoring system.31A cut‐off of DOSS ≤5 indicates the presence of dysphagia.
DOSS is a dysphagia severity scale ranging from 1 to 7, where 1 indicates severe dysphagia and 7 normal swallowing function.
The scale includes aspects of swallow safety (i.e., airway protection) and efficiency (i.e., bolus transport and pharyngeal retention).
Airway compromise (risk for or visualized aspiration) was defined as a score of ≥5 according to the Penetration‐Aspiration Scale (PAS).32The PAS ranges from 1 to 8, where 1 indicates no penetration or aspiration and 8 aspiration to the airways without any clearing attempt (silent aspiration).
Based on the FEES assessment, the examiner also rated the patient's functional ability to eat and drink according to the Functional Oral Intake Scale (FOIS).33FOIS ranges from 1 to 7, where 1–3 indicates non‐oral feeding, 4–6 oral feeding with various restrictions, and 7 oral diet without restrictions.
Criterion validity was assessed by comparing theGUSS‐IVAscreening results with the FEES examination and calculating sensitivity, specificity (as percentage), and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curves (AUC) with 95% confidence intervals (CI).
Dysphagia presence was determined using aGUSS‐IVAcut‐off of <10 points or a failed direct swallow test and a DOSS score of ≤5 according to the FEES assessment.
Acceptable psychometric properties of a dysphagia screening instrument are recommended to be >70% sensitivity and >60% specificity.34Convergence validity was determined using the phi‐coefficient (for correlation between two categorical variables) and the Spearman rank correlation, analyzing the correlation betweenGUSS‐IVAscores with DOSS, FOIS, and PAS.
Inter‐rater reliability was evaluated with Cohen's weighted kappa (quadratic weights).
All analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics version 29.0.
The sample size and power calculation was calculated using the sensitivity analysis estimation method described by Bujang and Adnan35; with an incidence rate of 40%4and a power of 0.885, a minimum of 48 patients was required.
To account for potential dropouts, 10% was added, resulting in a minimum sample size of 53 patients.
Of 61 eligible patients, 56 (36 men) were included in the study; five were excluded due to incomplete data (see Figures1and2).
The characteristics of the participants are shown in Table1.
FEES was performed in 51 of the 56 participants; five underwent screening only, due to fatigue or time constraints (n= 4) and nasal blood clotting (n= 1).
No adverse events occurred during screening or instrumental assessment.
Flow chart of the validation procedure.
FEES, Flexible Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing;GUSS‐IVA, The Gugging Swallowing Screen—Intensive Care Unit (Swedish); SLP, Speech Language Pathologist.
Flow‐chart of subject inclusion and data collection, all performed within 2 h. FEES, Flexible Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing;GUSS‐IVA, The Gugging SwallowingScreen—Intensive Care Unit (Swedish).
Note: Data are given as number of participants,n(%) or median [IQR].
Abbreviations: IQR, interquartile range; ICU, intensive care unit.
GUSS‐IVAscreening by ICU nursing staff identified 38 of 56 (67.9%) patients as having dysphagia.
The FEES assessment classified 42 of 51 (82.4%) participants as having dysphagia (DOSS score ≤5): 13 (25.5%) severe (DOSS 1), 3 (5.9%) moderately severe (DOSS 2), 7 (13.7%) moderate (DOSS 3), 5 (9.8%) mild–moderate (DOSS 4), and 14 (27.5%) mild (DOSS 5).
A total of 16 of 51 (31.4%) participants were classified as aspirating (PAS score >5).
In the subgroup of patients with a tracheostomy, the severity of dysphagia was as follows according to FEES assessment: six severe (DOSS 1), two mild–moderate (DOSS 4), and six mild (DOSS 5).
The criterion validity ofGUSS‐IVAfor screening for dysphagia is shown in Table2.
For the total cohort,GUSS‐IVAidentified dysphagia (DOSS ≤5) with a sensitivity of 81.0% and a specificity of 88.9% (AUC was 0.85, 95% CI: 0.71–0.95) (Figure3).
As shown in Table2, eight patients who initially passed the GUSS‐IVA were subsequently classified as having dysphagia based on the FEES assessment.
The severity of dysphagia in these patients was distributed as follows: one severe (DOSS 1), two moderately severe (DOSS 2), one mild–moderate (DOSS 4), and three mild (DOSS 5).
Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values inGUSS‐IVAcompared to gold standard FEES assessment evaluated with DOSS (n= 51).
Note: Results are presented descriptively or as percentages (95% Confidence Interval, CI).
Abbreviations: AUC, area under the curve; DOSS, Dysphagia Outcome Severity Scale; FEES, Flexible Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing; GUSS‐IVA, The Gugging Swallowing Screen‐Intensive Care Unit‐Swedish version; NPV, negative predictive value; PAS, Penetration‐Aspiration Scale; PPV, positive predictive value.
Receiver‐operator characteristics (ROC) curves for theGUSS‐IVAas a predictor for dysphagia as diagnosed by Flexible Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing (FEES) using the Dysphagia Outcome Severity Scale (DOSS).
The area under the curve was 0.85 (CI = 95%, 0.71–0.99).
GUSS‐IVAshowed strong correlation with DOSS (ɸ = 0.57;rs= 0.57,p< .001) and FOIS (ɸ = 0.52;rs= 0.52,p< .001), and moderate correlation with PAS (ɸ = 0.30;rs= 0.30,p= .033) as per the comprehensive FEES assessment.
Twenty‐nine participants were assessed twice within 2 h by two ICU nurses usingGUSS‐IVA.
The inter‐rater reliability between the ICU nurses showed moderate agreement (κ= 0.501,p= 0.006 as computed using Cohen's kappa).
In 7/29 (24%) cases, the assessors were not in agreement.
In three cases (10%), the first assessor found that the patient had voice changes in part 1, while the second assessor did not.
In four cases (14%), the water test differed between assessors in part 2.
The strong validity values from the current study, from three mixed ICUs across Sweden with heterogenic patient cohorts, are somewhat congruent with the results of Troll et al.19validation study of GUSS‐ICU, version 2.
In a single‐centre study of 45 ICU patients, 80% were diagnosed with dysphagia.
Their results also demonstrated high AUC values, although this was for the GUSS‐ICU, version 2, using multiple consistencies (thin and thick liquid trials), conducted by two independent SLP assessors, with AUC = 0.923 and 0.923, respectively.19Similarly, other researchers have recently published results for a multiple‐consistency ICU dysphagia screen, namely the modified volume‐viscosity swallow test (VVST).37In this single‐centre study in Spain, 87 ICU patients (44 extubated and 43 tracheostomized) were screened for dysphagia.
Their results identified aspiration in 55% of extubated and 40% of tracheostomized patients.37The modified VVST predicted aspiration for extubated patients with a sensitivity and specificity of 89.5% and 72%, respectively.
Sensitivity and specificity were also higher for tracheostomized patients, a result that was confirmed in our study.
Although these results are somewhat similar to the results of the current study, it should be noted that the Spanish study used the modified VVST to screen for and detectaspiration, as opposed todysphagia, which was the primary endpoint in the current study.
The inter‐rater reliability ofGUSS‐IVAdemonstrated moderate agreement (κ= 0.501,p= .006), which is a less favourable finding than the results by Troll et al.19whose rater agreement for GUSS‐ICU with multiple consistencies demonstrated good inter‐rater agreement (κ= 0.84).19Possible reasons for the lower reliability results may be due to methodology differences and those performing the dysphagia screen.
For example, in the Troll et al. study,19SLPs screened all ICU patients, whereas in the current study, ICU nursing staff completed theGUSS‐IVAscreen.
This aspect could be particularly important since two of the screening questions evaluate1voice quality and2swallow safety (in part one and part two of the screen).
Given that SLPs are specifically trained to assess voice and swallowing disorders, this could explain the higher agreement in the Troll et al. study.19This is particularly pertinent since the voice quality and water test ratings were the only source of disagreement in the current study (n= 7/29, 24%).
Therefore, based on our findings, information about dysphagia and training for using theGUSS‐IVAscreening tool would be recommended to increase ICU nurses' reliability, as per previous dysphagia screening research.26,41,42,43For optimal implementation of the GUSS‐IVA, thorough training of all relevant staff is recommended to ensure that they understand and follow the same procedures and criteria when using the screen.
This uniformity in the application helps to achieve high rater reliability and measurement precision, making results more reliable and valid (sensitivity and specificity).
Furthermore, given that ICU patients' conditions often fluctuate throughout the day, it is recommended to repeat the GUSS‐IVA test every 4 h following a failed attempt until a successful result is achieved, as per previous literature.18Additionally, if a patient who initially passed the screening exhibits clinical deterioration, a reassessment should be conducted before initiating oral intake to ensure continued safety and adequate swallow function.
A strength of the current study is the multicentre study design which aimed to decrease the risk of selection bias.
Additionally, the heterogeneity of the underlying diagnoses within our included patient cohort is reflective of the Swedish ICU population in general and underscores the applicability of usingGUSS‐IVAin a mixed ICU population.
Since the inclusion criteria involved informed consent, there is a risk that this cohort does not represent a typical cohort of patients with dysphagia in the ICU.
Moreover, given that many ICU patients experience delirium or agitation in the initial hours following extubation, not being able to give informed consent introduces a potential selection bias by under‐representing patients suffering from acute confusion or delirium, thereby affecting the observed prevalence data.
Results pertaining to the GUSS‐IVA validity and reliability data should also be considered since non‐alert patients (who could not give consent) would inevitably also fail the first part of the GUSS‐IVA screening, which required adequate RASS and CAM‐ICU or the Nursing Delirium Screening scores.
The patients who failed GUSS‐IVA due to inadequate agitation and delirium scores were placed nil by mouth and rescreened after 4 h.
Another limitation is the study sample size (n= 56).
Although the whole group sample was of adequate power (88.5%), a larger sample size might have generated different psychometric results for validity and reliability and allowed for analyses of subgroups.
Although the present validation was conducted on patients who waited 24 h post‐extubation, the optimal timing for screening should prioritize early assessment, provided patients are alert, cooperative, and deemed ready by the medical team to screen for oral intake of food, liquids, or medications as recommended by recent research and expert recommendations.18,43It is therefore reasonable to propose that the GUSS‐IVA could also be effectively applied to patients within the first 24 h post‐extubation to align with current recommendations for earlier swallow screening.18,44,45Finally, investigating the validity and reliability ofGUSS‐IVAin specific ICU populations, such as cardiothoracic or neurological intensive care units, is also warranted.
The study indicates that the Swedish version (GUSS‐IVA) of the GUSS‐ICU is a valid and reliable screening tool to detect dysphagia in critically ill patients, both with and without a tracheostomy.
Given the significant short‐and long‐term negative impacts of dysphagia, this study provides an essential first‐step resource to assist in the early identification and optimization of dysphagia management.
Dysphagia consequences are modifiable risks and, as such, this study supports previous research in advocating for improved dysphagia management, starting with screening all prolonged‐intubated and tracheostomized individuals in the ICU.