Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) infection in beef cattle has received less attention than in dairy herds, despite its potential impact on the beef industry.
To compare six different supervised machine‐learning (SML) algorithms used to identify the most important risk factors for predicting BLV seropositivity in beef cattle in Florida.
Retrospective study.
We used a dataset of 1511 blood sample records from the Bronson Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Florida Department of Agriculture & Consumer Services, submitted for BLV antibody testing from 2012 to 2022.
Logistic regression (LR), decision tree (DT), gradient boosting (GB), random forest (RF), neural network (NN), and support vector machine (SVM) were used.
Of the submitted samples, 11.6% were positive for BLV.
The RF model best predicted BLV infection with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.98, with a misclassification rate of 0.06.
The DT model showed comparable performance to RF (AUROC, 0.94; misclassification rate, 0.06).
However, the NN model had the poorest performance.
The RF model showed that BLV seropositivity can be best predicted by testing beef cows during the dry season, which mostly coincides with the pre‐calving processing and calving seasons, particularly for cattle raised in southern Florida.
The RF model shows promise for predicting BLV seropositivity in beef cattle.
Key predictive risk factors include the dry season months coinciding with pre‐calving and calving seasons and geographic location.
These findings could help develop predictive tools for effective screening for BLV infection and targeted interventions.
Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) is a retrovirus that causes a worldwide contagious neoplastic disease known as enzootic bovine leukosis (EBL), bovine lymphomatosis, malignant lymphoma of cattle, or bovine lymphosarcoma [1].
Bovine leukemia virus generally infects cattle lymphocytes by integrating its genomic material into the host genome, resulting in lifelong infection [2,3].
Infection can present in one of three forms: (1) asymptomatic or aleukemic (60%–65%), (2) persistent lymphocytosis (30%–35%), and (3) leukemia or lymphoma (< 5%) [4,5,6].
The World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) included BLV on its list of diseases that could have substantial impact on global trade [7].
The virus is closely related to human T‐lymphotropic virus types I and II (HTLV‐I and II), which cause tumors such as adult T‐cell leukemia and lymphoma, making BLV a good model for investigating leukemia in humans [8].
Recently, BLV was detected in blood from human breast cancer patients, indicating that it could be a zoonotic disease and raising public health concerns [9].
In 1999, approximately 38% of beef herds in the United States tested positive for BLV, and 10.3% of all beef cows tested positive for BLV [10].
The BLV infection causes high economic losses because of carcass condemnation, lower fertility rates, increased heifer replacement costs, and veterinary costs, as well as the inability to export cattle, semen, and embryos to countries that maintain BLV control programs, such as the European Union [11,12,13].
In the dairy industry, the economic losses of lymphosarcoma were estimated to be $412 USD per case in 2003 [14].
Despite potential implications for the beef industry, BLV infection in beef cattle has received less attention than in dairy herds.
Historically, traditional data analysis such as regression analysis dominated infectious disease prediction, regardless of the type of data or variable relationships.
Recently, machine learning (ML), particularly supervised algorithms such as random forest (RF) and decision trees (DT), have become widely utilized as advanced tools for clinical decision‐making and disease prediction [15,16].
These methods are particularly effective in veterinary epidemiology to predict infectious diseases for their ability to capture complex patterns in data [17,18].
We evaluated the performance of six supervised machine learning (SML) algorithms, including traditional logistic regression (LR), DT, gradient boosting (GB), RF, neural network (NN), and support vector machine (SVM) to predict BLV seropositivity in cattle.
To the best of our knowledge, no study has compared the performance of LR and other SML algorithms in the context of BLV seropositivity prediction in cattle in the state of Florida.
Our aim was to update the existing literature on both the seroprevalence and major risk factors associated with BLV seropositivity in Florida beef herds using different SML methods and using a 10‐year dataset.
This information will be useful for developing predictive tools for effective screening for BLV infection, as well as effective control and prevention strategies.
In a retrospective study, the database of Bronson Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory (BADDL), Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services (FDACS, Kissimmee, FL) related to BLV antibody testing in Florida was obtained using laboratory information management system software (LIMS).
This dataset included all consecutive serum samples collected from beef cattle and submitted to BADDL between January 2012 and December 2021 for BLV testing.
Ours was a cross‐sectional study where risk factor information and BLV status were assessed at the same time.
Unlike a typical cross‐sectional study in which subjects are recruited over a short period of time, our recruitment period covered a 10‐year period from January 2012 to December 2021.
The majority of samples were submitted for testing only once, based on the recommendation of the veterinarian overseeing the herd.
The dataset included 1511 beef cattle.
All animal records included the following information: species, breed, sex, age, geographic location (county level), year of submission, type of test used to detect BLV antibodies, and test results.
The outcome was the BLV serological test result (2 levels, seropositive: 1, seronegative:0).
The inclusion criteria were beef breeds of any age that were raised in Florida.
Any other animal species or those raised outside of Florida were excluded.
All serum samples were tested for BLV antibodies using a BLV ELISA (VMRD Inc., Pullman, WA).
The ELISA has a sensitivity (Se) of 95% and a specificity (Sp) of 99% [19].
The tests were conducted according to the manufacturer's instructions, where the optical density (OD) of the samples was measured at 620 nm.
A positive result was indicated by an OD reading higher than the average of the positive control samples, whereas a negative result was indicated by an OD reading lower than the average of the negative control samples.
For the test to be valid, the positive control average had to be at least 0.250, and the negative control average had to be ≤ 0.200.
Data from the years 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015 were consolidated for logistic regression analysis because of the relatively small sample size in these years compared with the years after 2015.
Univariable logistic regression was conducted using the PROC GLIMMIX procedure in SAS to address the hierarchical nature of our data, where individual cows were clustered within herds.
This method enabled us to incorporate both fixed and random effects into our model, effectively accounting for the potential lack of independence in test results caused by within‐herd clustering by including herds as a random effect.
Univariable logistic regression initially was used to screen for determinants associated with BLV seropositivity.
Variables identified with apvalue < 0.1 in the univariate analysis were included in a multivariable logistic regression analysis using the PROC GLIMMIX procedure.
The prevalence odds ratio (POR) was used as an approximate measure of relative risk (the likelihood of having BLV in animals with a given risk factor compared with animals without the risk factor).
To examine for potential confounding among the retained risk factors in the final models, we individually added each variable to the model and observed the changes in the POR using a cutpoint of ≥ 20% of the remaining variables in the model [21].
Interaction among variables was assessed by introducing new terms into the model for each pair of variables under examination.
The coefficients of these terms were analyzed to determine whether the combination of these two variables influenced BLV seropositivity [22].
Regression analysis was performed using SAS 9.4 (SAS Inst.
Inc., Cary, NC), andp< 0.05 was considered significant.
We fitted the binomial generalized additive model (GAM) to estimate trends in BLV seroprevalence as smooth functions of time.
This model can accommodate complex and non‐linear trends, account for uncertainty, and identify periods with significant temporal changes [23].
We aggregated the BLV seroprevalence data on a monthly and yearly basis to examine trends over a single year and the entire 10‐year study period.
We employed the restricted maximum likelihood (REML) method for estimation and used the logit link function, which is compatible with a binomial distribution, appropriate for binary or proportion data.
We identified significant periods of increase or decrease by identifying instances where the 95% CI of the GAM prediction's derivative did not include zero.
Model fitting and validation were conducted using R (Version 4.1.3, Vienna, Austria) with the assistance of the mgcv package.
The SML models were built with 1 output (target) variable, which is BLV seropositivity (binary; present: 1, absent: 0), and 5 input variables including breed (nominal, 5 levels: Crossbred, Angus, Brahman, Brangus, Wagyu), sex (nominal, 2 levels: male, female), age (interval, 3 levels: 1–2, 2–5, and ≥ 5 years), month (nominal, 12 levels), and geographic location (nominal, 3 levels: north, central, south).
The herd was included as an identifier (ID) and classification variable.
All data cleaning, management, and development of machine learning models were performed using SAS Viya 3.5 (SAS Visual Analytics) of Cloud Analytic Services (CAS) Library.
For SML models, data was typically split into two non‐overlapping sets using a stratified random sampling method: a training set (70%) and a validation set (30%) to ensure that the subsets of data used for training and validation accurately reflected the various subcategories of the variables present in the initial data distribution.
A stratified random sampling method was also used to address the issue of non‐independence arising from cows being clustered within herds.
The training set was used to fit the model, and the performance of each model was assessed on the validation set to check for robustness and prevent overfitting.
Missing values in the data were imputed with a specific value denoted as “(non).” This was done to ensure that the data remained consistent and could be effectively used in our analysis.
We compared six SML algorithms to predict the risk of BLV seropositivity in beef cattle.
The SML algorithms included three tree‐based algorithms (DT, GB, and RF) and three non‐tree‐based algorithms (LR, SVM, and NN).
These algorithms were chosen for their ability to effectively integrate numerous variables, including those with complex, high‐order interactions, into the models generated by the respective algorithm (Figure1).
Flow chart of supervised machine learning analysis.A LR was performed.
The binary target was linked to a linear function of input variables using a logit function.
The formatted sort order was used for class inputs, and GLM was used as the coding method for class inputs.
The Schwarz Bayesian Criterion (SBC) or Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) was used as a criterion to determine which variables to include in the model.
The significance level for adding and removing variables was set to 0.05.
Newton–Raphson with ridging was used as the optimization technique.
Decision tree is one of the most popular SML algorithms used for classification and regression tasks (Supporting Information) [24,25].
The information gain ratio was used as the criterion for determining the best splits on inputs that are given a class target.
The maximum number of branches that a splitting rule produces is 2.
The maximum depth, which represents the maximum number of generations in nodes, was 10.
Cost complexity was used for pruning.
The number of cross‐validation folds to use for cost‐complexity pruning when there is no validation data was 10.
Variable importance (importance score, IS) is calculated using a one‐level decision tree for each input to predict the predicted value as a global surrogate model.
Gradient boosting is an iterative approach that creates multiple trees in a sequential order of successive decision trees (Supporting Information) [26].
The proportion of training observations to train a tree was 0.5.
We determined the final GB model by fitting the training samples with 100 trees.
The maximum number of branches that a splitting rule can produce is 2.
The maximum depth of the trees was 4.
The minimum leaf size, which represents the smallest number of training observations that a leaf can have, was 5.
The early stopping method used to stop training when the model begins to overfit was stagnation, with the number of consecutive iterations of 5.
The random forest model consists of a collection of decision trees grown in parallel (Supporting Information) [27].
The number of trees in the forest was 100.
The information gain ratio was used as the splitting criterion for determining the best splits on input variables.
The maximum number of branches to consider for each node split in the tree was 2, and the maximum depth for each generated tree was 20.
The minimum leaf size that a new branch can have is 5.
Neural network is a statistical model that is designed to mimic the biological structures of the human brain (Supporting Information) [28].
We used a neural network with one hidden layer of 50 neurons.
The activation function for the hidden layer was hyperbolic tangent (Tanh), which transforms the input values into a range between −1 and 1.
This means that negative input values become negative output values, and positive input values become positive output values.
The optimization method was used to train the network to enhance the performance and accuracy of the predictions.
This option is in effect only for networks with < 6 hidden layers.
The optimization method used to train the network was automatic, based on the number of hidden layers.
The network was trained for a maximum of 300 iterations, with early stopping after 5 consecutive iterations without improvement in the validation partition (stagnation).
Support vector machine is one of the SML methods that can be used for classification or prediction (regression) tasks (Supporting Information) [29].
We used a polynomial kernel for the SVM, which means that we assumed that the data was nonlinearly separable.
The interior point was specified as the method for the model training algorithm.
The tolerance, which is the minimum number at which the iteration was stopped, was set to 0.000001.
The maximum number of iterations allowed with each try was 25.
We used different fit statistics, including mean squared error (MSE), Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic (KS; Youden), Se and Sp, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), accuracy, false positive rate (FPR), cumulative lift, F1 Score, gain, and misclassification rate.
These metrics were chosen to measure different aspects of the model's performance, such as its ability to distinguish between positive and negative instances, its accuracy, and its economic benefit (Supporting Information) [28].
The champion model performed best on the validation set with a selection depth of 10 and a cutoff of 0.5 according to a variety of metrics.
The champion model had the highest values for the KS statistic, AUROC, accuracy, cumulative lift, F1 score, and gain, and the lowest values for the FPR, MSE, and misclassification rate.
The seroprevalence of BLV was determined in 1511 beef cattle serum samples located in 24 counties in the state of Florida (Figure2).
The total seroprevalence of BLV was 165/1511 at the animal level (10.9, 95% CI: 9.4%–12.5%) and the totalPtest‐adjustedwas 11.6%.
The total seroprevalence of BLV at the herd level was 41 out of 125 herds (32.8%, 95% CI: 24.6%–41.0%).
The distribution of animals based on the determinants is illustrated in Table1.
Univariable logistic regression analysis indicated that BLV seropositivity was only affected by the age of the animals (p< 0.001), geographic location (p< 0.001), breed (p< 0.001), season (p< 0.001), and sex (p< 0.012; Table1and Figure3).
Map of Florida showing county‐stratified seroprevalence of BLV in beef cattle from 2012 to 2021.
Univariable logistic regression analysis for identification of risk factors associated with BLV infection in 1511 beef cattle in Florida over a 10‐year study period (2012–2021).
Results of the univariable logistic regression model of factors affecting BLV serostatus in beef cattle in Florida over a 10‐year study period.
Black dots indicate prevalence odd ratios and surrounding orange bars indicate 95% CIs.
Factors of 95% CIs that do not overlap one are considered significant.
Multivariable logistic regression analysis indicated that age and geographic location were significant risk factors for BLV seropositivity (Table2).
Beef cattle that were at least 5 years old had much higher odds of being seropositive for BLV (PORadj= 56.8, 95% CI: 10.9–296.8).
Results of the multivariable logistic regressions of potential risk factors associated with BLV seropositivity in beef cattle in Florida over a 10‐year study period (2012–2021).
We used GAMs to characterize changes in BLV seropositivity over time.
Significant fluctuations in BLV seropositivity occurred across the months of the year, after adjusting for the total number of animals tested each year over a 10‐year period (Figure4).
The seroprevalence of BLV increased in a dual‐peak pattern with an increase during February (2.3, 95% CI: 2.0%–2.5%), March (2.1, 95% CI: 1.7%–2.6%), and another increase in November (3.0, 95% CI: 2.1%–3.9%).
However, a more noticeable decrease was observed in BLV from May to September compared with other periods within the year (Figure4a).
The seroprevalence of BLV gradually increased over the 10‐year study period.
The increase was not linear, but some fluctuations were observed.
The highest prevalence of BLV seropositivity was observed in the year 2019, with 59.1% of cattle testing positive for BLV antibodies (Figure4b).
The serodynamics of BLV infection were assessed through measurements and modeling using a generalized additive model (GAM) over both the months under study (A) and the entire 10‐year study duration (B).
GAM prediction line was presented as a solid black line and the surrounding shaded blue area indicates 95% CI.
Purple points and bars indicate the mean values and 95% CI of BLV seroprevalence at time points.
Instances of significant change (indicated by non‐overlapping 95% confidence intervals of the GAM derivative) were highlighted in red for increases and green for decreases.
Fit statistics of both training and validation data for all models are presented in TableS1.
The multiple stepwise LR model showed adequate ability to correctly predict the BLV seropositivity (KS, 0.61; AUROC, 0.89).
However, 9% of the animals were incorrectly classified by the model (TableS1).
The DT model identified time of year as the most significant risk factor for BLV seropositivity, suggesting seasonal patterns in infection rates.
This model achieved an accuracy of 93% in both datasets, with a low misclassification rate of 6% (TableS1).
The results of GB showed that time of year, represented in months, was the most important risk factor.
The model differentiated between infected and non‐infected animals with an accuracy of 0.87.
However, the misclassification rate was 11% (TableS1).
The results of RF also found time of year as the most important risk factor (Figure5a,b), where February was the month with the highest risk of BLV seropositivity with a prediction of 0.67 (Figure5b).
Geographic location was the second most important risk factor (important score = 17.2), where beef cattle in the southern portion of Florida are more likely to be infected with BLV than beef cattle in other parts of the state with a prediction of 0.46 (Figure5c).
Breed (Figure5d) and age (Figure5e) also were considered important risk factors that might play an important role in BLV infection.
The RF model correctly predicted whether an animal was infected with BLV 98% of the time (AUROC, 0.98; FigureS1a,b).
Only 6% of the animals were misclassified (FigureS1c).
Random forest model for predicting BLV seropositivity in beef cattle by identifying the most important risk factors.
(a) The importance score of risk factors, (b) A bar plot showing the relationship between the time of year (in months) and the predicted BLV seropositivity, averaging out the effects of the other inputs.
They‐axis shows the corresponding average prediction for the BLV seropositivity.
(c) A bar plot showing the prediction of the geographic location of BLV seropositivity.
(d) A bar plot showing the prediction of breeds of BLV seropositivity.
(e) the prediction of age of BLV seropositivity surrounded with 95% CI.
The results of NN had an accuracy of 89% in predicting BLV seropositivity and a higher misclassification rate of 11%.
It also identified time of year as the most important risk factor, consistent with the other models (TableS1).
Results of the SVM model reaffirmed the importance of time of year as the most important risk factor.
It predicted BLV infection with an accuracy of 91% and a misclassification rate of 11% (TableS1).
Results of the model comparison are presented in Table3.
These results showed that the RF model best predicted BLV seropositivity in beef cattle.
The RF model had the highest KS statistics (0.86), AUROC (0.98; Figure6), accuracy (0.95), cumulative lift (7.40), F1 score (0.75), and gain (6.4).
It also had the lowest MSE (0.04) and misclassification rate (0.06).
The DT model had the second‐best performance in predicting BLV seropositivity (KS, 0.84; AUROC, 0.94; cumulative lift, 7.01; gain, 5.90; MSE, 0.04; and misclassification rate, 0.06).
The neural network (NN) model was the worst model, with the lowest KS statistics (0.16), AUROC (0.58) and highest MSE (0.15) and misclassification rate (0.12).
Comparison of machine learning algorithms performance for predicting BLV infection in beef cattle in Florida over a 10‐year study period (2012–2021).
Comparison of ROC curves for different machine learning algorithms for predicting BLV infection in beef cattle in Florida over a 10‐year study period (2012–2021).
In Florida, both ranchers and veterinarians are continuously striving to achieve effective control and eradication of BLV in beef cattle, with a strategy of random testing and culling.
The main aims of BLV testing are to detect infected animals, understand the epidemiology of the disease, and implement targeted interventions.
Our study contributes to these efforts by enhancing the understanding of BLV epidemiology using data on seroprevalence and risk factors.
We used various SML algorithms to predict BLV seropositivity and identify key differences in model performance.
Our study had three major advantages.
First, it was a retrospective study, which allows for the identification of trends and patterns that may not be apparent in prospective studies.
Second, it used a large dataset of 10 years of data, which provides a more comprehensive and accurate picture of the epidemiology of BLV infection in Florida beef cattle.
Third, because the performance of ML algorithms can vary depending on the data and the problem being solved, we used multiple SML algorithms and thoroughly validated their performance using appropriate evaluation metrics.
Doing so allowed us to identify complex and nonlinear relationships between various risk factors and BLV infection.
Doing so can identify hidden patterns and interactions that might not be apparent using traditional statistical methods.
Our findings can enhance disease control efforts in several ways: (1) targeted testing: identifying the dry season months, especially during pre‐calving processing and calving seasons, can guide more efficient and cost‐effective testing schedules; (2) risk‐based management: The identification of southern Florida as a higher‐risk location allows for more focused interventions and resource allocation; (3) early warning system: the high accuracy of RF in predicting BLV seropositivity can be used to develop proactive screening protocols; and (4) tailored control strategies: understanding the complex and nonlinear relationships between various risk factors and BLV seropositivity can help in developing effective control measures.
Our results showed that 11.6% of beef cattle in Florida had antibodies to BLV.
This percentage is nearly two times higher than the seroprevalence of 6.7% reported previously [30] in a study of 4911 beef cattle in Florida from 1979 to 1980.
Our results are consistent with the national seroprevalence of 10.3% reported by United States Department of Agriculture's National Animal Health Monitoring System (USDA‐NAHMS) [10].
However, it is substantially lower than the national seroprevalence of 33.6%, which was determined in a study conducted from 2014 to 2015 [31].
This study sampled cattle presented for slaughter plants that processed mainly beef animals.
The increase in the BLV seroprevalence in beef cattle in Florida over the years, as also reported in our study using the GAM model to characterize changes in BLV seroprevalence over a 10‐year study period, can be attributed to various factors.
These factors include the intensification of the industry, increased movement of cattle among herds, improper herd management practices such as the use of shared needles and syringes and rectal sleeves, environmental stress, such as drought, and lack of testing and control programs [32].
However, it is important to interpret the GAM seropositivity plots with caution, because BLV seropositivity in an exposed animal tends to persist for a relatively long period of time.
Therefore, the observed fluctuations in BLV seropositivity over time may be attributable to herd population dynamics (such as animal entries and exits), in addition to factors influencing transmission.
The seroprevalence of BLV infection varies by region, as has been shown in previous studies [10,31].
In our study, we found that the seroprevalence was higher in the southern region of Florida than in the northern and central regions.
This difference is likely because the beef industry is more concentrated in the southern region of Florida.
The results of the comparison of SML algorithms showed that the RF algorithm had a higher capacity to predict BLV seropositivity in beef cattle.
Random forest has been shown to be effective in a variety of applications, including veterinary medicine and healthcare [33,34].
This might be because RF combines the predictions of multiple DTs, which minimizes overfitting and improves the accuracy of the model.
The RF model is also known for its robustness to noisy data, data with missing values, and outliers, which are common in biological and medical data [27].
Additionally, RF can give good results with small datasets.
Furthermore, RF typically has a better bias variance tradeoff than other SML models.
This means that RF is less likely to overfit the training data and more likely to generalize well to unseen data.
However, other SML models, such as NNs, although powerful, can be prone to overfitting if not tuned carefully [27,35].
Random forest models have demonstrated strong performance when the data cannot be linearly separated and complex relationships are present between the features and the target variable.
The GAM identified a nonlinear relationship between the time of year and BLV seropositivity, confirmed by RF and other SML algorithms.
However, the traditional LR model could not identify this relationship.
Although the southern region showed a high odds ratio and was a significant risk factor for BLV prevalence in univariable analysis, this significance decreased in multivariable analysis, possibly because of confounding variables, interaction effects, or collinearity.
Random Forest, which captures complex interactions and nonlinear relationships, identified the southern region and season as key risk factors for BLV.
This indicates that SML algorithms can identify nonlinear relationships not captured by traditional statistical methods.
Therefore, machine learning analysis can identify novel risk factors, leading to new insights and hypotheses.
Our study findings indicated an increased risk of BLV infection in beef cattle during the dry seasons in FL.
However, no firm data, such as surveys or submission samples, were provided to indicate that the timing of sample collection corresponds to specific management practices in beef herds within the state of Florida; this time of year coincides with the pre‐calving processing and calving season [36].
These results are consistent with previous studies that found an increase in BLV seroprevalence during the dry season and around calving in cattle [37,38,39].
This finding is reasonable because these times of the year in Florida are associated with harsh weather conditions, which can cause more stress for cattle.
Stress can suppress the immune system with more severe effects in older cows.
Stress‐induced immune suppression makes cattle more vulnerable to other infections and causes decreases in production and reproduction performance.
During the dry season, hot weather, limited access to water and forage, and changes in diet can affect the nutritional status of cattle, and poor nutrition can weaken the immune system.
Additionally, during the dry season and calving season, there may be a higher concentration of cattle in specific areas because they are forced to share water, grazing land, and shade, which can increase opportunities for BLV transmission [32].
The calving season can lead to increased blood contact between cattle, which also can facilitate the transmission of BLV [39].
Insects or other vectors that can transmit BLV may be more active during the dry and calving seasons, facilitating spread of the virus [40].
Furthermore, some improper management practices might be more common during these seasons, such as sharing needles and syringes and grouping cattle together for birthing or other purposes, which can increase the likelihood of virus transmission [39].
Additionally, using a single rectal sleeve during the final pregnancy check in pre‐calving processing can increase the risk of cross‐contamination and the spread of BLV infection [41,42].
This is a finding that is important for beef cattle producers to be aware of because it can help them take steps to decrease the risk of BLV infection in their herds.
Our study had several limitations.
First, it was conducted in a single state, and thus the results may not be generalizable.
Second, the study used a retrospective design, which carries the risk of potential bias in data collection, reliance on existing data quality, and inability to control for all confounding variables.
This could have biased the results because animals infected with BLV may have been more likely to be included.
Third, not all determinants of BLV infection were included, potentially missing key factors.
Fourth, the study addressed the issue of an unbalanced dataset by adjusting the samples to resemble the overall cattle population of Florida in terms of time of year, geographic location, and breed.
However, this approach is not perfect because the sample still might not fully represent the broader population in other ways that could affect the risk of BLV exposure.
Ultimately, sample selection is a key challenge that affects nearly all seroprevalence studies.
If the sample differs from the wider population in ways that affect the likelihood of exposure to the virus, then the estimated seroprevalence may be unreliable.
It is important to acknowledge that the timing of BLV seroconversion post‐infection, which can vary from 3 to 14 weeks, represents a limitation of our study.
This variation is caused by several factors, including exposure route, infectious dose, host immune response, and BLV strain characteristics [43].
Therefore, seroconversion variation can impact the observed associations between BLV seropositivity and other variables.
Future studies using additional diagnostic methods, such as PCR, to detect early infections could be beneficial.
Despite these limitations, our study offers insight into BLV epidemiology, helping identify key risk factors and patterns associated with BLV infection and helping in developing targeted preventive strategies.
It also updates the literature on the current BLV infection status in Florida, considering the last report was in 1981 [30].
Our results showed that the RF model had the highest predictive capacity for BLV seropositivity in beef cattle, whereas the NN model was the worst.
The results of RF and other SML algorithms showed that the dry season months that coincide with the pre‐calving processing and calving seasons and location in southern Florida are important risk factors associated with an increased likelihood of BLV seropositivity in beef cattle.
These findings can guide the identification of animals for testing and emphasize good management practices during vulnerable periods.
Therefore, our results have the potential to enhance targeted control interventions where they are most likely to be effective.
Our study represents the initial steps in the long‐term goal of creating a freely available open‐source, cloud‐based web application for beef producers for BLV monitoring and control in beef herds.
Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials.