Drawing on perspectives of care work as a collaborative and negotiated practice, this paper aims to explore how older service users actively contribute to care work and situations of care in the reablement policy context of homecare.
The study analyses how service users in Danish and Norwegian municipal homecare settings place their bodies at disposal and how care workers' responses to service users' embodied contributions shape care practice and situations of care.
Four ways of placing service users' bodies at disposal were identified: proactively, dependently, reluctantly and instructively.
Care workers' capacity to attentively respond to service users' physical and emotional needs and their flexibility and adaptiveness in dealing with service users placing their bodies at disposal in various ways, seem to be key for care work as a collaborative practice that promotes dignity in care.
The study applies affective ethnography as a methodological and analytical approach.
Recent policies for an ageing society have drawn attention to the physical aspects of old age as a time of activity, potentiality and enhanced capacities (Bødker2019).
These capacity‐ and resource‐focused perspectives differ from how old age has been perceived previously, particularly within the care sector, where it used to be viewed as a stage of life marked by reduced capacity and functionality of the body (Blix and Ågotnes2023).
Notwithstanding, underpinned by the policy frameworks of active ageing (World Health Organisation2002), independent living and ageing‐at‐home, reablement has become the overall focus in Norwegian and Danish homecare services (Blix and Ågotnes2023; Graff and Vabø2023a,2023b; Kamp and Dybbroe2023).
Through individually adapted programmes with physical exercises or more generalised approaches that motivate service users to actively take part in everyday chores, reablement policies in homecare services aim at self‐reliance and independence for service users.
Reablement policies are connected to the ideals of personal autonomy and self‐determination, as self‐reliance and independence in everyday life are the expected outcomes of reablement programmes and care practices (Blix and Ågotnes2023).
Moreover, an individual's ability to exercise autonomy and self‐determination is closely related to one's understanding of dignity in old age (Korczynski2013), including for those who depend on assistance from welfare services (Helse‐ og omsorgsdepartementet2010).
Hence, reablement is conceived of as promoting dignity in care services and practice, as well as in the everyday life of older people as they become increasingly independent of care services and able to take care of themselves (Hansen2023).
Reablement conceptualises the person and his or her body as capable of being retrained into a condition of self‐reliance and independence.
Hence, the implementation of reablement policies and practices in Norwegian and Danish homecare services has transformed these services' approach to the older person's body: from a frail and care‐needing body to a potentially capable and actively participating one (Bødker2019; Hansen2016; Kamp and Dybbroe2023).
The reablement paradigm entails a change in social care practice from a situation in which care workers provide care to care receivers, as in a view of care as ‘doing for’, to a collaborative practice in which care receivers are expected to contribute actively to the provision of care, as in a view of care as ‘doing with’ (Graff and Vabø2023b).
The background for this study was a research project that investigated Norwegian and Danish homecare services that have implemented reablement policies.
During the fieldwork, my attention was drawn to the corporal dimension in care work encounters.
I was struck by how some care receivers trustfully placed their bodies at disposal for care, whereas others reluctantly encountered the care situation and withdrew their bodies.
Furthermore, I noticed how care workers responded differently to how care receivers placed their bodies at disposal.
These experiences from my fieldwork gave rise to reflections on the social meaning of the body in care work and how care workers' responses to service users' contributions in the form of body work shape care work and situations of care.
Social care is traditionally considered to constitute a relational practice, encompassing several dimensions, including ethical, emotional and practical aspects (Hirvonen2014; Mol2008; Norvoll et al.2022; Tan2019; Tufte2013; Wærness1984).
Theorising what constitutes ‘good’ care, several scholars have emphasised the emotional aspects of care work, focussing on care workers' compassionate attitudes and capacity to express empathy for care receivers while performing care work.
With the concept of ‘rationality of care’, Wærness (1984) underscored the professional skills of care workers in engaging relationally and emotionally with service users and their situations and simultaneously performing task‐oriented practical care.
Another way of conceptualising care work as relational and practical work is the notion of ‘caring for’, which refers to task‐oriented practical and physical labourand‘caring about’, which refers to relational, therapeutic emotional labour (England and Dyck2011).
This ‘caring for and about’ is commonly conceived as constituting professional care work (Theodosius2008; Tronto1993).
While these understandings of care focus primarily on the care worker's role and responsibility as a provider of care, other scholars have emphasised the collaborative aspect of care work (Hirvonen2014; Mol2008; Mol et al.2010; Tan2019).
For instance, Mol (2008) grounds her understanding of good care in practices characterised by respectful,collaborativeencounters between care professionals and their clients.
Following Mol's ‘logic of care’, good care is understood to be carried out in specific, flexible and mutually respectful ways, as contextual and situational acts of care (Mol2008).
From this perspective, care is concretised in the care situation as a persistent ‘tinkering’ involving emotional, collaborative and practical aspects (Mol et al.2010).
In care work, the care relationship is shaped by bodily encounters (Wolkowitz2002).
Therefore, the service user's body plays a crucial role in social care practice, not only as a passive body or object, as conceptualised within the medical tradition (Draper2014; Twigg2006), but also because the service user's body is commonly acknowledged for its physical frailty and the way the vulnerable old body affects social relations in care work (England and Dyck2011; Hirvonen2014; Twigg2004; Twigg et al.2011).
Hence, the care relation with the service user involves the body in a double sense: as a physical body and as the person being that body (Twigg2002), emphasising how the relational and bodily aspects of care work are interwoven and captured in the ethical dimension of care.
As the body is ‘the location at which human “being” is situated’ (James and Hockney2007, 13), the sovereignty of the body is profoundly connected to the autonomy of the person, and the loss of one's control of the body and its functions may result in a loss of subjectivity for the individual (Korczynski2013).
Therefore, working with bodies in need of care requires skilful mediation through relational and emotional labour to prevent the violation of bodily boundaries and to create dignity in care situations (Korczynski2013).
Departing from a practice perspective, Pols et al. (2018) demonstrated how dignity is crafted and co‐laboured with patients, next of kins and/or colleagues through the care worker's relational and practical engagement in concrete situations of caring.
In this perspective, dignity is not something that people have in themselves or are ‘granted’ by care workers or care services.
Rather, dignity is crafted through care workers' engagement and ‘doings’, which are deeply grounded in their capacity to empathise with and mirror themselves in others in concrete situations and circumstances.
According to Pols et al. (2018), dignity in care work lies in the involved actors' engagement and attempts to achieve ‘goodness’ or well‐being for service users.
Hence, dignity is a form of ‘doing’ care.
This understanding of dignity as a situated, collaborated or co‐laboured doing is in line with Mol et al. (2010) and Gherardi and Rodeschini (2016), regarding how ‘good’ care involves persistent ‘tinkering’ or ‘negotiation’ with the involved actors (humans as bodies and beings), as well as with the material/non‐human surroundings in concrete care situations.
In reablement, however, care workers are expected to take a step back and work with their ‘hands on the back’ (Graff and Vabø2023a,2023b; Hansen2016; Kamp and Dybbroe2023).
This means that care workers hold back in physical interactions with service users and partly substitute the touching of bodies with coaching in self‐care (Hansen2023).
Replacing bodily touch with encouragement to ‘do by yourself’ is intended to enhance dignity in the old person's life as well as in care services (Hansen2023).
However, for those who do not acquire the capacity to care for themselves, there is still a need to be ‘cared for and about’ by a care worker.
Graff and Vabø (2023b) demonstrate how care workers adapt situationally to the reablement mode of ‘doing with’ service users in combination with more traditional forms of ‘doing for’ service users.
In this way, dignity in care situations can be achieved without compromising the service user's well‐being and quality of life (Graff and Vabø2023b).
Emphasising service users' participation and care as a collaborative undertaking in reablement and replacing bodily interaction with ‘coaching’ may position the care worker and the service user in a more equal relationship (Hansen2023).
However, replacing the practical tasks of care and the bodily interactions and touching of bodies with motivational work may require a good deal of persuasion of the older person, for instance, convincing them that goal setting and exercising will be rewarding in the long run (Jokstad et al.2020).
As such, reablement may take the form of ‘talking into’ or ‘pressuring’ service users into self‐reliance and self‐caring rather than the co‐laboured and dignifying care described by Pols et al. (2018). This actualises the power relations between care workers and service users in reabling care, which will be further elaborated on in the discussion section of the paper.
Although the abovementioned scholars acknowledge care work as a collaborative undertaking, the active role of service users tends to go unrecognised in the care work literature.
Drawing on the presented perspectives of care work as a collaborative, negotiated and co‐laboured undertaking, this paper aims to explore further how service users actively contribute with their bodies—as a form of body work—and how their embodied contributions shape care practice in the reablement policy context of homecare.
Although the institutional context for homecare services varies somewhat between Norway and Denmark, for instance regarding legislation and statutory mandates versus municipal and local autonomy and regarding the models for service provision and organisation (integrated or separate services), homecare services in the two countries share many characteristics (Graff and Vabø2023a) and therefore provide a good context for studying care practices using empirical examples from the two countries.
Both Norwegian and Danish homecare services have a strong focus on reablement in care provision to older people (Graff and Vabø2023a,2023b; Kamp and Dybbroe2023).
In both countries, reablement may be offered as short‐term individually tailored training and exercise programmes provided by physiotherapists or occupational therapists (Graff and Vabø2023a) or it may form part of the everyday care provided by care workers.
The focus in the latter form of reablement, often referred to as everyday reablement, is to motivate service users to participate in everyday tasks, such as cooking, dressing and cleaning.
In both types of reablement, the underlying premise is the ability to change, particularly in terms of service users' physical capacities to manage at home (Kamp and Dybbroe2023).
However, because of the habit of early discharge of patients from hospitals, homecare services both in Norway and Denmark increasingly serve sick and vulnerable older people with complex medical, therapeutic and clinical needs, which presents difficulties in fulfiling the underlying policy expectations about people ageing at home.
This study draws on fieldwork undertaken in Denmark and Norway and includes observations of homecare visits by care workers to older service users from three municipal homecare services.
The fieldwork took place over a 10‐month period from April 2019 to February 2020 and included 31 days of observations of care worker‐service user interactions, with 8 days spent in Danish homecare settings and 23 days spent in Norwegian homecare settings.
The study was approved by the Norwegian Centre of Research Data/SIKT (reference number 128713) and all participants gave informed consent.
The study participants, consisting of care workers and service users, were recruited through the three municipal homecare services that took part in the research project.
The care workers participating in the study ranged in age from 28 to 58 years.
Both in the Norwegian and Danish homecare settings, all care workers that I shadowed were female, except for one male care worker in the Norwegian setting.
In the Danish homecare setting, all care workers I shadowed were ethnic Danes, while in the Norwegian homecare setting, there was a mix of ethnic Norwegian and Scandinavian care workers and care workers with immigrant backgrounds from different continents (Africa, Asia and the Middle East).
The service users participating in the study ranged in age from 49 to 98 years, with an approximately equal share of male and female service users consisting of ethnic Norwegian and ethnic Danish.
Every day during fieldwork, I shadowed a different care worker, each visiting from five to 10 service users per day.
The observations took place in the service users' homes, which mostly consisted of a private house or apartment and only in a few cases consisted of a private room or a one‐room flat in a housing arrangement (omsorgsbolig) for people who need care but who do not depend on 24 h of care service, such as those who are admitted to a nursing home.
Of course, it is a delicate matter for a stranger, such as a researcher like myself, to enter the home of a person in a vulnerable situation in need of care; therefore, it was necessary to engage in ethical considerations and discuss the possibility of my presence in each case.
Hence, before entering the house of a service user, the care worker and I discussed whether my presence would be appropriate for the specific service user in his or her situation.
In a few cases, we agreed that my presence would not be appropriate, that is, in situations with service users who were in particular anxious and/or who tended to act aggressively.
With most of the service users, however, I joined in the care visit.
Upon entering the service user's home, I was presented to the service user as a researcher.
I explained the research project and its implications for the service user and asked if I could join the care visit.
None of the service users objected to my presence.
One care worker commented that the service users seemed to accept my presence without further questioning.
He mentioned the fact that most of the service users had different care workers and other professionals visiting their homes on a daily basis and, therefore, they were habituated to different people coming into their homes, including strangers and people they barely knew.
In that sense, my presence might not have felt exceptional to the service users since there were many people involved in their care.
My role during the care visits was to observe the care workers in their everyday work, including their interactions with the service users, whether that involved medical or practical tasks or personal care, such as getting out of bed, having a shower, getting dressed, preparing a meal and preparing or giving medications.
Sometimes, the interaction took place in the bedroom and other times in the living room, kitchen or bathroom.
Normally, I shadowed the care workers in all their tasks and doings, even in the most intimate care with the service users.
However, depending on the individual service user or the spatial circumstances in which the care work took place, I sometimes waited outside, for instance if the bathroom was tiny or if the service user did not want my presence while performing the most intimate care.
I never participated in any of the homecare tasks, but I was often invited to conversations and sometimes I was encouraged by the care workers and/or service users to sit down and have a chat with the service user while the care worker was performing some practical tasks, such as making the bed.
The study data consist of fieldnotes from the care visits, which were partly made after each visit using a small notebook, for instance while we were transferring ourselves from one visit to another.
The field experiences and observations were more fully written down and expanded on, including reflections on how the care visits had affected me sensorily and emotionally (see the next subsection for further elaboration) at the end of each workday.
There was no recording of conversations during the care visits.
This study draws on affective ethnography (Gherardi2019), a methodological approach in which researchers use their capacity to be affected to become aware of how they resonate with what is happening in the field and to attune to situations and events that happen during field observations.
The capacity to become affected is a way of approaching the field and the topic being explored and it differs from ‘being there’ in traditional ethnography.
Instead of just reporting and interpreting what is observed by ‘being there’, researchers use their capacity to become affected to produce interpretations, meaning that they use their senses, feelings and emotions as tools in the research process as a way of ‘becoming with’ the field and the topic of research.
Moreover, in affective ethnography, data are considered to always be in the making and can include flows of thoughts and interactions, relationships and events that occur during the research process (Benozzo et al.2013).
This means that data not only encompass fieldnotes and interview transcripts but the entire research process.
Using affective ethnography, the analysis in this study became an ongoing process that intermingled with and was closely connected to the making of the data and the process of producing interpretations.
This means that the analytical and interpretive process started from my observations of the care visits and how I was affected through my senses, such as smelling, hearing and sight, including emotionally, by what happened in the care situation at the time of the observation, as well as how I recalled and interpreted these events at later stages in the analytical process.
Hence, the making and interpreting of the data for this article involved a mutually constitutive, iterative and creative process in which I moved back and forth between my fieldnotes and reconstructions of situations from the field in which I had been affected by how the service users displayed, hid, resisted or used their bodies in various ways in interactions with the care workers and how the care workers responded to the service users' bodies.
After first recalling these situations and events—for instance, a service user preparing his body and bed prior to catheterisation and a service user withdrawing from touch—I turned to the fieldnotes for further information on the respective events.
The fieldnotes were also consulted regarding other events and situations involving how the service users placed their bodies in interactions with the care workers.
Along with this process of searching the fieldnotes, recalling, reflecting and associating events and situations involving the body, I consulted the literature on embodiment and care work to aid the analysis and interpretation of the data.
Importantly, because affect is transmitted through the body and its senses, using the capacity to become affected as a tool in the research process also involves the researcher's body.
For instance, my observations of the morning care situation described below underdependent bodyaffected me emotionally and provoked a sense of shock and distaste, which further led me to thoughts of vulnerability and power in care work relations.
Hence, I acknowledged my own body as a tool, both as a way of attuning to what was going on in the care work situations and in the way my interpretations were influenced by how I was affected, sensorily and emotionally, in specific situations that involved the body and care during the fieldwork.
In this way, both my observations of the situationsandthe way I was affected by them formed the basis for my interpretations.
Noticing how I was affected emotionally and sensorily by what I observed in the care situations, I started to reflect on how the service users used their bodies in their interactions with the care workers and how the care workers responded to the service users' bodily dispositions in the care situation.
Through this analytical process, I identified four ways of what I labelled ‘service users placing their bodies at disposal’.
In the next section, I present the ways in which the service users placed their bodies at disposal and discuss how the service users' embodied contributions affected their relationships with the care workers and shaped care work.
In this section, I analyse how the service users placed their bodies at disposal in care work situations, interpreted in light of their capacity to collaborate, participate and engage in reablement with the care workers and how the care workers responded to the service users in terms of their professional and institutional responsibilities and capacities, including the asymmetrical power relation.
I identified four ways in which the service users placed their bodies at disposal in their encounters with the care workers: proactive bodies, dependent bodies, reluctant bodies and instructing bodies.
The labelling and characterisation of ‘placing bodies at disposal’ are not meant to describe typologies of service users or their bodies, but rather to describe bodiesinsituations of care work and reablement.Proactive bodiesrefer to situations in which the service users prepared for the care work to take place and were characterised by the care receivers' capacity and willingness to collaborate and facilitate care through how they placed their bodies at disposal for the care workers.Dependent bodiesrefer to situations in which the service users had few means or choices to physically collaborate and were characterised by the care recipients' incapacity to contribute physically in manoeuvring their body parts during the care situation.Reluctant bodiesrefer to situations in which the service users hesitated to collaborate physically in the care work situations.
This involved, for instance, service users' withdrawing their bodies from situations of washing or dressing or refusing to take part in everyday tasks or in other ways obstructing care workers from physically performing their tasks.Instructing bodiesrefer to situations in which the service users prepared for the care work to take place by instructing the care workers in their tasks, either in a reciprocal, collaborative way or in a one‐directional, commanding way.
The following care situations exemplify proactive bodies.
The first care situation involved an older man who was just getting up from his chair when we entered the house, struggling to put on his prosthetic leg and shoes.
He was wearing diapers and a tube from a catheter was visible below the diapers.
He looked happy and chatted with us as he prepared for his shower.
He said he was going to visit his girlfriend that afternoon and that she had instructed him not to visit until he had shaved and showered.
Hence, he was ready for his shower and had already prepared by taking his clothes off and putting his body at the trustful disposal of the care worker to prepare him for the shower.
Before entering the house, the care worker had considered postponing the shower until the next day because of time constraints.
However, seeing him ready for it, she immediately recognised how much he appreciated having a wash and how important it was for him that it should take place today, as scheduled, not the following day.
They agreed that he would do some of the household tasks himself later, for example laundry and that the care worker would spend the time preparing and assisting him to shower and shave.
The situation described above exemplifies a service user who contributed physically and mindfully by preparing himself for his shower and taking responsibility for the laundry, while the care worker responded to the physical and emotional needs of the service user in this situation by helping him shower and shave so that he could visit his girlfriend.
By facilitating the bath as planned rather than postponing it, the care workerengagedwith the service user and his needs and thereby contributed to a situation of dignity in care (Pols et al.2018).
By responding to his needs both practically and emotionally, the care worker supported his autonomy (Korczynski2013).
In this way, the care worker and service user co‐constructed a situation of care that aligns with the policy ideals of participation, as well as with the care ideals of collaboration and co‐construction (Mol2008).
Another example of a proactive body is an older man who had previously been a sailor.
Upon our arrival at 9 a.m., the care worker anxiously wondered whether he was still at home or had left for the pub.
He was home, ready and stripped to the waist to receive his daily treatment for his skin problems.
In the interaction with the man and his disposed body, the care worker adapted her dialect and jargon to the service user's way of talking.
Her tone of voice became darker and she swore and moved her body like a sailor aboard a ship in a rough sea while chatting with the man and tending to his back.
This example illustrates not only a proactive body at disposal but also how care workers can use their own bodies to adapt to the spheres of service users.
Her skilful way of engaging with the man's need for help with his skin problem by adapting her own body language and way of talking while touching him demonstrated respect for his self and personhood, as well as his autonomy (Korczynski2013).
In this case, the care worker's embodied transformation facilitated a smooth and collaborative situation of care and her engagement in the man's life context allowed for the co‐labouring of dignity in the situation (Pols et al.2018).
These examples with proactive bodies and the care worker's embodied transformation demonstrate how the bodily encounters between the service users and care workers shaped the care relation (Wolkowitz2002) as a smooth and ideal collaboration, as described by Mol (2008). The examples also demonstrate how the care workers' engagement and skilful emotional labour promoted autonomy and dignity in the bodily encounters and situations of care.
However, as we will see in the following section, collaboration, participation and embodied contribution in acts of reabling care can be more complex, for instance when service users do not possess the capacity to physically participate.
The following exemplifies a situation with a dependent body involving a male service user residing in an independent living unit in a residential home.
The man was in his late 40s and had been paralysed since suffering a stroke in his early 20s.
He depended on help for almost everything, but he had some movement and strength in his hands and arms.
It was a morning visit and the care worker was going to perform the morning care and prepare his breakfast.
She accommodated the limbs of his body to facilitate washing him while commenting on what she was doing and asking him if he was okay.
As she moved his body parts, she commented to me about what he liked and did not like, telling me that sometimes he was grumpy, upon which he protested, ‘I am always kind to you’.
She demonstrated that she could do anything to his body without him reacting while commenting, ‘Yes, he is mostly a nice guy’ as a token of collaboration.
I had the impression that they knew each other quite well and that she had tended to him many times.
She communicated with him in a teasing way, to which he responded reluctantly.
After washing his body, she helped him to the toilet and then left him while she went to prepare his breakfast.
Subsequently, she returned to the man, who was still sitting on the toilet.
He said that he had been unable to go to the toilet.
She then dressed him.
Later in the morning, he approached us in his wheelchair downstairs in the reception area.
He was eager to tell the care worker that he had succeeded in going to the toilet and he related how he managed with the help of a lady in the independent unit.
He described in detail how they collaborated to get him onto the toilet: while he supported himself on a rack, she pulled down his trousers and, together, they managed to get him seated on the toilet.
I was surprised by his openness and directness in this public space, but I was even more surprised by the care worker's response.
In a loud voice, she said something like, ‘Okay, good, now that we have this information that you went to the toilet, do you want me to put it down in your medical record?’ The service user protested, ‘No, no, that's not what I meant’; he looked uncomfortable and left in his wheelchair.
In this situation, the service user was placing his body at trustful disposal for the care worker to inform her about its ‘clinical’ state and about the effort he had made to contribute to the morning routine.
However, instead of responding in a mutually trusting and collaborative way, she responded in a way that to me seemed to embarrass him or make him feel uncomfortable.
Of course, using humour to take the edge off sensitive issues is also a way of building trust in care relationships.
However, in this situation, given the power dimension of this highly asymmetrical relationship, regarding both the service user's lack of autonomy and control of his bodily functions and his dependency on receiving care from other people in general, I interpreted her response as disrespect for the service user.
In this case, a lack of physical autonomy in a paralysed body was met by the care worker's lack of adequate engagement and support in the form of skilful emotional labour to handle an intimate situation of care (Korczynski2013).
Instead of recognising the man's attempts to physically contribute to his daily care, the care worker seemed to humiliate the service user with her response.
Consequently, her response undermined the possibility of co‐labouring a situation of dignity in care with the service user (Pols et al.2018).
Undermining attempts at collaboration from service users with paralysed or impaired bodies, as in this case, can be perceived as a misrecognition of autonomy and ultimately result in a loss of subjectivity for the person (Korczynski2013).
Reablement schemes that aim to promote an older person's capacity to stay at home and manage with as little help as possible from care services are prominent in social care policies (Graff and Vabø2023a,2023b; Kamp and Dybbroe2023).
However, in this study, I observed many situations with service users who were not able to cope with daily tasks and participate in the reablement programme offered by care workers, whether due to lack of ability, energy or motivation.
One situation involved a service user who was not able to walk and who suffered from a condition that inhibited joint movement.
The woman was in her bed, awake and waiting for her morning care when we entered her apartment.
The care worker helped her out of bed and into the bathroom.
After seating her on the toilet, the care worker asked her to undress while she went to fetch her clothes.
The woman struggled with the nightgown, but the care worker encouraged her to do as much as she could of the morning care by herself.
The lady protested and said she needed help.
Towards the end of the morning care scene, the care worker told the woman to put on the last piece, a cardigan and left to prepare her breakfast.
When the care worker returned, the woman was still sitting with the sweater in her lap and resignedly said that she had not managed to put it on.
The care worker looked annoyed and explained to the woman the importance of her trying to participate in everyday chores.
The woman answered that she didn't understand why she had to try to do something that she already knew was painful for her.
Later, possibly as an attempt to alleviate the unfriendly atmosphere between the two of them, the care worker sat down and talked with the woman for quite a while about her situation and her reluctance to participate in daily chores.
The care worker clearly interpreted the service user's passivity as non‐collaboration and unwillingness rather than physical incapacity.
Later, during our movement to the next service user, the care worker told me that several of the care workers on the team, including herself, often experienced difficulties with this woman, who was perceived as a non‐collaborative service user.
Notwithstanding, the care worker's insistence on following the reablement scheme instead of allowing the service user to define her situation seems to have hampered the possibility of co‐labouring a situation of dignity in care.
Rather, in this situation, institutional requirements and ideas about participation and reablement seem to have ruled out other professional ideals of co‐construction and collaboration with service users (Hirvonen2014), such as the constant ‘tinkering’ of practicalities and emotional labour (Mol et al.2010) to onboard the service user, as well as the ethics of ‘caring about’ the service user (Tronto1993).
Instead of responding with empathic engagement and meeting the service user in her situation with emotional labour, the care worker insisted on carrying out the prescribed policy programme of reablement, thereby hampering the co‐labouring of a situation of dignified care (Pols et al.2018).
Another situation involved a service user who was expected to prepare her meals and perform everyday chores in collaboration with the care workers as part of the enablement scheme.
When we arrived in the morning, the service user opened the door, ready and nicely dressed for the visit.
The care worker noted that she was up early and asked whether she had already had her breakfast, upon which the woman responded ‘no’ and invited us to sit with her on the sofa.
The care worker urged her to help with the breakfast, but the woman said that she would rather spend the time on the sofa having a pleasant conversation.
She added, ‘I have been preparing my meals for 80 years now.
I know how to make those sandwiches, and I don't need to repeat it…’ The care worker accepted the service user's response and prepared her breakfast while chatting with us from the kitchen in the open living space.
Later, the care worker explained to me that encouraging active participation was not always the best approach, noting, ‘You have to pay attention to people's psychological needs also.
Sometimes, for a depressed person, a nice conversation may be more appropriate than doing everyday household tasks’.
In this situation, the care worker negotiated the institutionally prescribed everyday‐reablement scheme with what she determined were the service user's most urgent needs, which were emotional support and psychosocial enablement, rather than participating in practical household tasks.
By mirroring the service user and engaging in her situation, the care worker acknowledged the service user's emotional and social needs, and in her doings, crafted dignity in the situation of care (Pols et al.2018).
These two examples of reluctant bodies demonstrate how the service users hesitated or sought to avoid placing their bodies at disposal in the ways required by the care services or expected by the care workers.
Regardless of whether their reluctant attitude was an attempt to maintain autonomy and dignity in a situation of bodily vulnerability, their reluctance towards physical participation in everyday chores was met with a different response from the two different care workers.
These examples demonstrate how crafting dignity in situations of care depends on the care workers' responses and flexibility, on how they balance acts of care and reablement (Graff and Vabø2023a).
In the example involving the woman who was unwilling to prepare breakfast, the care worker chose to ignore the requirements of the everyday‐reablement scheme and responded with understanding and acknowledgement of the service user's definition of her situation.
In fact, the care worker redefined the content of reablement from doing ordinary household tasks to engaging in conversations and having a good time.
This strategy of ‘tinkering’ with practicalities and emotional labour resulted in increased well‐being and enhanced quality of life for the service user.
Instead of using ‘persuasive’ strategies and trying to talk the service user into participating in household tasks, the care worker's redefinition of reablement facilitated a situation marked by dignity in care.
In the other example, the care worker was more insistent on following the prescribed formula for everyday reablement by urging the lady to take part in everyday chores.
The care worker's insistence, based on her interpretation of the woman's reluctance to participate as unwillingness rather than inability, indicated a lack of mirroring and understanding of the service user's situation, which prevented the co‐crafting of dignity in the situation of care (Pols et al.2018).
A situation with aninstructing bodyis exemplified by a service user with a history of cancer, who instructed the care worker how to treat his body to avoid pain.
The service user sat upright in his bed and gave detailed instructions to the care worker on how she should mobilise his body, as well as how much pressure she should use when touching his skin: ‘I need you to do it like this… (instructing the care worker how to wash him) and then it will be less painful and we will manage.
Can we agree on that?’ The care worker carefully followed his instructions, while constantly communicating what she was doing and asking if he was okay, if the pressure was alright and so on.
In this way, they were able to complete the morning care routine without the care worker causing additional pain to the service user.
In the example above, the service user's situation required a response not only to the bodily needs of washing and dressing but also to the service user's need to not suffer additional pain.
In this situation, there was an explicit need for attentive collaboration that considered both the body and the person and for the care worker to be sensitive to the service user's needs.
By carefully following the service user's instructions, the care worker acknowledged him in taking the lead.
In this way, the care worker engaged in and empathised with the service user's situation.
She also repositioned herself in the service user‐care worker relationship, equalising the power relationship and thereby crafting and co‐labouring dignity in a situation with a vulnerable person with a body in pain and need of care.
Instructing can also mean commanding, in the sense that service users sometimes give orders to care workers, as illustrated by a situation involving a service user with a condition that restricted her movements.
During the morning visit, the woman sat on a chair in the living room and issued orders on how she would like to be dressed, what she would like to eat and how the food should be prepared: ‘thin slices!
in halves… not that butter… noooo!
the other trousers’ and in what sequence everything should happen.
The care worker followed the service user's instructions or commands and took care of her physical and practical needs in a conscientious way without demonstrating any emotional care or engagement with the service user.
In this situation, the service user's commanding and demeanour attitude did not give the care worker an opportunity to engage in a meaningful way in promoting her well‐being.
Instead, as the service user seemed to expect to be served, the care worker transformed from a care worker to a housekeeper or servant in her embodied attitude.
This situation indicated a subversive embodied power relation, in which the service user took the lead from a superior position and the care worker adopted a subordinate position in performing the practical tasks.
Unlike the example above with the man in pain, in this subversive power relation marked by a fundamental lack of trust and mutual respect, the service user's commanding approach left the care worker without any option of co‐labouring and crafting dignity in care.
This paper demonstrates how older service users contribute to care work by placing their bodies at disposal depending on their capacity and motivation to participate in reablement and how care workers' responses to service users' efforts of embodied contribution shape the care relation and facilitate dignity in situations of care.
Care workers' engagement and capacity to attentively respond to service users' physical and emotional needs and their flexibility and adaptiveness in dealing with service users in their bodily encounters seem to be key for care work to unfold as a collaborative practice that promotes dignity in situations of care.
As exemplified by the proactive bodies and the instructive body, the care workers attended to the physical and practical needs of the service users in a collaborative, understanding and empathic way.
However, in these examples, the care workers not only responded to their physical needs (e.g., pain relief), practical needs (e.g., washing and lotioning of the back) and emotional needs (to be left without pain, to visit a girlfriend, to have a clean and neat house, etc.), but they also adapted to the sphere of the service users and responded to the corporal efforts they made to place their bodies at disposal.
Hence, by adapting to the sphere of the care recipients and their ways of placing their bodies at disposal, for instance, by attentively following instructions to alleviate pain with a damp cloth, by considerately preparing a shower for the man in diapers or by changing one's jargon and body language, these care workers facilitated the co‐labouring of dignity in situations of care.
With proactive or instructing service users' bodies at disposal, it seems easy to craft dignity in care.
However, with reluctant service users' bodies, the co‐labouring and collaborative ‘project’ in care work and particularly in reablement policy contexts, seems more challenging.
Social care in homecare services involves helping people complete tasks that they would perform themselves were they able, including washing, dressing and toileting, all of which are highly private.
Crafting dignity in situations with service users in need of such help is a core value in social care.
Not being able to take care of one's personal care ‘threatens also the social persona of the individual’ or the person living in that body (Twigg2002, 429).
Therefore, traditionally, social care seeks to downplay the focus on the frailty of the body because it risks objectifying the person (Twigg2002).
In reablement, however, the service user's body is viewed as a physical potential to be revealed and therefore put upfront in all its vulnerability.
As demonstrated in this study, many service users do not possess the capacity to participate in everyday activities, either physically or mentally.
As we have seen in the examples, care workers may respond in various ways to service users' incapacity to participate.
Adaptation of schemes, programmes and approaches and a constant ‘tinkering’ with what works as ‘reablement’ in the individual's situation is what marks ‘good care’ (Mol2008; Mol et al.2010) or dignity in situations of care (Pols et al.2018).
However, enforced participation may highlight the impairment of the service user's body and thereby hamper the co‐laboured crafting of dignity in the homecare situation.
Hence, while reablement can be seen as promoting or strengthening the collaborative ‘project’ and dignity in care work, it does not imply that this particular practice of care will serve as a guarantee against harm and the misuse of power.
Professional care practices will always involve a risk of harm due to structural power relations that may contradict professionals' (good) intentions and how their actions and practices are understood and received by the service user (Doel et al.2010).
Certainly, in reablement, which requires the participation of service users in particular ways, there is a risk of the enforcement of independence and self‐care due to the asymmetrical power relations between service users and care workers.
Indeed, care relationships are often characterised by asymmetrical power relations, in which care receivers are positioned at the lower end because of their fragile and vulnerable bodies and their need for care.
However, as demonstrated in this study, care workers' flexibility, attentiveness and inventiveness in encountering service users are important means of alleviating asymmetrical power relations.
Notwithstanding, the fact that service users place their bodies at disposal in care situations, whether they are able to participate physically or not, makes it easier for care workers to facilitate dignity in care.
Balancing asymmetrical power relations and crafting dignity in care is, of course, more challenging in situations involving reluctant bodies than those involving proactive and collaborative bodies.
The power relations between service users and care workers can also be reversed, for example, by a service user taking the lead in the care situation and positioning the care worker as a subordinate.
In such situations, care workers' responses may take the form of embodied transformations into domestic servants, as demonstrated in this study.
In these situations, the care workers place their bodies at disposal to perform physical and practical labour as a form of body work (Twigg2000) but without the emotional dimension of care work.
Hence, in such subverted service user‐care worker relations that turn into client‐servant relationships, the bodily encounter shapes the relation in a particular way (Wolkowitz2002), which makes co‐labouring and crafting of dignity difficult.
In fact, in this subverted relationship, there is no situation of care but rather a situation of service (Neumann and Gundersen2019).
Although such subverted relationships might be rare, they challenge professional care work and the collaborative ‘project’ of reablement aimed at facilitating participation, dignity and enhanced well‐being for the service user (Gherardi and Rodeschini2016; Hirvonen2014; Mol2008; Tan2019).
To conclude, this study demonstrates that the body, both the service user's and the care worker's, is an important arena for shaping care work as a collaborative practice and an important tool for promoting dignity in situations of care.
However, collaboration and co‐construction do not guarantee that harm or neglect in care work will not occur.
There is strong policy pressure and institutional pressure on care workers to implement reablement programmes due to ‘ageing‐at‐home’ policies (Kamp and Dybbroe2023).
Organisational directives in care services seem to encourage care workers to pursue the institutional mantra of reablement and ageing‐at‐home in encounters with service users, often at the cost of care relations and dignity in situations of care.
However, awareness of service users as people and not just bodies that can be trained or changed (Kamp and Dybbroe2023), as well as the recognition of both their capacities and their incapacities to collaborate corporally, may facilitate collaborationanddignity in care.