Eimeria maximais one of the sevenEimeriaspecies that infect poultry.
Despite being highly immunogenic, this species also displays variability in terms of antigenic characteristics.
The objective of this study was to examine the biopathological properties of two distinctEimeria maximaisolates in Iran.
Two mixed field samples, collected from backyard poultry droppings with the highest numbers ofEimeria maximaoocysts, were selected for experimental challenges.
The birds were inoculated with an equal number of oocysts, and the biopathological indicators ofEimeriaoocysts were evaluated.
The findings revealed that the two strains exhibited differences in terms of pathological lesions and intestinal inflammatory reactions on the seventh day post‐challenge (p> 0.05).
Consequently, it was demonstrated thatEimeria maximaisolates from geographically distant regions possessed biological and pathogenic dissimilarities.
Studies have shown the genetic diversity ofEimeria maximaas it may alter the efficiency of the applied anticoccidial vaccines.
In the present study, biological traits of two distinct native isolates ofE.maximain chickens were evaluated and compared.
Poultry coccidiosis is the most important parasitic disease in the dense poultry production industry around the world.
Although much of the basic information about this disease was obtained in the 1930s and 1940s, much research into the prevention and control of coccidiosis in poultry is still being conducted nearly a century later.
Coccidiosis is estimated to cost the poultry sector more than £10 billion annually (Blake et al.2020).
Subclinical coccidiosis affects bird productivity in both industrial and conventional poultry farming, resulting in poor performance and increased feed conversion, and ultimately economic losses.
Seven species ofEimeriahave been identified in chickens, all of which invade the lining of the intestines and caecum, causing destruction of the epithelial cells and disrupting the nutrient absorption process, leading to dehydration, anaemia, decreased immunity, and decreased growth and weight gain.
The species are site‐specific in the intestinal tract though simultaneous contamination with multipleEimeriaspecies is more common in poultry farms.Eimeria maximaandEmeria tenellaare the most pathogenic species, thoughE.
maximais the most immunogenic species in poultry (López‐Osorio, Chaparro‐Gutiérrez, and Gómez‐Osorio2020; Mtshali and Adeleke 2020).
The diversity ofEimeriaspp.
has been investigated in industrial and traditional poultry farms in many studies in the country and around the world.
In most of these studies, which were carried out by a morphological method, all seven important species ofEimeriawere reported in poultry farms of Iran.
Among these studies,E.maximawas identified as the prevailing species found within the country.Emeria maximainfects the middle part of the small intestine, from the end of the duodenum to the yolk sac diverticulum.
The first two stages of asexual reproduction in the epithelial cells cause destruction of the intestinal mucosa.
The sexual proliferation in the deeper intestinal tissues leads to hyperaemia, oedema, cellular infiltration, and thickening of the mucous layer.
Exposure to only a few oocysts of this species leads to complete immunity (99.9%) against homologous challenges (Smith et al.2002).
In the intensive poultry industry,Eimeria maximacauses significant economic damage by reducing growth rate, diarrhoea, and death in severe cases (Schneiders et al.2020).
In recent years, studies have been conducted on the genetic diversity ofE.
maximaas it may alter the efficiency of the applied anticoccidial vaccines (Adeyemi et al.2023; Tucker et al.2023; Võ et al.2021).
The immunogenicity of E.maximais attributed to the tissue penetration of the species.Emeria maximahas intraspecies diversity which do not overlap with each other in terms of immunogenicity (Jenkins et al.2017,2024).
According to Liu et al. (2018), infection with one of the isolates did not significantly confer cross‐immunity against other isolates.
The purpose of this experiment was to compare and evaluate the biological traits of two distinct native isolates ofE.maximain chickens.
The pre‐patent period, fertility, and the degree of intestinal lesions were all assessed and analyzed for this experiment.
Samples of litter were collected from traditional poultry houses from various provinces between May 2022 and May 2023.
The samples were investigated for the presence ofEimeriaspp.
oocysts via flotation with saturated salt solution.
Twelve (10.2%) of the 118 examined samples from six provinces of the country contained oocysts.
The oocysts per gram (OPG) of the infected samples ranged from 3 × 102to 5.1 × 105with an average of 1.4 × 105.
The identifiedEimeriaspecies in the surveyed samples includedEmeria acervulina,E.maxima, E. Tenella, andEmeria necatrix.
Two samples containing the highest quantity of E.maximaoocysts during the initial survey were selected for further analysis.
The selected isolates from Mazandaran and Tehran provinces were sporulated in 2.5% potassium dichromate (Conway and Mckenzie2007).
For single oocysts isolation, the sample was diluted and spread over a divided glass slide covered with 5% gelatin (Khalafalla and Daugschies2010).
The two selected E.maximaisolates were propagated via oral infection of five chickens and subsequent collection of the birds’ faeces (Su et al.2003).
The selected samples included a sample from Tabaghdeh village, Mazandaran province (isolate S), and a sample from Shahr‐e‐Ray, Tehran province (isolate T).
For each isolate, ten 13‐day‐old chicks were inoculated with 10E.
maximaoocysts, in three replicates.
A group of 10 chickens was inoculated with distilled water as the control group.
The birds were kept in wire cages, and water and food were freely available.
During the test period, from the third day after inoculation to day 10, excreta were collected and examined to calculate OPG of faeces.
The birds were weighed on the day of inoculation and at the end of the experiment for calculation of the weight gain.
Intestinal lesions were evaluated once at day 7 post‐inoculation in two randomly selected birds for each isolate.
At the end of the experiment (day 10 after inoculation), all the remaining birds were euthanized, and the digestive tract from the duodenum to the end of the rectum was completely removed from the carcass, examined macroscopically on the serousal and mucousal surfaces for the presence of coccidial lesions.
In order to evaluate the pathogenic characteristics of the examined isolates, sections from the intestine were obtained form two birds for each isolate at the end of the experiment.
All tissue sections were blindly evaluated by an experienced individual.
For the microscopic lesions of the infection, two separate scores were considered, necrosis score (NS), inflammation score (IS) and the score of the infection severity (Coccidia score, CS) (Balestrin et al.2022; Bortoluzzi et al.2019).
At the end of the experiment, qualitative data were analyzed by chi‐square test and quantitative data by ANOVA test (p< 0.05) using SPSS 26.0 software (IBM Corp., USA).
Prepatenet period for the isolate T was 96 h, while isolate S started oocyst excretion from 72 h post‐inoculation.
For both isolates, OPG peaked on day 6 and declined afterwards.
The highest OPG for isolate S was 6 × 103, while it was 4×103for isolate T (Figure1).
It should be noted that the non‐parametric Mann–Whitney test showed that the number of excreted oocysts for both isolates was not statistically different (p= 1.000).
Comparison of oocyst shedding pattern in two isolates ofEimeria maximain experimentally challenged broilers.
The average weight of the chickens at the beginning of the experiment in each group had a normal distribution, and no statistical differences were noticed (p= 0.44).
The average final weight of the chickens challenged with isolate T was statistically more than the final weight of the birds challenged with isolate S (p= 0.025) though they were not statistically different with the control group (p< 0.05) (Table1).
The mean initial and final weight, and mean weight gain of the birds challenged with two E.maximaisolates.
Note: Means sharing the same superscripts within each column do not differ significantly (p≤ 0.05).
Abbreviation: W0, mean weight at the inoculation date; W14, mean weight 2 weeks after inoculation; WG, mean weight gain at the end of the experiment.
Due to the limited number of the oocysts in the challenge dose, no macroscopic lesion or signs of inflammation, edema, and ballooning were observed in the necropsy from the birds inoculated with isolates S and T. Microscopically, seventh day after ioculation, there were a small number of villi infected with few parasites in the birds challenged with isolate S. For isolate T, mild‐to‐moderate parasitic infection was observed in the sections.
NS, IS, and CS were lower in isolate S compared to isolate T (p< 0.05) (Figure2).
The 10th day post‐challenge sections were free of parasitic infections in both groups, indicating that the disease has subsided and no reinfection occurred (Figure3).
Comparative microscopic lesions scores, necrosis score (NS), inflammation score (IS), and the score of the infection severity (Coccidia score, CS) in the birds challenged withE.
maxima isolatesS and T, panelled by necropsy time (gold/0: day 7 post‐inoculation; blue/1: day 10 post‐inoculation).
Axis x is the ordinal severity of the lesions.
Histological sections from mid intestines of broilers inoculated withEimeria maximaisolate T and S, 7 and 10 days after challenge.
(a) Isolate S seventh day post‐challenge.
Macrogametocyte in intestinal villi (black triangle), two first‐generation schizonts in a large parasitophorous vacuole in the intestinal crypt (black arrow).
(b) Isolate S 10th day post‐challenge.
A mass of schizonts along with healthy villi.
(c) Isolate T seventh day post‐challenge.
Different parasite stages in the intestinal villi (black triangles).
(d) Isolate T 10th day post‐challenge showimg almost healthy intestinal villi free of parasitic stages.
In this study, the biological and pathological characteristics of two differentEimeria maximaisolates were evaluated and compared during the experimental challenge of the broiler chickens.
As stated in the results, the two examined strains differed from each other in the terms of the prepatent period as isolate T started oocysts shedding almost 24 h earlier than the S isolate.
The peak time of oocyst excretion in both isolates was 144 h after the challenge.
The oocyst excretion in the isolates examined in this study ceased on the 10th day following the challenge.
In the present study, the average final weight and average weight gain in the group challenged with the isolate T were similar to the negative control group, but the group challenged with isolate S had a significantly lower weight gain (p <0.05).
Because the aim of this study was to evaluate the biopathological characteristics of two isolates and in the experimental challenge, the number of oocysts inoculated into the chickens was considered minimal so that the severity of the lesions would not hinder the evaluation of the characteristics.
In the microscopic evaluation of infection intensity indicators, pathological lesions and intestinal inflammatory reactions on the seventh day after challenge, the groups challenged with S isolates had significantly lower levels of parasitic infection than T isolates (p> 0.05).
Other indices between the two isolates had no statistically significant difference (p> 0.05).
The number of excreted oocysts (OPG) is known as the gold standard for the evaluation of the strain characteristics, the effectiveness of anticoccidial compounds and vaccines (Jorgensen, Richards, and Anderson2006; Soutter et al.2020).
This index may be affected by the presence of other species; for example,E.acerulinais the most productive species, while E.maximahas a very low production capacity (Soutter et al.2020).
It is important to acknowledge that the prepatent period can vary among differentEimeriaspecies.
It should be noted that this index is not a fixed feature as efforts to produce attenuated vaccines have resulted in the reduction of the prepatent period (Jenkins et al.2017; Long and Joyner1984).
The peak time of oocyst shedding in most studies for differentEimeriaspp.
has been reported as 5–7 days after challenge (Chasser et al.2020).
In the research conducted by Bumstead and Millard (1992), the excretion of oocysts ceased on the 10th day following the challenge.
However, in contrast to their findings, other studies have reported a longer duration of oocyst excretion.
This disparity in results could potentially be attributed to the utilization of mixedEimeriasp.
during the challenge.
It is plausible that the presence of species with greater production potential, when compared to a single species challenge, could influence the final outcome (Soutter et al.2020).
It is important to highlight that the enumeration of OPG is a labor‐intensive process that necessitates trained technicians.
However, given its widespread use in poultry coccidiosis research worldwide, it serves as a valuable metric for assessing and comparing the effectiveness of control and prevention strategies on a global scale (Blake et al.2006; Chasser et al.2020).
It is advisable to consider growth and efficiency indicators such as weight gain and food conversion ratio, along with necropsy indicators such as intestinal lesion scoring, in addition to the OPG (Chasser et al.2020).
Although morbidity is closely linked to the litter OPG, there were no statistically significant associations found between the OPG and weight gain (Jenkins et al.2017; Mesa‐Pineda et al.2021; Taylor et al.2022).
The intestinal lesions increase as the infectious dose increases (Nolan et al.2015).
The use of intestinal lesion scoring requires an experienced user.
It is important to note that the score of intestinal lesions does not necessarily indicate the clinical appearance of the disease.
In an experimental challenge where birds were exposed to a high dose of E.tenellaafter being immunized with the virulent strain ofEimeria, severe intestinal injuries were observed, while weight gain was minimally affected (Jenkins et al.2017; Soutter et al.2020; Taylor et al.2022).
Furthermore, research has demonstrated that when examining the correlation between the OPG or intestinal lesion scores with the productivity of birds, the latter displayed a significant association (Mesa‐Pineda et al.2021; Taylor et al.2022).
Intestinal lesions are also very helpful in identifying the infectious species.
The intestinal lesion scores occur within a specific time frame, and they resolve after a while.
It has also been mentioned that the lesion score for E.maximais not related to pathogenicity (Barrios et al.2017; Chapman et al.2013).
Therefore, intestinal lesions along with OPG improve the depiction of the strains' characteristics (Chasser et al.2020).
In this study, due to the use of a small number of infectious doses for both strains, no macroscopic intestinal lesions were observed.
While in the microscopic examination, the presence of parasistic infection pathologies including necrosis and infiltration of inflammatory and immune cells in the tissue was observed.
In the research conducted by Barrios et al. (2017), a clear correlation was found between the macroscopic lesions of E.maximaand microscopic presentation.
However, in the study conducted by Idris et al. (1977), no such relationship was observed between the severity of macroscopic and microscopic lesions.
The authors of the latter study emphasized that this discrepancy hinders the accurate assessment of the herd's condition in terms of coccidiosis through necropsy.
It is important to note that this outcome varies among different species of poultryEimeria.
For instance, there is a strong correlation between macroscopic and microscopic lesions in E.acervulina, whereas the severity of pathogenicity in E.maximadoes not correlate with intestinal injuries (Idris et al.1997).
Weight gain is an important indicator in the poultry industry which is severely affected by acute coccidiosis (Soutter et al.2020).
Researchers have reported that infection with E.maximaresults in a 10% reduction in weight gain, while otherEimeriaspecies have less negative impact on bird's weight gain.
However, sometimes despite coccidiosis infection, due to nutrition and increased food intake compared to the negative control group, weight may not be affected (Kipper et al.,2013).
Another study has shown that coccidiosis infection definitely leads to a decrease in food intake, but this decrease did not show a significant difference compared to the negative control group (Taylor et al.2022).
In both of these studies,E.maximahas caused a greater weight loss compared to E.acervulina, indicating that E.maximahas a more severe pathogenesis thanE.acervulina(Taylor et al.2022).
Additionally, in some studies, weight gain was not correlated with microscopic lesions, which could be due to genetic differences in the hosts (Barrios et al.2017).
In a study evaluating the effect of infection dose on birds’ performance indicators, a significant decrease in weight gain was observed in the challenge of chicks with 10,000E.
maximaoocysts compared toE.acervulinaand negative control group.
In the high‐dose challenge, the severity of intestinal injuries inE.acervulinawas much higher thanE.
maxima, and the excretion of oocysts in E.maximawas much lower thanE.acervulina.
In the low‐dose challenge, the severity of intestinal injuries in theE.acervulinagroup was lower than the lesions in E.maxima(Flores et al.2020).
Furthermore, Al‐Badri and Barta (2012) compared two distinctE.
maximaisolates and found that one strain produced approximately twice as many oocysts as the other strain.
Despite similar prepatent period, OPG, sporulation time, and the immunogenicity of the two strains differed significantly (Al‐Badri and Barta2012).
The geographiacal variations ofEimeriasp.
were studied for the first time in Iran.
The findings of this study show that E.maximaisolates from two geographically distant localities showed biological differences.
They differed in pathogenicity and in the impacts on the birds’ productivity.
Isolate S was more fecund than isolate T, and isolate S caused greater weight reduction in the challenged groups.
More extensive investigation regarding their genetic and anticoccidial sensitivity profiles will be required to further characterize these isolates.