Checkpoint Inhibitor‐induced Liver Injury (CHILI) is a frequent complication of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs).
Corticosteroids are the standard treatment but have many limitations.
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) offers an alternative for managing cholestatic CHILI, but its efficacy remains underexplored.
A multicenter retrospective study included 27 patients treated with first‐line UDCA monotherapy.
Data were collected from diagnosis to week 52, assessing liver enzyme improvement, recurrence, and outcomes.
UDCA alone achieved improvement in 81.5% of patients, with an average response time of 39.3 days.
Among patients, 77.8% had severe CHILI (CTCAE grade ≥ 3).
Macroscopic bile duct injury was observed in 37%, associated with higher recurrence rates (75%,p< 0.001).
Recurrent CHILI led to chronic CHILI in all cases.
ICI rechallenge was conducted in 52% of patients, with only 23% experiencing relapse.
UDCA monotherapy appears effective for cholestatic CHILI, presenting a viable alternative to corticosteroids.
Further prospective studies are warranted.
Corticosteroids are the main treatment in CHILI but have many side effects and may compromise oncologic response.
UDCA in monotherapy seems to be an effective therapeutic altenative in cholestatic and mixed CHILI.
In contrast to the use of corticosteroids, which have to be tapered before ICI rechallenge, UDCA at an effective dose can be continued after ICI rechallenge.
CHeckpoint Inhibitor‐induced Liver Injury (CHILI) is now a well‐known immune‐related adverse event of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), resulting from the restoration of anti‐tumour lymphocytic T response [1], which concerns up to 25% of patients treated with ICIs [2].
Corticosteroids are the cornerstone of CHILI treatment, as they are recommended beyond CTCAE grade ≥ 2 [1,3].
Yet, some case series have shown that 37.5 to 50% of patients with severe CHILI may experience improvement without the use of corticosteroids [2].
In addition, some studies have shown that treatment with corticosteroids before or during ICI therapy was associated with poorer survival and potentially poorer oncological response by blocking naïve T cell proliferation and differentiation [4,5,6].
Thus, some case reports have shown that patients with severe CHILI may benefit from ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) treatment [7,8].
We have previously described various CHILI patterns, with cholestatic pattern as frequent as hepatocellular pattern, and 32.5% of patients successfully treated with UDCA alone or associated with corticosteroids [9].
We also reported ICI‐induced cholangitis, which occurred only in patients with cholestatic or mixed patterns, with 39.6% of patients presenting macroscopic bile duct injury and 20.9% of patients treated with UDCA in the first line [10].
Indeed, the literature has suggested an association between ICI‐induced cholangiopathy and corticosteroid resistance [11,12], and the response to steroids in patients with ICI‐induced sclerosing cholangitis has been found to be as low as 11.5% [13].
Since 2022, ESMO guidelines have recommended the use of UDCA in immune‐related cholangitis secondary to immunotherapy [3], although no study has assessed its efficacy in this condition.
In parallel, corticosteroids are not recommended in idiopathic autoimmune cholangiopathies (i.e., primary sclerosing cholangitis and primary biliary cholangitis), except for IgG4‐related sclerosing cholangitis.
Thus, UDCA is the first‐line treatment of idiopathic autoimmune cholangiopathies [14] and is empirically proposed in cholestatic DILI.
However, there is no data regarding UDCA efficacy in CHILI, except case reports.
Thus, we hypothesized UDCA efficacy as first‐line treatment in cholestatic CHILI.
The objective of this study was to analyse real‐world data on the off‐label use of first‐line UDCA alone in the setting of CHILI.
We conducted a multicenter retrospective study among consecutive patients presented at the “Toximmun” multidisciplinary meeting between January 2020 and June 2024.
The patient files were submitted from Montpellier University Hospital, Montpellier Cancer Institute and Nimes University Hospital.
Clinical and biological CHILI‐related data were collected at diagnosis; at weeks 1, 2, 4; and then monthly until week 52.
Data regarding cancer, treatment of CHILI, and ICI rechallenge were also collected.
Inclusion criteria were (i) adult patients treated by ICI; (ii) patients with previous normal liver tests, defined as normal transaminases, ALP, GGT and bilirubin levels; (iii) CHILI presentation with abnormal liver tests, after ruling out other causes of hepatitis; (iv) patients treated with first‐line UDCA in monotherapy.
CHILI diagnosis was assessed at onset using the Roussel Uclaf Causality Assessment Method (RUCAM), and was defined as possible (RUCAM 3–5), probable (RUCAM 6–8), and highly probable (RUCAM ≥ 9) [15].
We excluded patients treated with corticosteroids in first line.
The hepatitis pattern was calculated with the ratio (R) = (ALT/ULN)/(ALP/ULN), and classified as cholestatic (R≤ 2), hepatocellular (R≥ 5), or mixed (2 <R< 5).
Severity of CHILI was assessed using CTCAE and DILI classifications (DILI‐N and DILI‐IEWG).
Liver biopsy was performed beyond CTCAE grade 2, according to the international recommendations and at the physician's discretion.
Response criteria to UDCA treatment was defined as decrease in ALP and GGT ≥ 50%.
Recurrent CHILI (rCHILI) was defined as ALP ≥ 50% after ALP improvement (i.e., after response to UDCA treatment), and chronic CHILLI was defined as ALP ≥ 2 × ULN or ALT ≥ 5 × ULN after 6 months.
Macroscopic bile duct injury was defined as biliary tract dilation or stricture on MRI.
Descriptive statistics are presented as medians (ranges), means (SD) for quantitative variables, and counts (percentages) for qualitative variables.
The Wilcoxon rank sum test was applied to compare the distribution of continuous variables and chi‐squared test (or Fisher's exact test when appropriate) was used to test the association of categorical variables.p< 0.05 was considered statistically significant and all statistical tests were two‐sided.
Easymedstat software was used for statistical analysis (version 3.30.2;www.easymedstat.com).
This study was conducted in accordance with both the Declarations of Helsinki and Istanbul.
Institutional review board approval (IRB ID 202100908) and written informed consent of each patient were obtained.
The retrospective analysis included 27 patients treated with UDCA in first line, with a mean follow‐up time of 347.7 days.
Table1summarises the characteristics of the patients included.
The median age was 69 years, with a sex ratio of 1.3.
Most patients received PD‐1 inhibitors either alone (n= 18, 66.7%) or with a CTLA‐4 inhibitor (n= 4, 14.8%).
The median number of ICI infusions was 3, and the median time from first ICI infusion to onset of CHILI was 4.7 months.
A cholestatic pattern was observed in 96.3% of patients and a mixed pattern in 3.7%.
Regarding severity, 21 patients (77.8%) were CTCAE grade ≥ 3, and no patient had liver dysfunction according to DILI classifications (DILI‐N and DILI‐IEWG).
A total of 10 patients (37%) had macroscopic bile duct injury, mainly dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts.
None of the patients had a biliary stricture.
Seven patients (25.9%) had a liver biopsy; among them, 6 patients had microscopic cholangitis, and 2 patients had a liver biopsy after starting UDCA.
We compared patients with and without macroscopic bile duct injury and found that patients with macroscopic bile duct injury had significantly higher levels of eosinophil polynuclear count (535.3 vs. 179,p= 0.028).
Furthermore, a higher incidence of recurrent CHILI was observed in this group (n= 6, 75%;p< 0.001) and an escalation in UDCA treatment was noted (n= 4, 40%;p= 0.047).
A total of 22 patients (81.5%) improved with UDCA alone, and the mean improvement time under UDCA was 39.3 days.
Figure1illustrates the evolution of patients on UDCA alone and outcomes.
Patients who did not respond to UDCA alone and who received corticosteroids as a second‐line treatment were more likely to undergo a liver biopsy (n= 5, 100%;p< 0.001) and to be admitted to hospital (n= 3, 60%;p= 0.013).
Recurrent CHILI (rCHILI) was significantly associated with chronic CHILI (n= 6, 100%,p< 0.001) and the median number of flare‐ups was 2 [1,2,3,4,5,6,7].
A total of 6 patients had chronic CHILI (22.2%), which was associated with macroscopic bile duct injury (n= 6, 100%;p< 0.001).
ICI was rechallenged in 14 patients (51.9%), and UDCA was continued after ICI reintroduction in 11 patients (84.6%).
Lastly, only 3 patients (23.1%) experienced a CHILI relapse after ICI rechallenge.
No patient‐related adverse event was secondary to UDCA treatment.
Characteristics of patients with immune checkpoint‐induced liver injury (CHILI) treated with UDCA in first line.
Abbreviations: ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; ANA, antinuclear antibodies; ASMA, anti‐smooth muscle antibodies; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CTCAE, Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events; GGT, gamma‐glutamyl transferase; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; RUCAM, Roussel Uclaf Causality Assessment Method; UDCA, ursodeoxycholic acid.
Evolution of patients treated with UDCA in first line.
This observational study describes a cohort of 27 CHILI patients treated with first‐line UDCA in monotherapy.
We highlight here that cholestatic and mixed CHILI may benefit from UDCA treatment alone in first line, instead of corticosteroids.
In fact, UDCA is a hydrophilic biliary acid (BA) with anti‐cholestatic, cytoprotective, and anti‐inflammatory properties used to treat a wide range of cholestatic liver diseases, including primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and primary biliary cholangitis (PBC).
The anti‐inflammatory mechanism appears to be related to the increased hydrophilicity of accumulated BA, which modifies the pool of BA and reduces BA‐induced cell damage.
Physiologically, biliary epithelial cells maintain hepatic immune tolerance by expressing PDL‐1 and regulate the inflammatory response.
In pathological situations, particularly when tolerance breaks down, cholangiocytes have the ability to act as antigen‐presenting cells by expressing major histocompatibility complex (MHC)/human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II [16].
Thus, the breaking of tolerance induces cholangiocyte injury through T lymphocyte‐mediated immune attacks [16].
The analogy between PBC or PSC and the cholestatic forms of CHILI has already been mentioned in the literature [10,17].
Bessone et al. had previously shown that UDCA may be beneficial in cholestatic and mixed drug‐induced liver injury (DILI), but also in hepatocellular patterns through UDCA antioxidant and antiapoptotic properties [18].
Corticosteroids have a well‐established role in the management of immune‐related adverse events; however, two factors may limit their use.
The first limitation concerns the side effects of high‐dose corticosteroids, including infections and diabetes.
The second limitation is their potential impact on oncological response, as suggested in several studies, particularly through their ability to inhibit the proliferation and differentiation of naive T cells [4,5].
Moreover, in several cases of corticosteroid‐resistant CHILI, cholestatic patterns are observed, with favourable outcomes occurring after the addition of UDCA [11,12,13].
This study once again highlights the divergence in severity classification between CTCAE and the DILI classifications, as most patients are classified as non‐severe in the DILI classifications but as severe in the CTCAE classification [19].
Our study has several limitations, such as the small sample size and the absence of a control group.
It is merely a retrospective case series, but it highlights the potential interest of UDCA in certain patterns of CHILI.
Further studies are needed to confirm the potential benefit of UDCA in the cholestatic forms of CHILI, and a study comparing UDCA to corticosteroids should be considered.
The role of UDCA in cases of ICI rechallenge following cholestatic hepatitis should also be evaluated in the future.
Finally, the identification of biomarkers of response to UDCA could be useful in better selecting patients who might benefit from UDCA treatment.
Recently, an experimental study suggested that indoleamine 2,3‐dioxygenase 1 (IDO‐1), an interferon‐γ‐activated enzyme leading to the suppression of CD8+ T cells and natural killer cells, was a good a histologic biomarker for PBC, but also for CHILI with biliary involvement [20].
IDO‐1‐positive cells were observed in the bile ducts of CHILI with microscopic and macroscopic biliary involvement, and this marker could predict further need for UDCA in clinical practice [20].
Additional data are needed to confirm the potential benefits of UDCA, but these preliminary findings are encouraging.